              Employee Profit Sharing and Labor Extraction in a
                Classical Model of Distribution and Growth

                                    Jaylson Jair da Silveira
                      Department of Economics and International Relations
                          Federal University of Santa Catarina, Brazil
                                   jaylson.silveira@ufsc.br
                                                &
                                     Gilberto Tadeu Lima
                                   Department of Economics
                                 University of São Paulo, Brazil
                                       giltadeu@usp.br


Abstract: This paper sets forth a classical model of economic growth in which the distribution of
income features the possibility of profit sharing with workers, as firms choose periodically
between two labor-extraction compensation strategies. Firms choose to compensate workers with
a base wage or a share of profits on top of this base wage. In accordance with robust empirical
evidence, labor productivity in profit-sharing firms is higher than labor productivity in non-
sharing firms. The frequency distribution of labor-extraction compensation strategies and average
labor productivity in the population of firms is evolutionarily time-varying. The paper derives
two main results which carry relevant theoretical and policy implications. First, heterogeneity in
labor-extraction compensation strategies across firms can be a stable long-run equilibrium.
Second, in the long-run equilibrium, a higher frequency of profit-sharing firms can yield a higher
net profit share in income and thereby higher rates of net profit and economic growth.
Keywords: profit sharing, income distribution, economic growth, evolutionary dynamics.

Resumo: Este artigo propõe um modelo clássico de crescimento econômico em que a distribuição
de renda conta com a possibilidade de compartilhamento de lucros com os trabalhadores, pois as
firmas escolhem periodicamente entre duas estratégias de remuneração para extração de trabalho.
As firmas escolhem remunerar os trabalhadores com um salário base ou com uma participação
nos lucros em adição a esse salário base. Conforme evidência empírica robusta, a produtividade
do trabalho é maior nas firmas que adotam compartilhamento de lucros que naquelas que não o
adotam. A distribuição de frequência das estratégias de remuneração para extração de trabalho e
da produtividade média do trabalho na população de firmas varia ao longo do tempo de maneira
evolucionária. O artigo deriva dois principais resultados com relevantes implicações teóricas e de
política pública. Primeiro, a heterogeneidade nas estratégias de remuneração para extração de
trabalho entre as firmas pode ser um equilíbrio de longo prazo estável. Segundo, no equilíbrio de
longo prazo, uma maior frequência de firmas que adotam compartilhamento de lucros pode gerar
uma maior parcela líquida dos lucros na renda e, por meio disso, de taxas mais elevadas de lucro
líquido e crescimento econômico.
Palavras-chave: compartilhamento de lucros, distribuição de renda, crescimento econômico,
dinâmica evolucionária.

JEL Codes: E11, E25, J33, O41.

Classificação Anpec: Área 2 – Economia Política.
1. Introduction
       Employee profit sharing has experienced an increasing (even if fluctuating) popularity in
several advanced economies in the last few decades (D’Art and Turner, 2004, Kruse et al., 2010).
Meanwhile, from a longer-term perspective, there have been rising and falling waves of interest
in employee profit-sharing schemes since their inception in the 19th century (Mitchell et al.,1990,
D’Art and Turner, 2006, Blasi, et al., 2013).
        The main motivation behind a firm’s offering of profit sharing to workers is that
connecting workers’ earnings to the profit performance of the firm is believed in theory to induce
workers to increase commitment, effort and other attitudes leading to their higher productivity.
Indeed, attitude surveys find that employers and employees usually believe that profit sharing
helps improve firm performance in several dimensions (Weitzman and Kruse, 1990, and Blasi et
al., 2010).
        Other compensation mechanisms through which workers’ earnings depend on the
performance of the firm (or work group) are gain sharing, employee ownership and stock options.
Profit-sharing plans themselves vary considerably, and some major ways in which they differ
concern what is shared (e.g., total profits or profits above some target or threshold level), how
and when sharing is made (e.g., in cash or company stocks, in a deferred or non-deferred way)
and with whom sharing is made (e.g., directly to workers or to some workers’ retirement or
pension plan). Yet, there is survey evidence that non-deferred and in cash profit sharing is ranked
first by employees as a motivation device (Blasi et al., 2010).
        There is considerable empirical evidence that profit sharing raises labor productivity.
Although the estimated magnitude of the productivity gain varies from study to study, it is often
non-negligible. Weitzman and Kruse (1990) apply meta-analysis to sixteen studies to find that the
productivity gain of profit sharing is positive at infinitesimal significance levels. Doucouliagos
(1995) applies meta-analysis to forty-three studies to find that profit sharing is positively
associated with productivity. Cahuc and Dormont (1997) use French data to find that profit
sharing firms outperform other firms in productivity and profitability. Conyon and Freeman
(2004), using UK data, find that profit-sharing firms tend to outperform other firms in
productivity and financial performance. D’Art and Turner (2004) use data for 11 European
countries to find that profit sharing is positively associated with productivity and profitability,
while Kim (1998), using U.S. data, finds that albeit profit sharing raises labor productivity,
profits do not rise, as gains from profit sharing are cancelled out by increased labor costs. In a
field, quasi-experimental study, Peterson and Luthans (2006) randomly assigned profit-sharing
plans at three of twenty-one establishments within a U.S. firm, finding that labor productivity and
profits rose in the profit-sharing establishments relative to the control group.
        Also motivated by the above empirical evidence, this paper sets forth a classical model of
economic growth, in which the distribution of income can feature profit sharing with workers. In
attempting to extract labor from labor power more effectively, firms can behave heterogeneously
as regards the choice of compensation strategy. Firms choose to compensate workers with either
only a conventional base wage or a share of profits on top of this conventional base wage. In line
with the empirical evidence reported above, workers in profit-sharing firms have a higher
productivity than their counterparts in non-sharing firms. Meanwhile, any observed heterogeneity
in labor-extraction compensation strategies across firms and the resulting additional productivity
gain that accrues to profit-sharing firms are not parametric constants, but rather co-evolve
endogenously towards the long-run as driven by an evolutionary process. Therefore, our model is
well fitted to explore possible explanations for evidence such as that U.K. firms switch modes of
employee compensation frequently, with the gross changes in modes (which include profit
sharing) being far more numerous than the net changes (which suggests that firms have trouble
                                                1
optimizing and that the transaction costs of switching are relatively low) (Bryson and Freeman,
2010).
        Moreover, we explore the implications of the coupled dynamics of the distribution of
labor-extraction compensation strategies across firms and the additional productivity gain that
accrues to profit-sharing firms for the distribution of aggregate income between profits and wages
and thereby capital accumulation and economic growth. Arguably, given the essential role of the
functional distribution of income in the classical tradition, it is fitting to explore the implications
of profit sharing for capital accumulation and economic growth in a model that conforms to
essential tenets of this tradition.1
        The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the structure of
the model and investigates its behavior in the short run. Section 3 explores the coupled
evolutionary dynamics of the frequency distribution of labor-extraction compensation modes
across firms and the additional productivity gain that accrues to profit-sharing firms. This section
also investigates the implications of such coupled evolutionary dynamics for income distribution
and thereby capital accumulation and economic growth in the long run. The final section
summarizes the main conclusions reached along the way.

2. Structure of the model and its behavior in the short run
        The model economy is closed and without government activities, producing a single
(homogeneous) good for both investment and consumption purposes. Production is carried out by
a large (and fixed) population of firms, which combine two (physically homogeneous) factors of
production, capital and labor, by means of a fixed-coefficient technology. Firms produce (and
hire labor) without facing realization (or effective demand) constraints, thereby being able to sell
profitably all its output production at the prevailing price level. However, the model is cast in real
terms.
        In attempting to extract labor from labor power more effectively, an individual firm
chooses periodically between two worker compensation strategies: it compensates workers with
either only a conventional (or subsistence) base wage v (non-sharing labor-extraction
compensation strategy) or with a conventional base wage and a share of profits   (0,1) 
(profit-sharing labor-extraction compensation strategy). In a given period there is a proportion
  [0,1]     of profit-sharing (or type s) firms, while the remaining proportion, 1   , is
composed by non-sharing (or type n) firms. In accordance with the empirical evidence on profit
sharing reported in the preceding section, a profit-sharing firm is willing to play such labor-
extraction compensation strategy because the resulting labor productivity gain is strictly higher
than otherwise. Productivity is homogeneous across workers in firms playing a given worker
compensation strategy. Since the conventional base wage is assumed to be the same under both
labor-extraction compensation strategies, a worker hired by a sharing firm does receive a higher



1
  From a mainstream (of New Keynesian variety) perspective, Weitzman (1985) claims that profit sharing
can deliver full employment with low inflation. If part of workers’ total compensation is shared profits, so
that the base wage is lower, the marginal cost of labor is lower and firms will be willing to hire more
workers. As the marked up price is lower, a real balance effect creates a higher aggregate demand and
hence a higher desired output. Therefore, Weitzman (1985) implicitly sees involuntary unemployment as
due to downward wage inflexibility (Davidson, 1986-87, Rothschild, 1986-87). In our model, the fraction
of profit-sharing firms and the average labor productivity are endogenously time-varying. Also, we
explore implications of profit sharing for growth performance in a classical model, in which the functional
distribution of income plays a key role.
                                                     2
total compensation than a worker hired by a non-sharing firm along the economically meaningful
domain given by strictly positive profits for sharing firms.2
        To keep focus on the dynamics of the distribution of labor-extraction compensation
strategies and its implications for the functional distribution of income and thereby economic
growth, we simplify matters by assuming that the conventional base wage, v , and the profit-
sharing coefficient,  , remain constant over time. The distribution of labor-extraction
compensation strategies across firms, ( ,1   ) , which is given in the short run as a result from
previous dynamics, changes beyond the short run according to an evolutionary dynamic (the
replicator dynamic). In the short run, for given values of the conventional base wage, profit-
sharing coefficient, productivity differential, distribution of labor-extraction strategies and,
therefore, individual and average profit shares, the short-run equilibrium value of the rate of
economic growth is determined. As the economy evolves towards the long-run, the co-evolution
of the distribution of labor-extraction strategies and the labor productivity differential, by leading
to changes in the average share of profits, causes changes in the short-run equilibrium value of
the rate of economic growth.
        Formally, we define the productivity differential as:
                       as
(1)                     ,
                       an

where ai  X i / Li denotes labor productivity in firms of type i  s, n , X i is total output of firms
of type i  s, n , and Li is total employment of firms type i  s, n . For simplicity, we normalize
labor productivity in non-sharing firms, an , to one, so that we obtain as    1 in (1). As it turns
out, profit-sharing firms can be intuitively described as firms willing to bet on the prospect of
attaining a productivity differential,  , which is high enough to allow them to have a lower unit
labor cost than non-sharing firms. At the end of the day a sharing firm expects such productivity
differential to be high enough to allow it to have a higher net profit rate (i.e., net of shared profits)
than a non-sharing firm. However, as explored in the next section, the resulting labor productivity
differential may fall short of the level required for the profit-sharing bet to prove successful.
        Using (1), the total profits of sharing and non-sharing firms are, respectively:
                                   v
(2)              Rs  X s  vLs  1   X s ;
                                   
and:
(3)              Rn  X n  vLn  (1  v) X n ,

which requires further assuming that v  an  1  as . Using (2) and (3), the shares of profit in
output of sharing and non-sharing firms in the short-run are given, respectively, by:
                        Rs     v
(4)             s         1 ;
                        Xs     
and:

2
  Empirical evidence shows that profit sharing has a meaningful effect on worker total compensation
(Kruse et al., 2010). In fact, Capelli and Neumark (2004) find that total labor costs exclusive of the sharing
component do not fall significantly in pre/post comparisons of firms that adopt profit sharing. This
suggests that profit sharing tends to come on top of, rather than in place of, a base wage.
                                                      3
                        Rn
(5)            n          1 v .
                        Xn
The profit share expression in (4) denotes the proportion of gross profits in the output of sharing
firms, since an exogenously given fraction of such profits, given by   (0,1)  , is shared with
workers. Using (4), the net unit return of sharing firms in the short-run is given by:
                        (1   ) Rs             v
(6)             sc                 (1   ) 1   ,
                            Xs                  
Using (5) and (6), the short-run value of the average net profit share can be expressed as:
                                                          v
                  sc  (1   ) n   (1   ) 1          (1   )(1  v) .
                                                            
(7)
                                                    
       As regards capital productivity, to keep focus on the main issue of the effect of profit
sharing on the rate of economic growth, we simplify matters by assuming that the maximum
output that can be produced by fully utilizing one unit of capital, k , is an exogenously given
constant common to all firms:
(8)             k s  kn  k ,

where ki  X i / Ki is the output to capital ratio (and K i is the total capital stock) of firms of type
i  s, n .
       Using (2)-(5) and (8), the (gross) profit rates of sharing and non-sharing firms in the short
run can then be expressed as follows:
                        Rs     vX
(9)             rs        1   s  k s ;
                        Ks    Ks
and:
                        Rn          X
(10)            rn         (1  v) n  k n .
                        Kn          Kn
Using (6) and (9), the net profit rate of sharing firms in the short run is then given by:
                        (1   ) Rs             vX
(11)            rsc                 (1   ) 1   s  k sc .
                            Ks                    Ks
Therefore, using (10) and (11), the short run value of the average net profit rate can be expressed
as:
                                                         v                     
(12)            r c   rsc  (1   )rn  k  (1   ) 1    (1   )(1  v)  .
                                                                              
Therefore, a comparison between (7) and (12) shows that the average net profit share and the
average net profit rate always move in the same direction.
       As assumed earlier, the population of firms, the conventional base wage, v , the labor
productivity in non-sharing firms, an , the profit-sharing coefficient,  , and the output to capital
ratio which is common to all firms, k , all remain constant over time. The short run period t is
defined as a time frame in which the aggregate capital stock, K t , the labor supply, N t , the

                                                          4
productivity differential of profit-sharing firms, as ,t  t , the frequency distribution of labor-
extraction compensation strategies across firms, t , and therefore the distribution of income as
measured by the average net profit share,  tc , can all be taken as predetermined by previous
dynamics.3
       The economy is inhabited by two classes, capitalists who own the firms and workers.
Workers provide labor and earn a base wage income, when they work for non-sharing firms.
Workers in sharing firms also receive a share of the latter’s profit income, which is the entire
surplus over the respective base wage bill. We assume that workers’ total compensation is all
spent on consumption, while capitalists homogeneously save a fraction,   (0,1)  , of their
net profit income. As we further assume that capitalists save in order to fully finance their
investment decisions, it follows that all income not consumed is automatically invested.
Therefore, individual firms are able to sell all their production at the prevailing price level, so that
aggregate demand will adjust to remove any excess aggregate (and individual) supply in the
goods market. In short-run goods market equilibrium, therefore, it follows that aggregate
investment, I t , is identically equal to net aggregate savings, St .
       Using (8)-(11), the net aggregate savings as a proportion of the capital stock at period t
can be expressed as follows:
        St     (1   ) Rs ,t  Rn ,t 
(13)                                   t ks s ,t  (1  t )kn n    k t s ,t  (1  t ) n  .
                                                      c                                    c

        Kt              Kt            
Thus, by substituting (13) in the goods market equilibrium identity given by It / Kt  St / Kt , and
assuming for simplicity that the capital stock does not depreciate, we obtain the short-run
equilibrium growth rate:
(14)             gt* (t , t )   k t sc,t (t , t )  (1  t ) n  .

Note that the short-run equilibrium growth rate depends on parametric constants along with the
labor productivity differential,  t , and the frequency distribution of labor-extraction
compensation strategies, t , which are predetermined in the short run and co-evolve in the
transition from the short to the long run (as described in the next section). Expectedly, in light of
the classical nature of the macroeconomic dynamic, the short-run equilibrium growth rate varies
positively with the common saving propensity of capitalists and the average profit share in
income. This is so because economic growth is driven by capital accumulation from the
aggregate saving of capitalists.

3. Behavior of the model in the long run
         In the long run we assume that the short-run equilibrium value of the rate of economic
growth is always attained, with the economy moving towards the long run due to changes in the
aggregate stock of capital, K , coming from changes in the individual stocks of capital, K s and
 K n , the supply of available labor, N , the labor productivity differential,  , and the frequency
distribution of labor-extraction compensation strategies,  . However, as the maximum output
that can be produced by fully utilizing one unit of capital is an exogenously given constant k

3
 As in the next section we explore the behavior of the economy in the transition from the short to the long
run, thereafter we attach a subscript t to the short-run value of all variables (be they endogenous or
predetermined).
                                                                  5
common to all firms, it follows from (8) that K s ,t / Kn,t  k . Meanwhile, to sharpen focus on the
coupled dynamics of the frequency distribution of labor-extraction compensation strategies and
the productivity differential as state variables, we further assume that the supply of available
labor grows endogenously at the same rate as the aggregate capital stock.4
        Let us then start by deriving the dynamics of the productivity differential. At a given
(short-run) period t there is a fraction t [0,1]  of the population of firms, which may vary
from one period to the next one, adopting the profit-sharing labor-extraction strategy. The
complementary fraction 1  t is made up of firms that pay only the conventional base wage. Let
 yt  t ys ,t  (1  t ) yn be the average earnings of workers at period t , where ys ,t  v   Rs ,t Ls ,t
and yn  v are the earnings of a worker in a profit-sharing firm and a worker in a non-sharing
firm in period t , respectively. Therefore, the differential between the higher earnings and the
average earnings can be written as ys ,t  yt  (1  t ) Rs ,t Ls ,t for all t [0,1]  . In
accordance with the empirical evidence reported earlier, we assume that the extent to which
productivity in profit-sharing firms is greater than productivity in non-sharing firms varies
positively with the relative earnings differential given by ys ,t  yt . Formally, we consider the
following labor-extraction differential function:
(15)                    t 1  f ( ys ,t  yt )  f  (1  t ) Rs ,t Ls ,t  ,
where f ()  0 and f ()  0 for all earnings differential ( ys ,t  yt )      . Moreover, we assume
that      lim         f ( ys  y )  0 . Therefore, in accordance with the empirical evidence that the labor
       ( ys  y )

productivity gains arising from profit sharing are not unlimited, the labor-extraction differential
in (15) not only rises at a decreasing rate, but also tends to become insignificant for very large
values of the relative earnings differential.5 We can use (2) to re-write (15) as follows:
(15-a)                  t 1  f  (1  t )(t  v)  .
        As re-written in (15-a), the labor-extraction differential function has an intuitive
interpretation. Given that  t is the output per worker of a profit-sharing firm and v is the
respective unit cost of labor, it follows that  t  v is the profit per worker of a profit-sharing firm
and  (t  v) is the amount of profit per worker of a profit-sharing firm which is shared with its
workers. Therefore, given  t and t , the next-period labor-extraction differential varies
positively with the profit-sharing coefficient and negatively with the conventional base wage.
Meanwhile, given  t , v and  , the next-period labor-extraction differential increases with


4
  Consequently, the constancy of the productivity differential and the distribution of labor-extraction
compensation strategies in the long-run equilibrium guarantee the constancy of both the average labor
productivity and the average employment rate. In fact, using (1) and (8)-(9), the average employment rate
                                      L*  L*n ,t  t           K
in the short-run equilibrium is et*  s ,t          (1  t )  t k , where the expression in square
                                           Nt      t            Nt
brackets represents the weighted average of the inverse of the individual productivities as ,t   t and
an ,t  1 .
5
  In the meta-analyses in Weitzman and Kruse (1990) and Doucouliagos (1995), the size of the estimated
effect of profit sharing on labor productivity is usually on the order of 3 to 7 percent.
                                                        6
1  t , the proportion of firms playing the non-sharing strategy in a given period, which is an
indicator of the prospects of not receiving any shared profits in the next period. Since an increase
in 1  t acts as an incentive on workers in profit-sharing firms in the next period to yield a higher
productivity differential, it follows that  (1  t )(t  v) reflects how valuable it is to work for a
profit-sharing firm.
        In fact, note from (15-a) that t 1 t   (t  v) f   (1  t )(t  v)   0 for all
t [0,1]  and for any  t  v (recall that the latter condition was assumed earlier to ensure
strictly positive gross profits for profit-sharing firms in (2)). The greater the proportion of sharing
firms in a given period, the smaller the labor-extraction differential between sharing and non-
sharing firms in the next period. One firm’s decision to play the profit-sharing labor-extraction
strategy in a given period, by reducing  (1  t )(t  v) for a given  t and making it less
valuable to workers to be employed by a sharing firm in the next period, has a negative payoff
externality on all other sharing firms. Thus, there is strategic substitutability in the firms’ choice
of labor-extraction compensation mechanism. Meanwhile, if all firms choose to play the profit-
sharing labor-extraction strategy (t  1) , the relative earnings differential given by
 ys ,t  yt   (1  t )(t  v) vanishes. In this case with all firms playing the profit-sharing strategy,
given that labor productivity becomes uniform across all firms, and should be higher than the
average labor productivity when all firms pay only the conventional base wage (recall that the
productivity in non-sharing firms was normalized to one), we further assume that f (0)  1 .
Conversely, if all firms choose to play the non-sharing strategy (t  0) , the potential relative
earnings differential given by ys ,t  yt   (t  v) takes its maximum value. In this case, a non-
sharing firm which switches compensation to the profit-sharing mode is able to reap the largest
possible additional labor-extraction gain, since f  (t  v)   f  (1  t )(t  v)  for all
t  (0,1]  and for any  t  v . In order to better convey the substance of all these properties
of the labor-extraction differential function (15-a), they are displayed in Figure 1.

                                  t 1


                       f  (t  v)                         f  (1  t )(t  v) 




                                f (0)
                                     1



                                     0                                     1        t

                               Figure 1. Labor-extraction differential function

        The following intuitive rationales can be proposed for the additional labor-extraction gain
in (15). First, the average earnings can be seen by a worker as a conventional estimate of her
outside option or fallback position. Consequently, workers who receive a share of profits in
                                                     7
addition to a conventional base wage generate an extra productivity gain (relatively to the
productivity gain they would offer if remunerated with only a conventional base wage) which
increases with the excess of the higher earnings over their outside option or fallback position.
Second, the average earnings can be perceived by a worker as a norm-based reference point
against which a compensation package featuring a conventional base wage and shared profits
should be compared when she is deciding how much above-normal productivity to provide in
return. Therefore, above-average earnings could be seen by workers as warranting the offer of
above-normal levels of productivity. In fact, Blasi, Kruse and Freeman (2010) propose an
interesting rationale for profit-sharing compensation based on reciprocity and gift exchange (as
these notions are articulated in Akerlof (1982)): a “gift” of higher worker compensation through
profit sharing raises worker morale, and workers reciprocate with a “gift” of greater productivity.
More generally, a “gift” of profit-sharing compensation on top of a conventional base wage can
be seen as helping to create and reinforce a sense of shared interests and the value of a reciprocal
relationship. Alternatively, the norm-based reference point offered by the average earnings can be
interpreted as reflecting workers’ earnings expectation under uncertainty. Thus, a worker
compensation package that features a conventional base wage and shared profits is greeted as a
pleasant surprise which warrants the offer of above-normal levels of productivity.
       While the frequency distribution of labor-extraction compensation strategies is given in
the short run, an individual firm revises periodically its choice of compensation strategy in a way
described by the following replicator dynamic:6
(16)            t 1  1  t (rsc,t  rtc )  t (1  t )( sc,t   n )k ,

where rt  t rs ,t  (1  t )rn is the average net profit rate, which is given by (12), and the latter
        c       c


equality is obtained using (10) and (11), so that  sc,t and  n are given by (5) and (6),
respectively. According to the replicator dynamic in (16), the frequency of the profit-sharing
labor-extraction strategy in the population of firms increases (decreases) exactly when it has
above-average (below-average) payoff.
         Using (5) and (6), the replicator dynamic in (16) becomes:
                                                        v              
(16-a)          t 1  t 1  (1  t ) (1   ) 1          (1  v)  k  .
                                                       t             
Thus, the state transition of the economy is determined by the system of difference equations (15-
a) and (16-a), whose state space is   {(t , t )  2 : 0  t  1, t  v} , as represented by the
shaded area in each panel in Figure 2.
        We will show that the dynamic system given by (15-a) and (16-a) has two long-run
equilibria featuring survival of only one labor-extraction compensation strategy. These pure-
strategy equilibria are denoted by E1 and E2 in the three panels in Figure 2. Moreover, we will
show the possible existence of a third long-run equilibrium (denoted by E3 in panel (b) in Figure
2), now featuring the survival of both labor-extraction compensation strategies.




6
  The replicator dynamic can be derived from a model of (social or individual) learning as in Weibull
(1995, sec. 4.4).
                                                               8
        Note that t 1  t  0 for any t {0,1, 2,...} satisfies (16-a) for any state (t ,0)  .
Moreover, let t 1  t    (v, )        for any t {0,1, 2,...} . In this case, the difference
equation in (15-a) is satisfied for any t {0,1, 2,...} if the following condition holds:

(17)              f  (  v)  .
We demonstrate in Appendix 1 that   (v, )  exists and is unique. Therefore, one of the
two pure-strategy long-run equilibria of the system, E1 in Figure 2, is given by the state
 ( ,0)   , which features the non-sharing labor-extraction compensation strategy as the only
survivor.
        Meanwhile, if t 1  t  1 for any t {0,1, 2,...} , the difference equation in (16-a) is
satisfied for any state (t ,1)  and, given (15-a), it follows that t 1  t  f  0  for all
t {0,1, 2,...} . Therefore, the other pure-strategy long-run equilibrium of the system, E2 in
Figure 2, is represented by the state  f (0),1   , which features the profit-sharing labor-
extraction compensation strategy as the only survivor.
        Finally, if t 1  t   *  (0,1)  for any t {0,1, 2,...} , the difference equation in (16-
a) is satisfied if the individual profit shares in (5) and (6) (and hence the profit rates in (10) and
(11)) are equalized. Given that the labor-extraction differential (which is equal to the labor-
extraction in profit-sharing firms) is the only adjusting variable among the determinants of the
individual profit shares in (5) and (6), the latter become equalized when the long-run equilibrium
value of the labor-extraction differential is:
                       (1   )v
(18)            *              ,
                         v 
where we assume that v   . Meanwhile, given that t 1  t   * for all t {0,1, 2,...} , the
difference equation in (15-a) is satisfied if the following condition holds:
(19)             *  f  (1   * )( *  v)  .

As demonstrated in Appendix 2, there is a unique  *  ( f (0),  )        which satisfies (19) if the
following necessary and sufficient condition is satisfied:
(20)             f (0)   *   .
Therefore, if the condition in (20) is satisfied, there exists a third long-run equilibrium given by
the state ( * ,  * )   (and denoted by E3 in panel (b) in Figure 2), which features the survival of
both labor-extraction compensation strategies in the long run.
       The well-defined ordering in (20), which implies and is implied by the existence and
uniqueness of the mixed-strategy equilibrium, E3 , can be interpreted intuitively with recourse to
Figure 3, which plots the next-period labor-extraction differential as a function of its current-
period value. Note that, ceteris paribus, the function in (15-a) shifts down with an increase in the
proportion of profit-sharing firms at period t . More precisely, this function rotates clockwise
around the point  v, f (0)  as t increases, due to the resulting squeeze in the relative earnings
differential given by ys ,t  yt for every  t  v .

                                                       9
             t
                            E2
              1
                                                                       t  0
                                      tt 0
                                              0




                                        t  0          E1
                  0   v f (0)                                    *              t

          (a) Relatively weak labor-extraction differential: f (0)     *

             t
                            E2
              1
                                                       t  0



             *                                   E3


                                                                   t  0


                                      t  0                                E1
                  0                                                              t
                      v    f (0)              *
        (b) Relatively moderate labor-extraction differential: f (0)   *  

             t
                          t  0 E
                                    2
              1

                                                   t  0




                                                        t  0              E1
                  0   v         *
                                     f (0)                                       t

         (c) Relatively strong labor-extraction differential:  *  f (0)  
Figure 2. Phase diagram for different magnitudes of the labor-extraction differential

                                              10
                                               t 1

                                                                                                               f  (t  v) 
                                                                  t  0
                                                                                                              f  (1   * )(t  v) 


                                                                                                      t  1
                                             f (0)




                                                                                                                         t
                                                     0     v       f (0)      *

             Figure 3. Ordering of labor-extraction differentials when there is a mixed-strategy long-
                                             run equilibrium

      Let us now explore the dynamics of the system towards the long run as governed by the
motion equations (15-a) and (16-a). The t  t 1  t  0 isocline is the locus of all the states
of the set given by (t , t )  : f  (1  t )(t  v)   t  0 . Therefore, this isocline connects
the equilibrium solutions E1 and E2 , as depicted in Figure 2. In order to know more about the
t  0 isocline, we can use (15-a) to compute the following derivative:

                           d t                       (1  t ) f   (1  t )( t  v)   1
(21)                                                                                            .
                           d t      t 0
                                                       ( t  v) f   (1  t )( t  v) 

The sign of (21) in the neighborhood of both pure-strategy long-run equilibria (  *  0 and
 *  1 ) can be determined by taking the limit of (21) as the state of the system approaches each
of these equilibria. These limits are given by:
                             d t                         1                                          d t                   f   (  v)   1
(22)         lim                                                       0 and          lim                                                         0,
       (t ,t )  f (0),1 d
                                t   t 0
                                                  ( f (0)  v) f (0)             (t ,t )  ,0  d
                                                                                                         t   t 0
                                                                                                                           (  v) f   (  v) 

with the sign of the second limit in (22) coming from (A-2.2) in Appendix 2. The reason why in
the vicinity of the extinction of one of the existing labor-extraction strategies, the higher is the
labor-extraction differential, the lower is the proportion of profit-sharing firms, is that a higher
relative earnings differential is then necessary to generate a higher labor-extraction differential
(recall that because there is strategic substitutability in the firms’ choice of labor-extraction
compensation mode, the labor-extraction differential in (15) rises at a falling rate).
           Meanwhile, the t  t 1  t  0 isocline is the locus of all the states of the set given by
(t , t )  : t  0  (t , t )  : t  1  (t , t )  : t   * . As depicted in Figure 2, this
set is represented by a semi-inverted H-shaped isocline.
      From the local stability analysis carried out in Appendices 3-5, the following results
emerge. In the configuration depicted in panel (a) in Figure 2, the additional labor-extraction gain
                                                                                   11
for sharing firms returned by a given relative earnings differential is relatively low. In this case,
there are only two pure-strategy long-run equilibria, E1  ( ,0) , with no firm playing the profit-
sharing labor-extraction strategy, and E2  ( f (0),1) , with all firms rather playing the profit-
sharing labor-extraction strategy. As shown in Appendices 3 and 4, E2  ( f (0),1) is a repulsor,
while E1  ( ,0) is an attractor.
        Meanwhile, in the situation depicted in panel (c) in Figure 2, the additional labor-
extraction gain for profit-sharing firms ensured by a given relative earnings differential is
relatively high. Consequently, there are only two pure-strategy long-run equilibria, E1  ( ,0) ,
with all firms playing the non-sharing labor-extraction compensation strategy, and E2  ( f (0),1) ,
with all firms rather playing the sharing labor-extraction strategy. As shown in Appendices 3 and
4, while E2  ( f (0),1) is an attractor, E1  ( ,0) is a repulsor.
        Finally, in the configuration depicted in panel (b) in Figure 2, the additional labor-
extraction gain accruing to profit-sharing firms is relatively moderate. In this case, there are two
pure-strategy long-run equilibria, E1  ( ,0) and E2  ( f (0),1) , and also one mixed-strategy
long-run equilibrium, E3  ( * ,  * ) , which features heterogeneity in labor-extraction
compensation strategies in the population of firms. As shown in Appendices 2-5, while
 E1  ( ,0) and E2  ( f (0),1) are repulsors, E3  ( * ,  * ) is an attractor if condition (A-5.4) in
Appendix 5 is satisfied.7
        Nonetheless, since the state space of the system is positively invariant (as shown in
Appendix 6), in this configuration heterogeneity in labor-extraction compensation strategies does
persist in the long run even if the mixed-strategy long-run equilibrium is not an attractor. This
positive invariance implies that, if the long-run equilibrium with coexistence of both labor-
extraction compensation strategies is not an attractor, the system keeps undergoing endogenous,
self-sustaining and persistent fluctuations in the frequency distribution of labor-extraction
compensation strategies and the average productivity, with the average levels of the income
shares and economic growth persistently fluctuating as well. In fact, Mitchell et al. (1990) and
D’Art and Turner (2006) find that the adoption of profit sharing schemes has tended to be
cyclical in nature in many advanced countries since the origin of these schemes in the 19th
century.
       It is worth computing the long-run equilibrium values of the functional distribution of
income and economic growth in each one of these three configurations as regards the relative
magnitude of the additional labor-extraction gain which accrues to profit-sharing firms, as
depicted in Figure 2. We can use (7) to establish:
(23)     * ( ,0)   ( * ,  * )   n  1  v ,
and:
                                                           v 
         *  f (0),1   sc  f (0)   (1   ) 1 
                                                          f (0) 
(24)                                                               ,
                                                  


7
  As implied by the analysis in Appendix 5, the output to capital ratio, k , is likely to be a bifurcation
parameter, as the long-run equilibrium with coexisting labor-extraction strategies is likely to lose (local)
stability as the output to capital ratio crosses a given threshold from below. We leave this issue for future
research.
                                                              12
where the first equality in (23) follows from the fact that E3  ( * ,  * ) is defined implicitly by the
condition given by  sc,*t (t , t )   n  0 (recall that the profit share of non-sharing firms is
exogenously given). In panel (a), with   f (0) , we have  * ( ,0)   *  f (0),1 and,
consequently, using (14), g * ( ,0)  g * ( f (0),1) . In panel (b), with  *  f (0) , we have
 * ( ,0)   * ( * ,  * )   *  f (0),1 , with (14) yielding g * ( ,0)  g * ( * ,  * )  g * ( f (0),1) . In
panel (c), with  *  f (0) , we have  * ( ,0)   *  f (0),1 , it following from (14) that
g * ( ,0)  g * ( f (0),1) . Therefore, if the economy converges to a long-run equilibrium (which
may not occur in panel (b), as shown in Appendix 5), the coupled evolutionary dynamics of
profit-sharing adoption and labor-extraction gain takes the economy to a position in which the
average net profit share, the net profit rate and the rate of economic growth are all at their highest
possible long-run equilibrium levels.
        Finally, note that despite the possibility of a stable long-run equilibrium outcome with
strategic dualism, the evolutionary dynamic in (16) ensures that the (net) rates of profit of the
coexisting labor-extraction strategies become equalized. However, in our one-sector model, profit
rate equalization is brought about not by classical competition with capital mobility across
sectors, but by evolutionary competition with firms’ (and their capital) mobility across labor-
extraction compensation strategies.

4. Conclusions
        This paper is motivated by several pieces of suggestive empirical evidence. First,
historically, there has been a persistent heterogeneity in worker compensation strategies across
firms, and profit-sharing schemes have experienced a fluctuating popularity. Second, profit
sharing raises labor productivity in the firm, and surveys find that both employers and workers
usually perceive profit sharing as helping to improve firm performance in several dimensions.
Third, surveys find that non-deferred and in cash profit sharing is ranked first by workers as
motivation device. Fourth, firms switch mechanisms of worker compensation (which include
profit sharing) frequently, with the gross changes in mechanisms being more numerous than the
net changes. Fifth, profit sharing has a meaningful effect on worker total compensation, which
suggests that profit sharing tends to come on top of, rather than in place of, a base wage.
        Against this empirical backdrop, this paper formally models firms as periodically
choosing to compensate workers with either a conventional base wage or a share of profits on top
of this conventional base wage. As a result, the frequency distributions of labor-extraction
compensation strategies and labor productivity in the population of firms are evolutionarily time-
varying. Moreover, we explore implications of this coupled evolutionary dynamics for income
distribution and economic growth.
        When the additional productivity gain for profit-sharing firms is relatively low, there are
two long-run equilibria, one featuring all firms sharing profits and the other with no firm sharing
profits. While the former is a repulsor, the latter is an attractor. When the additional productivity
gain for profit-sharing is relatively high, the economy has the same two long-run equilibria.
However, the long-run equilibrium with all firms sharing profits is an attractor, while the long-
run equilibrium with no firm sharing profits is a repulsor. When the additional productivity gain
for profit-sharing firms is relatively moderate, there is another long-run equilibrium, now one that
features heterogeneity in worker compensation modes across firms. In this case, the long-run
equilibria with survival of only one strategy are repulsors, while the long-run equilibrium with
coexistence of both strategies can be an attractor. However, even if the long-run equilibrium
configuration with coexistence of both labor-extraction strategies is not an attractor, the economy
                                                         13
keeps undergoing endogenous, self-sustaining and persistent fluctuations in the distribution of
labor-extraction compensation strategies and average labor productivity (which accords with the
empirical evidence), with functional income distribution and economic growth persistently
fluctuating as well.
        Meanwhile, when there is convergence to some of the three long-run equilibria, the
average net profit rate (which excludes shared profits) and the rate of economic growth are at
their highest possible long-run equilibrium values. Moreover, there is profit rate equalization
even in the long-run equilibrium with coexisting labor-extraction strategies. However, this profit
rate equalization is brought about by evolutionary competition with firms’ mobility across labor-
extraction compensation strategies and not by classical competition with capital mobility across
sectors.

References
Akerlof, G. (1982) ‘Labor contracts as partial gift exchange’, The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 87, 543-69.
Blasi, J., R. Freeman, C. Mackin and D. Kruse (2010) ‘Creating a bigger pie? The effects of
employee ownership, profit sharing, and stock options on workplace performance’, in Douglas
Kruse, Richard Freeman and Joseph Blasi (eds), Shared Capitalism at Work, Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Blasi, J., D. Kruse and R. Freeman (2010) ‘Epilogue (and Prologue)’, in Douglas Kruse, Richard
Freeman and Joseph Blasi (eds), Shared Capitalism at Work, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Blasi, J., R. Freeman and D. Kruse (2013) The Citizen’s Share: Putting Ownership Back into
Democracy, New Haven: Yale University Press.
Bryson, A. and R. Freeman (2010) ‘How does shared capitalism affect economic performance in
the United Kingdom?’, in Douglas Kruse, Richard Freeman and Joseph Blasi (eds), Shared
Capitalism at Work, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Cahuc, P. and B. Dormont (1997) ‘Profit-sharing: does it increase productivity and employment?
A theoretical model and empirical evidence on French micro data’, Labour Economics, 4, 293–
319.
Capelli, P. and D. Neumark (2004) ‘External churning and internal flexibility: Evidence on the
functional flexibility and core-periphery hypotheses’, Industrial Relations, 43(1), 148-82.
Conyon, M. and R. Freeman (2004) ‘Shared modes of compensation and firm performance: U.K.
evidence’, in Richard Blundell, David Card and Richard Freeman (eds), Seeking a Premier
League Economy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
D’Art, D. and T. Turner (2004) ‘Profit sharing, firm performance and union influence in selected
European countries’, Personnel Review, 33(3), 335–350.
D’Art, D. and T. Turner (2006) ‘Profit sharing and employee share ownership in Ireland: A new
departure?’, Economic and Industrial Democracy, 27(4), 543–564.
Davidson, P. (1986–7) ‘The simple macroeconomics of a nonergodic monetary economy vs a
share economy: is Weitzman’s macroeconomics too simple?’, Journal of Post Keynesian
Economics, 9(2), 212–25.
Doucouliagos, C. (1995) ‘Worker participation and productivity in labor-managed and
participatory capitalist firms: A meta-analysis’, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 49(1), 58-
77.
                                                14
Farebrother (1973) ‘Simplified Samuelson conditions for cubic and quartic equations’, The
Manchester School, 41(4), 396-400.
Kehoe, J. T. (1998) ‘Uniqueness and stability’, in A. P. Kirman (ed.), Elements of General
Equilibrium Analysis, Oxford: Basil Blackwell, pp. 38–87.
Kim, S. (1998) ‘Does profit sharing increase firms’ profits?’, Journal of Labour Research, 19,
351–70.
Kruse, D., J. Blasi and R. Park (2010) ‘Shared capitalism in the U.S. economy: Prevalence,
characteristics, and employee views of financial participation in enterprise’, in Douglas Kruse,
Richard Freeman and Joseph Blasi (eds), Shared Capitalism at Work, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Kruse, D., R. Freeman and J. Blasi (2010) ‘Do workers gain by sharing? Employee outcomes
under employee ownership, profit sharing, and broad-based stock options’, in Douglas Kruse,
Richard Freeman and Joseph Blasi (eds), Shared Capitalism at Work, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Marquetti, A. and Foley, D. K. (2012) Extended Penn World Tables v. 4.0 – EPWT 4.0.
Accessed in February 2016 from https://sites.google.com/a/newschool.edu/duncan-foley-
homepage/home/EPWT
Mitchell, D. B., D. Lewin and E. E. Lawler (1990) ‘Alternative pay systems, firm performance,
and productivity’, in Alan S. Blinder (ed.), Paying for Productivity, Washington, D.C.: Brookings
Institution, 15–88.
Peterson, S. and F. Luthans (2006) ‘The impact of financial and nonfinancial incentives on
business-unit outcomes over time’, Journal of Applied Psychology, 91(1), 156–165.
Rothschild, K. W. (1986-7) ‘Is there a Weitzman miracle?’, Journal of Post Keynesian
Economics, 9(2), 198–211.
Weibull, J. W. (1995) Evolutionary Game Theory, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Weitzman, M. (1985) ‘The simple macroeconomics of profit sharing’, American Economic
Review, 95, 937–953.
Weitzman, M. and D. Kruse (1990) ‘Profit sharing and productivity’, in Alan S. Blinder (ed.),
Paying for Productivity, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 95–140.




                                               15
Appendix 1 - Existence and uniqueness of a long-run equilibrium with all firms playing the
non-sharing labor-extraction strategy
Let x    v and h( x)  f ( x)  v . In order to show the existence and uniqueness of a
  (v, )  which satisfies (17) we have to show that the function h has a unique strictly
positive fixed point, i.e, there is a unique real value x    v such that x  h( x ) .
We can accomplish this by using Theorem 3 in Kennan (2001, pp. 895), which makes it possible
to ascertain that h has a unique x   , if the following conditions are satisfied: (i) h is
increasing; (ii) h is strictly concave; (iii) h(0)  0 ; (iv) h(a)  a for some a  0 ; and (v)
 h(b)  b for some b  a .
Conditions (i) and (ii) are satisfied. Since f ()  0 and f ()  0 in the entire domain of f , it
follows that for all x   we have:

(A-1.2)                h( x)   f ( x)  0 and h( x)   2 f ( x)  0 .
Therefore, the function h is strictly increasing and strictly concave.
Condition (iii) is also satisfied. Since f (0)  1  v , it follows that h(0)  f (0)  v  0 .
Condition (iv) is also satisfied. Given that 0  v  1, it follows that 0  1  v  1 . Besides, since h
is strictly increasing and f (0)  1 , it follows that there is a a  1  v such that
h(1  v)  f  (1  v)   v  f (0)  v  1  v .

Condition (v) is also satisfied. Recall that we have assumed that                     lim         f ( ys  y )  0 . Hence,
                                                                                   ( ys  y )

since ys  y   (  v)   x for   0 , it follows that lim( ys  y )  lim  x   . For   0 , we
                                                                         x           x 

                        h( x )          f ( x)  v
can deduce that lim             lim                 lim  f ( x)  0 , where in the last equality we have
                    x  x        x        x        x 

used L'Hôpital's rule. Thus, we can assert that for every   0 there is some M  0 such that for
                           h( x )
all x  M we have                     . This last inequality can be re-written as h( x)   x , since
                              x
h( x)  f ( x)  v  f (0)  v  0 for all x  0 . We can set   1 . In this case, there is some M  0
such that for all x  M it follows that h( x)  x . Thus, it is enough to choose any
 x  b  Max{M , a} to obtain h(b)  b and b  a  1  v .

Appendix 2 - Existence and uniqueness of a mixed-strategy long-run equilibrium (both
labor-extraction compensation strategies are played across the population of firms)
Let  ( ,  )    f  (1   )(  v)  . Condition (19) is satisfied if, and only if,  ( * ,  * )  0 . Let
us show that, given  * , if condition (20) is satisfied, there is a unique  *  (0,1)                         such that
 ( * ,  * )  0 .
Given the existence and uniqueness of the fixed point  shown in Appendix 1, we can use the
Index Theorem (Kehoe, 1987, p. 52) to write:
                                        f  (  v)  
(A-2.1)                index( )  sgn 1                 1,
                                                      

                                                              16
where sgn() stands for the sign function. Based on this function, we can establish that:
                       ( ,  )
(A-2.2)                            1   f   (  v)   0 .
                         
Therefore, given the existence and uniqueness of  , the graph of  ( ,  ) in the plane given by
{( ,  )      2
                   } always crosses the 45-degree line only once and from above, as shown in Figure 3.
Since it follows from (17) that  ( ,0)    f  (  v)   0 , we can conclude that
 ( ,0)    f  (  v)   0 for all   (v,  )  . For all  *   , then, we can infer that:

(A-2.3)                ( * ,0)   *  f  ( *  v)   0 .
Moreover, it is straightforward that (20) implies that:
(A-2.4)                ( * ,1)   *  f (0)  0 .
Since  ( * ,0)  0 ,  ( * ,1)  0 and  is continuous along the domain, we can then apply the
intermediate value theorem to conclude that there is some  *  (0,1)                        such that  ( * ,  * )  0 .
Moreover, given that f ()  0 for all  [0,1]  , we have:
                       ( * ,  )
(A-2.5)
                          
                                                                          
                                      ( *  v) f   (1   )( *  v)  0 ,

for all  [0,1]           . As a result, since the function in (A.2-5) is continuous in the closed interval
[0,1]        , there is only one  *  (0,1)             such that  ( * ,  * )  0 .

Appendix 3 - Local stability of the long-run equilibrium with all firms playing the non-
sharing labor-extraction strategy
The Jacobian matrix evaluated around the equilibrium ( ,0)   is given by:

                                   f   (  v)       (  v) f   (  v)  
                                                                                         
(A-3.1)               J ( , 0)                                      v            .
                                            0         1   (1   ) 1    (1  v)  k
                                                                                  
                                  
Let  be an eigenvalue of the Jacobian matrix (A-3.1). We can set the characteristic equation of
the linearization around the equilibrium:
                                   a       b
(A-3.2)               J  I                        2  (a  c)  ac  0 ,
                                     0      c 

                                                                                              v             
where a   f   (  v)   0 , b   (  v) f   (  v)   0 , and c  1  (1   ) 1    (1  v)  k . The
                                                                                                           
solutions of (A-3.2) are the eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix (A-3.1), which are given by:
(A-3.3)               1   f   (  v)  and 2  1  [ sc ( )   n ]k ,
                            v
where  sc ( )  (1   ) 1   and  n  1  v .
                            

                                                                17
Let us investigate the absolute value of 1 . Given that   0 and f ()  0 along the domain, it
follows that 1   f   (  v)   0 . Also, it follows from (A-2.2) that 1   f   (  v)   1 .
Hence, it follows that 1  1 .

Let us check the absolute value of  2 . We want to find under what condition(s) it follows that
1  2  1 . Per (A-3.3), it follows that 1  2  1 obtains if, and only if, 2  [ sc ( )   n ]k  0 .

Since 0   sc ( )  1 and 0   n  1 , we obtain that 1   sc ( )   n  1 . Since the output to capital
ratio typically satisfies the condition given by 0  k  1 (Marquetti and Foley, 2012), it follows
                                                                       v
that 2  k  [ sc ( )   n ]k . Thus,  sc ( )   n  (1   ) 1    (1  v) is increasing in  . Given
                                                                       
(25), we have  s ( )   n  0 . Thus, if    (panel (a) in Figure 2), we find that  sc ( )   n  0 ,
                    c   *                               *


and hence that [ sc ( )   n ]k  0 , which means that 2  1 if    * . But if    * (panels (b)
and (c) in Figure 2), it follows that  sc ( )   n  0 , and hence that [ sc ( )   n ]k  0 , so that
2  1 if    * . This completes the demonstration that the long-run equilibrium with no firm
playing the profit-sharing strategy, ( ,0)   , is an attractor if    * (panel (a) in Figure 2) and
a repulsor if    * (panels (b) and (c) in Figure 2).

Appendix 4 - Local stability of the long-run equilibrium with all firms playing the profit-
sharing labor-extraction compensation strategy
The Jacobian matrix evaluated around the equilibrium  f (0),1   is given by:

                                    0            f (0)  v  f   0        
                                                                                
(A-4.1)              J ( f (0),1)                        v               .
                                    0 1   (1   ) 1  f (0)   (1  v)  k 
                                                                          

Let  be an eigenvalue of the Jacobian matrix (A-4.1). We can set the characteristic equation of
the linearization around this equilibrium:
                                         a
(A-4.2)              J  I                       (  b)  0 ,
                                   0     b 

                                                              v             
with a    f (0)  v f   0  0 and b  1  (1   ) 1       (1  v)  k .
                                                           f (0)            
In this case, the eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix (A.4-1) are easily computed from (A-4.2):
(A-4.3)             1  0 and 2  b  1   sc  ( f 0)    n  k ,

where  sc  f (0)   (1   ) (1  v / f (0) and  n  1  v .

The local stability of    f (0),1   depends on                         2 . Given (A-4.3), it follows that 1  2  1
obtains if, and only if, 0   sc  f (0)    n  k  2 .


                                                                     18
Since 0   sc  f (0)   1 and 0   n  1 , it follows that 1   sc  f (0)    n  1 . Therefore, given that it
is typically the case that 0  k  1 , we can infer that  sc  f (0)    n  k  2 .

                                                v
It can be seen that  sc ( )   n  (1   ) 1    (1  v) is increasing in  . Given (25), we have
                                                
 s ( )   n  0 . Therefore, if f (0)   * (panels (a) and (b) in Figure 2), we obtain that
  c   *


 sc  f (0)    n  0 , and hence that  sc  f (0)    n  k  0 , which means that 2  1 if f (0)   * .
Meanwhile, if f (0)   * (panel (c) in Figure 2), we obtain that  sc  f (0)    n  0 , and hence that
 sc  f (0)    n  k  0 . Therefore, it follows that 2  1 if f (0)   * . This completes the
demonstration that the long-run equilibrium with all firms playing the profit-sharing labor-
extraction strategy,  f (0),1   , is a repulsor if f (0)   * (panels (a) and (b) in Figure 2) and
an attractor if f (0)   * (panel (c) in Figure 2).

Appendix 5 - Local stability of the long-run equilibrium with heterogeneity in labor-
extraction compensation strategies across firms
The Jacobian matrix evaluated around the equilibrium ( * ,  * )   is given by:

                          (1   * ) f   (1   * )( *  v)   ( *  v) f   (1   * )( *  v)  
                                                                                                             
(A-5.1) J ( * ,  * )                                 v                                                    .
                           (1   )(1   ) ( * )2 k
                                *         *
                                                                                       1                      
                                                                                                             
Let  be an eigenvalue of the Jacobian matrix (A-5.1). We can set the characteristic equation of
the linearization around the equilibrium:
                                      a       b
(A-5.2)                J  I                           2  (a  1)  (a  bc)  0 ,
                                        c      1 

where             a   (1   * ) f   (1   * )( *  v)   0 ,        b   ( *  v) f   (1   * )( *  v)   0 ,   and
                               v
c   * (1   * )(1   )           k 0.
                             ( * )2
We can use the Samuelson stability conditions for a second order characteristic equation to
determine under what conditions the two eigenvalues are inside the unit circle. Based on
Farebrother (1973, p. 396, inequalities 2.4 and 2.5), we can establish the following set of
simplified Samuelson conditions for the quadratic polynomial in (A-5.2):
(A-5.3)               1  a  bc  (a  1)  a  1 and a  bc  1 .
Let us prove that these conditions are satisfied if a  1 .
First, note that 1  a  bc  a  1 simplifies to bc  0 , which is trivially satisfied given that b  0
and c  0 .
Meanwhile, the second inequality, a  bc  1 , can be expressed as follows:



                                                                        19
                                              v(1   ) * ( *  v) 
(A-5.4)         a  bc   (1   * ) f () 1                     k   1.
                                                     ( * )2          

Appendix 6 - Positive invariance of the state space
We want to show that (t , t )  for all t {1, 2...} and initial condition ( 0 , 0 )  .

Let us first demonstrate that t 1  v for all t {0,1, 2...} and ( 0 , 0 )  . Given (22-a) and the
assumptions that f (0)  1  v and f (.) is strictly increasing, we can establish that
t 1  f  (1  t )(t  v)   f (0)  v for any  t  v and 0  t  1 . By induction, we can
conclude that t 1  v for all t {0,1, 2...} and ( 0 , 0 )  .

Next, let us prove that 0  t 1  1 for all t {0,1, 2...} and ( 0 , 0 )  . Let us first show that
t 1  0 for all (t , t )  . As t  0 for any (t , t )  and given (23-a), in order to show that
t 1  0 for all (t , t )  , we need to show that for all (t , t )  we have:

                                      v           
(A-6.1)         (1  t ) (1   ) 1    (1  v)  k  1 .
                                   t            
We can set up the following lower and upper bounds for the profit share differential for any
t  v :

                                                         v          
(A-6.2)         (1  v)   sc,t   n,t  (1   ) 1               (1  v)  v   .
                                                      t            
From (A-6.1)-(A-6.2) and the fact that it is typically the case that 0  k  1 , we can write:
(A-6.3)     (1  t )( sc,t   n,t )k  (1  t )(1  v)k  (1  t )(1  v)  1  v  (1  v)t  1

for any (t , t )  . Hence, by induction, t 1  0 for all t {0,1, 2...} and ( 0 , 0 )  .

Finally, let us demonstrate that t 1  1 for all (t , t )  . Given (23-a), in order to establish that
t 1  1 for all (t , t )  , we need to demonstrate that:

(A-6.4)         t 1  (1  t )( sc,t   n,t )k   1 .

This inequality is trivially satisfied for t  0 . For any t  0 , we can re-write (A-6.4) as:
                                       1
(A-6.5)         ( sc,t   n,t )k         .
                                       t
We can again make use of (A-6.2) and conclude that for any t  0 , we have:
                                                          1
(A-6.6)         ( sc,t   n,t )k  (v   )k  1             .
                                                         t
This completes the proof that the state space  is positively invariant, so that (t , t )  for all
t {1, 2...} and initial condition ( 0 , 0 )  .


                                                                    20
