A Kaldor-Schumpeter Model of Cumulative Growth: Combining Increasing
Returns and Non-price Competitiveness with Technological Catch-up and
Research Intensity1

                                          João P. Romero
             Centro de Desenvolvimento e Planejamento Regional (CEDEPLAR-UFMG)
                                Email: jpromero@cedeplar.ufmg.br

                  Área 6 - Crescimento, Desenvolvimento Econômico e Instituições

Resumo: Em função da importância das contribuições das abordagens Kaldoriana e
Schumpeteriana para a teoria macroeconômica do crescimento, o presente artigo propõe um modelo
de crescimento que combina de forma consistente as ideias centrais dessas duas vertentes,
resolvendo algumas importantes limitações do modelo Kaldor-Dixon-Thirlwall original. O modelo
proposto leva em consideração os principais fatores enfatizados nas duas literaturas, mantendo a
relevância tanto de fatores de oferta como de fatores de demanda na determinação do crescimento.
O modelo Kaldor-Schumpeter proposto no artigo é também transposto para uma forma multi-
setorial que indica: (i) que mudanças na performance de um dado setor afetam a performance de
outros setores via externalidades inter-setoriais que operam através do relaxamento da restrição
externa; e (ii) que um aumento na taxa de crescimento da renda externa pode exercer um impacto
negativo sobre a economia doméstica, caso o efeito negativo da maior competitividade não-preço
externa que resulta desse aumento seja superior ao efeito positivo de aumento da demanda externa.

Palavras-chave: Retornos crescentes de escala; Modelo Kaldor-Dixon-Thirlwall; Intensidade de
pesquisa; Catch-up tecnológico; Lei de Thirlwall.

JEL: O11; O41; O30.

Abstract: Taking into account the relevance of the Kaldorian and the Schumpeterian contributions
to macroeconomic growth theory, this paper proposes a growth model that consistently combines
the insights of these two traditions while solving some of the most important limitations of the
original Kaldor-Dixon-Thirlwall model. This model takes into account the main factors emphasized
by the Kaldorian and the Schumpeterian literatures, while keeping the importance of both demand
and supply-side factors for economic growth. The proposed Kaldor-Schumpeter growth model was
also transposed to a multi-sectoral setting that indicates that: (i) changes in the performance of a
given sector affect the performance of the other sectors through inter-sector demand externalities by
easing the BOP constraint; and (ii) an increase in the growth rate of foreign output can exert a
negative impact on the domestic economy, provided that the negative effect of higher foreign non-
price competitiveness is larger than the positive demand effect.

Keywords: Increasing Returns; Kaldor-Dixon-Thirlwall Model; Research Intensity; Technological
Catch-up; Thirlwall’s Law.

JEL: O11; O41; O30.




1
    Este trabalho contou com o apoio financeiro da FAPEMIG.


                                                                                                   1
A Kaldor-Schumpeter Model of Cumulative Growth: Combining Increasing
Returns and Non-price Competitiveness with Technological Catch-up and
Research Intensity

1. Introduction

Both the Kaldorian and the Schumpeterian approaches to economic growth have strong
foundations, with important contributions to macroeconomic growth theory and considerable
support from a large number of empirical works.
        The two approaches carry some important similarities. Both approaches emphasize the
importance of endogenous technical progress and trade for economic growth, while recognizing the
crucial role of non-price competitiveness for trade performance (e.g. Kaldor, 1970; Fagerberg,
1988). Furthermore, both streams emphasize the relevance of structural differences between sectors
or industries. In addition, both approaches stress the importance of cumulative mechanisms that
guarantee positive growth rates in the long-term. In the Kaldorian tradition, cumulativeness comes
from the impact of output growth on productivity growth (e.g. Dixon and Thirlwall, 1975), while in
the Schumpeterian tradition cumulativeness comes from the impact of knowledge accumulation
(which faces constant marginal returns) on productivity growth (e.g. Romer, 1990; Aghion and
Howitt, 1992; 1998). And finally, both approaches predict conditional convergence (see Roberts,
2007; Griffith et al, 2004).
        These similarities notwithstanding, the two traditions present an important difference. While
Kaldorian theory emphasizes the importance of demand growth for long-term growth, putting less
stress on the importance of supply-side factors, the opposite holds for Schumpeterian theory.
Although this difference does not make the two approaches necessarily incompatible, it does create
an important difficulty, since combining these theories can subvert one of the two by attributing
final role to either demand or to supply alone.
        A number of works have sought to combine Kaldorian and Schumpeterian insights into
models of cumulative growth. Amable (1993), for instance, put together a model that takes into
account the importance of both research intensity and technological transfer for productivity
growth, but does not specify how productivity growth impacts output growth nor considers the role
of exports in long-term growth. Targetti and Foti’s (1997) model, in turn, stresses the importance of
technological transfer for productivity growth, but disregards the roles of research intensity and
non-price competitiveness for long-term growth. León-Ledesma’s (2002) model, however,
represents the most complete formalization of Kaldorian and Schumpeterian insights. The author
expanded Dixon and Thirlwall’s (1975) model by introducing the technology gap, research intensity
and technological competitiveness into the Kaldorian model. Nonetheless, León-Ledesma’s (2002)
tests suggest that demand factors do not influence research intensity, while this variable has a
positive impact on export growth. In contrast with the Kaldorian approach, therefore, this ends up
attributing a more prominent role to supply-side factors in determining export growth. In addition,
León-Ledesma’s (2002) tests suggest also that research intensity does not impact on productivity
growth, going against one of the key findings of the Schumpeterian literature. Thus, these issues
suggest that some of the relationships adopted in the model might be problematic, casting doubt on
its dynamics. Finally, it is also important to note that none of the models discussed above takes
sectoral differences2 into account nor incorporates the importance of balance-of-payments (BOP)
constraint for long-term growth, as emphasized by Kaldor (1970) and Thirlwall (1979). In sum,

2
 Cimoli and Porcile’s (2014) model is one of the few models that try to combine Kaldorian and Schumpeterian insights
taking into account sectoral differences. However, the model is inspired in a structuralist framework that is very
different from the Schumpeterian and the Kaldorian models, and that does not take into account all the factors
considered in these approaches.


                                                                                                                  2
none of these seminal works has managed to construct a model that satisfactorily encompasses the
contributions of both the Kaldorian and the Schumpeterian traditions.
        This paper’s contribution to the existing literature is threefold. First, the paper presents a
growth model that consistently combines the key insights from the Kaldorian and the
Schumpeterian traditions, while keeping the importance of both demand and supply-side factors for
long-term growth. This model not only formally integrates the two approaches, but it also addresses
three important limitations of the Kaldor-Dixon-Thirlwall (KDT) model developed by Dixon and
Thirlwall (1975), namely: (i) that the model does not account for BOP constraint; (ii) that
cumulativeness works through price competitiveness; and (iii) that the degree of returns to scale is
left unexplained. The Schumpeterian contributions are incorporated into the KDT model by
introducing the effect of technological transfer as a determinant of technical progress, and
introducing research intensity as a determinant of the degree of returns to scale. Interestingly, the
model is compatible with the existing empirical evidence on conditional convergence, with the
Kaldorian and the Schumpeterian empirical literatures and with the evidence provided by Romero
and Britto (2016) and Romero and McCombie (2016b). Hence, this model shows that the Kaldorian
and the Schumpeterian traditions can be combined without subverting their core ideas, as long as
both demand and supply-side factors are allowed to play a role in long-term growth. Second, the
paper proposes a multi-sectoral version of this Kaldor-Schumpeter growth model to demonstrate
that in a multi-sectoral setting with BOP constraint, increases in productivity growth in a given
sector generate increases in productivity and output growth in the other sectors of the economy due
to inter-sector demand externalities. Third, the paper shows that, in a multi-sectoral framework,
increases in foreign output growth can exert a negative impact on the growth rate of the domestic
economy, provided the resulting negative effect on domestic exports and imports through non-price
competitiveness is larger than the resulting positive demand effect on domestic exports.
        The remainder of the paper is divided in five sections. Section 2 presents a Kaldor-
Schumpeter model of cumulative growth. Section 3 discusses the multi-sectoral version of this
model. Section 4 presents the concluding remarks of the paper.

2. An aggregate Kaldor-Schumpeter growth model

        The Kaldor-Dixon-Thirlwall (KDT) model developed by Dixon and Thirlwall (1975) is the
canonical model of economic growth from a Kaldorian perspective. This model describes how
export, output and productivity growth interact to form a circuit of cumulative growth.
        Still, the KDT model has three important limitations. First, the original model puts more
emphasis on price competitiveness than on non-price competitiveness. This is an important
limitation, given that it makes the model inconsistent with empirical evidence on the neutrality of
price competition3 in the long-term. If relative prices are assumed to be constant in the long-term,
however, the model loses its cumulative mechanism. Moreover, attempts to solve this limitation, as
Setterfield’s (2011) model, have never been empirically tested. Second, the central parameters of
the model are not explained. The price elasticity of exports, the Verdoorn coefficient, and the
elasticity of output with respect to exports are the parameters that determine the magnitude of the
equilibrium growth rate. Yet, the model does not provide any explanation for what determines the
magnitude of these parameters between countries (or regions) and through time. Furthermore, not
much empirical research has focused on investigating the determinants of these parameters. Third,
the model does not take into account differences between sectors. Although Kaldor (1966)
emphasised the differences in returns to scale between manufacturing, agriculture and services, the

3
 A vast literature provide evidence that in the long run, price elasticities of demand do not have a significant effect on
export growth, either because relative prices change only negligibly in the long-term, or because the Marshal-Lerner
condition is not satisfied (see Blecker, 2013).


                                                                                                                        3
KDT model does not take such sectoral differences into consideration. Moreover, recent evidence
has also shown that income elasticities of demand for exports differ between sectors (Gouvea and
Lima, 2010; Romero et al., 2011; Romero and McCombie, 2016a), which suggests that the sectoral
disaggregation can be twice as important.
        In addition to these three internal limitations, the model does not consider the impact of two
important supply-side factors that the Schumpeterian literature has found to be significant in
explaining productivity growth: research intensity and technology transfer.
        This section presents a Kaldor-Schumpeter (KS) growth model that addresses the limitations
of Dixon and Thirlwall’s (1975) model and of previous growth models that have sought to combine
Kaldorian and Schumpeterian insights.
        Firstly, to incorporate the BOP constraint into the original KDT model, the Hicks (1950)
super-multiplier, used in the original KDT model to relate export growth to output growth, was
replaced by a BOP equilibrium growth rate, as done by Thirlwall and Dixon (1979) and Blecker
(2013).
        Secondly, to change the channel through which cumulative causation operates, two changes
were carried out: (i) relative prices are assumed to be constant in the long term, not exerting a
significant impact on export and import growth; and (ii) relative productivity growth affects export
and import growth via its impact on non-price competitiveness. Ideally, the demand function of a
given good should take into account the features of the product and of its competitors, as well as
their prices and the income of the consumers (e.g. Hausman, 1997; Nevo, 2001). However, taking
into account the different characteristics of each good is an extremely difficult task, especially in
macroeconomic investigations. Traditionally, the Kaldorian literature considers that non-price
factors are captured in the income elasticity of demand, assuming that goods with higher demand,
given relative prices, are the ones with higher quality. This specification, therefore, is a second-best
option, adopted in face of unobservable differences in quality (amongst other non-price
competitiveness factors). By contrast, the export and import functions used in this paper’s model
introduce differences in productivity to capture differences in the quality of the goods, as proposed
and tested by Romero and McCombie (2016b). Thus, this specification not only takes into account
technological competitiveness, as emphasized by Schumpeterian works, but it also captures the
effect of other non-price factors that affect productivity.
        Thus, the first three equations of the model are a simple BOP equilibrium condition, an
expanded export demand function and an expanded import demand function, respectively:

X̂ = M̂                                                                      (1)
X̂ = ε Ẑ + γ (Q̂ − Q̂ f )                                                   (2)
M̂ = π Yˆ + δ (Q̂ f − Q̂)                                                    (3)

where X is exports, M is imports, Z is foreign income, Y is domestic income and Q is productivity.
The hats over the variables denote growth rates and the subscript f indicates variables or parameters
for the foreign economy. In addition, ε and π are the income elasticities of demand for exports
and imports, respectively. Finally, γ and δ are the non-price elasticities of demand for exports and
imports, respectively.
       As in the original KDT model, productivity growth is determined by the growth of output
via Kaldor-Verdoorn’s Law. Still, in the present model it is also assumed that technological transfer
influences productivity growth (e.g. Angeriz et al., 2008; 2009), so that productivity growth in the
domestic economy is given by:

Q̂ = ρ + λYˆ + β G                                                           (4)



                                                                                                      4
where G = (Q f − Q) / Q denotes the technology gap, ρ is the autonomous productivity growth, λ
and is the Verdoorn coefficient.
        For the foreign economy, however, productivity growth is given by the simple Kaldor-
Verdoorn Law, given that the technology gap becomes zero by assuming that this is the leading
economy:

Q̂ f = ρ + λ f Ẑ                                                                            (5)

        Thirdly, following the evidence provided by Romero and Britto (2016), equations (6) and
(7) make the Verdoorn coefficient partially endogenous, being determined by the level of research
intensity (T) in each economy. Kaldor-Verdoorn’s Law indicates that productivity growth is driven
by demand growth, through its impact on technical progress (i.e. division of labour). Still, the law
does not take into account supply-side factors that might influence the pace of technical progress.
The Schumpeterian literature, in turn, emphasizes that technical progress is influenced by research
intensity, which depends on the amount of resources devoted to research and other activities related
to the creation of innovations (e.g. Aghion and Howitt, 1998; Madsen, 2008). Thus, if research
intensity intensifies technical progress, then higher research intensity should increase the degree of
increasing returns to scale. Put simply, this means that in face of demand growth, economies with
higher research intensity will be able to increase division of labour more quickly, generating higher
productivity growth through higher increasing returns to scale. Thus, in contrast with the expanded
Kaldor-Verdoorn Law proposed by León-Ledesma (2002), in this paper’s KS model, following
Romero and Britto (2016), research intensity has no independent effect on productivity growth,
affecting it only when associated with demand growth. Consequently, incorporating the
Schumpeterian approach into the Kaldorain framework endogenizes the Verdoorn coefficient,
contributing to solve one of the most important limitations of the KDT model, i.e. that the central
parameters of the model, among them the Verdoorn coefficient, are not explained. It is important to
note, however, that in this model, in contrast with León-Ledesma’s (2002) model, research intensity
is assumed to be an exogenous variable.4

λ = α +τT                                                                                    (6)
λ f = α + τ Tf                                                                               (7)

where T is research intensity.
        It is crucial to note, therefore, that the model described above presents three important
differences in relation to the original KDT model. First, the KS model substitutes the Hicks super-
multiplier by the BOP equilibrium growth rate as the initial determinant of output growth (e.g.
Thirlwall and Dixon, 1979; Blecker, 2013). Second, the model assumes relative prices are constant,
so that this term is dropped from the export and import functions and the equation that represents
the determinants of price changes is dropped from the model as well (e.g. Setterfield, 2011). Third,
cumulativeness is introduced into the model via the effect of productivity growth, generated
through Kaldor-Verdoorn’s Law, on exports and imports, assuming that productivity growth is
associated with increases in non-price competitiveness (e.g. Romero and McCombie, 2016b).
        Hence, the KS model described in this section incorporates two important innovations in
relation to the original KDT model and its modified versions.
        The first innovation of the model is to incorporate the expanded export and import functions
proposed by Setterfield (2011), and discussed and tested by Romero and McCombie (2016b). These

4
    See Romero and Britto (2016) for a discussion on the exogeneity of research intensity.


                                                                                                    5
functions that take into account differences in non-price competitiveness captured in relative
productivity. This provides more information on the determinants of trade performance, while
keeping the key aspects of Kaldorian and Schumpeterian traditions. Regarding Kaldorian theory,
stressing the role of productivity growth does not mean subverting the demand-oriented approach to
trade performance (a la Krugman, 1989), given that productivity growth is driven by demand,
following Kaldor-Verdoorn’s Law. Regarding Schumpeterian theory, emphasizing the more general
non-price competitiveness captured in productivity growth does not mean that technological
competitiveness is not relevant either, given that productivity growth is associated with
technological progress and partially determined by research intensity.
        The second innovation of the model is to incorporate the impact of research intensity on the
magnitude of the Verdoorn coefficient, as proposed and tested by Romero and Britto (2016). This
innovation indicates that in face of demand growth, economies with higher research intensity will
be able to increase division of labour more quickly, generating higher productivity growth through
higher increasing returns to scale. Again, this contributes to better understand the determinants of
productivity growth, while keeping the central aspects of Kaldorian and Schumpeterian theories.
Regarding Kaldorian theory, this innovation keeps the central role of demand growth for
productivity growth. Regarding Schumpeterian theory, in turn, this innovation keeps the idea that
research intensity is relevant for productivity growth, just changing how this effect works.
        Turning back to the model, substituting equation (6) in (4) gives the models’ productivity
curve (PR):

       " ρ + βG % " 1 %
Yˆ = − $        '+$       ' Q̂                                               (8)
       # α + τT & #α + τT &

       In addition, substituting equations (2) and (3) into equation (1), and then substituting
equations (5) and (7) into it yields the BOP growth rate (BP):

      " ε Ẑ − (γ + δ )[ ρ + (α + τ T )Ẑ ] % " γ + δ %
Yˆ = $$                              f
                                            '' + $    ' Q̂                   (9)
      #                  π                   & # π &

         Equilibrium is found substituting equation (8) into equation (9):

       ε Ẑ + (γ + δ )[ β G − (α + τ Tf )Ẑ]
Yˆ * =                                                                       (10)
               π − (γ + δ )(α + τ T )

        Five important implications follow from equation (10). First, if relative productivity has no
effect on demand, then γ = δ = 0 and equation (10) reduces to Thirlwall’s Law. Second, equation
(10) has a stable equilibrium solution if 0 < (γ + δ )(α + τ T ) < π . Third, an increase in research
intensity in the domestic economy (T), ceteris paribus, increases the equilibrium growth rate.
Fourth, an increase in research intensity in the foreign economy (Tf), ceteris paribus, decreases the
equilibrium growth rate, given that such increase raises the growth rate of productivity in the
foreign economy, which benefits imports and hinders exports from the domestic economy. Fifth,
the higher the technology gap is, the higher the equilibrium growth rate is, ceteris paribus. Still,
equation (10) shows also that the equilibrium growth rate of output can stay unchanged or even
decrease if an increase in research intensity (T) occurs simultaneously to a decrease in the growth
rate of foreign income ( Ẑ ). Similarly, an increase in foreign demand can exert little impact on
output growth, if it is accompanied by a decrease in research intensity.



                                                                                                   6
        Figure 1 illustrates the equilibrium of the model. As the figure shows, this equilibrium is
given by the intersection between the PR and the BP curves. On the one hand, if the rate of growth
of output is higher than the equilibrium rate, then the effect of higher non-price competitiveness on
exports and imports (via the increase in productivity growth) will not be large enough to offset the
raise in import growth motivated by the increased output growth. Consequently, the economy will
run into BOP deficits, which will force the growth rate to reduce back to the equilibrium rate. On
the other hand, if the rate of growth of output is lower than the equilibrium rate, then cumulative
causation will take place through Kaldor-Verdoorn’s Law, so that productivity will increase,
leading to higher exports and higher output growth. This process will continue until equilibrium is
reached.

                                           Figure 1
                Equilibrium output and productivity growth rates in the KS model

                                    Yˆ
                                                       PR   BP




                                                                 Q̂
                       Source: Author’s elaboration.


2.1. Model’s dynamics

        Figure 2 illustrates the effects of changes in research intensity, in the technology gap, and in
the growth rate of the foreign economy.
        Following equation (8), an increase in research intensity in the domestic economy (T),
ceteris paribus, increases the equilibrium growth rate. This increase generates a rightward shift in
the PR curve from PR1 to PR2 in Figure 2A, changing both the slope and the intercept of the
original curve. Similarly, equation (8) also indicates that a higher the technology gap increases the
country’s equilibrium growth rate.
        An increase in the technology gap generates a shift in the intercept of the PR curve without
changing its slope. In Figure 2B, this is represented by the shift of the PR curve from PR1 to PR3. In
addition, following equation (9), an increase in research intensity in the foreign economy (Tf) leads
to a decrease in output and productivity growth rates in the domestic economy, due to the increase
in non-price competitiveness that follows increases in research intensity. In Figure 2C, this increase
is represented by the downward shift of the BP curve from BP1 to BP2.
        Finally, an increase in the growth rate of the foreign economy leads to an upward shift in the
BP curve, which is represented by the upward shift of BP1 to BP3 in Figure 2D.




                                                                                                      7
                                              Figure 2
             Shifts in equilibrium output and productivity growth rates in the KS model




                 Source: Author’s elaboration.


2.2. Simulations

       In order to quantify the implications of the KS model, the parameters estimated by Romero
and Britto (2016) and Romero and McCombie (2016b) were used as reference to perform
simulations and analyse the magnitude of the impacts of each variable: ρ = 0 , β = 0.03 , π = 2.08 ,
ε = 2.35 , α = 0.37 , δ = 1.46 , γ = 0.90 and τ = 0.23 . Thus, assuming plausible and fixed values for
Tf, T, G and Ẑ , i.e. 0.6, 0.2, 0.1 and 0.03, respectively, the model’s stable equilibrium condition is
fulfilled (i.e. 0 < (γ + δ )(α + τ T ) < π ).
         Using the values listed above indicates that a considerable increase in research intensity is
necessary to generate a meaningful effect on the equilibrium growth rate. With the initial values
listed, the equilibrium growth rate is 3.82 per cent. An increase in the domestic research intensity
from 0.2 to 0.3, however, leads to an increase in the equilibrium growth rate to 4.02 per cent. This
means that and increase of 0.1 in the number of patents created per millions of hours worked
generates an increase in GDP growth of 0.2 percentage points.5 The same applies to increases in
research intensity in the foreign economy. An increase in foreign research intensity from 0.6 to 0.7
reduces the equilibrium growth rate to 3.67 per cent, which represents a negative variation of 0.15
percentage points. Finally, an increase in the growth rate of the foreign economy from 3 to 4% leads
to an increase in the equilibrium growth rate to 4.87%.

5
 Similar figures are obtained if the R&D to GDP ratio is used instead of patents per millions of hours worked as the
measure of research intensity.


                                                                                                                  8
        Given the importance of research intensity in this model, however, two aspects of this
variable should be noted. Firstly, although this variable is considered exogenous in the model, it is
possible to assume that it is in fact influenced by institutional factors, such as property rights
protection, political system, education system, production linkages, etc. As Setterfield (1997: 372)
argued, economies might need some particular institutions to realise certain scale economies.
Similarly, in the KS model, particular institutional arrangements might be necessary to increase the
level of research intensity, which determines the level of economies of scale. Secondly, the fact that
research intensity has no significant effect on productivity growth dissociated from output growth
can be attributed to the fact that without output growth it is hard to translate inventions into
innovations, which refers back to Smith’s (1776) argument that the size of the market determines
the degree of division of labour.
        The technology gap, in turn, has a non-linear impact on the equilibrium output growth rate,
as found in previous works (e.g. Griffith et al, 2004).6 The closer to the technological frontier a
country is, the smaller is the contribution of the gap to productivity and output growth. Thus,
holding domestic research intensity (T) constant at 0.2, an increase in the gap form 0.1 to 0.2
increases the equilibrium growth rate from 3.82 to 4.58 per cent (0.76 difference). Yet, an increase
in the gap from 0.2 to 0.3 increases the equilibrium growth rate to 5.44 (0.86 difference). Thus, this
examination indicates that the contribution of the gap to growth is much higher than the
contribution of research intensity. Nonetheless, it is important to note that in the present model, the
gap is assumed to exert a positive effect on productivity growth regardless of the characteristics of
the economy. However, technological absorption most likely depends on the absorptive capacity of
each country (see Abramovitz, 1986; Verspagen, 1991; Cohen and Levinthal, 1990; Griffith et al,
2004). Hence, this important qualification must be kept in mind when interpreting the effects
analysed above.

3. A Multi-Sectoral Kaldor-Schumpeter growth model

       In this section, the model proposed in the previous section is disaggregated into a Multi-
Sectoral Kaldor-Schumpeter (MSKS) model.
       Firstly, in order to subdivide the economy into sectors, the seven equations used in the
aggregated KS model are now applied to each sector i. For simplicity, it is assumed that ρ = 0 and
β is the same for all i = 1,..., k sectors.

X̂ = M̂                                                                                (11)
X̂i = εi Ẑ + γ i (Q̂i − Q̂ fi )                                                       (12)
M̂ = π Yˆ + δ (Q̂ − Q̂ )
    i      i       i   fi    i                                                         (13)
Q̂i = λiYˆi + β Gi                                                                     (14)
Q̂ fi = λ fi Ẑi                                                                       (15)
λi = α i + τ iTi                                                                       (16)
λ fi = α i + τ iTfi                                                                    (17)

       Then, three auxiliary relationships are added to the model.
       Equations (18) and (19) simply state that aggregate imports and exports are weighted
averages of the respective sectoral variables:

6
 This effect is normally captured by the effect of the log of technology gap on the growth rate of productivity (e.g.
Griffith et al, 2004).


                                                                                                                   9
           k
M̂ = ∑θ i M̂ i                                                                                                                               (18)
          i=1
          k
X̂ = ∑φi X̂i                                                                                                                                 (19)
         i=1


where θ i and φi are the shares of each sector in total imports and exports, respectively.
      Equation (20), in turn, indicates that output growth rate in each sector of the domestic
economy depends on the growth rate of foreign demand (i.e. exports) and on the growth rate of
domestic demand:7

Yˆi = µiYˆ + ν i X̂i                                                                                                                         (20)

       Substituting equations (15) in (12), and then substituting the resulting expression and
equation (20) in (14) yields the sectoral productivity curve (SPR):

        " λ ν (ε Ẑ − γ λ Ẑ ) + β G % " 1− λ γ ν %
Yˆ = − $$ i i i        i fi i       i
                                      '' + $   i i i
                                                     ' Q̂i                                                                                   (21)
        #            λ  µ
                       i i             & #   λ µ
                                              i i    &

       In turn, substituting equations (18) and (19) into the BOP equilibrium condition (11), and
then substituting equations (12), (13) and (15) into the expression and rearranging its terms gives
the multi-sectoral BOP growth rate (MSBP):

     ⎡⎛ k                                   ⎞ ⎛ k−i                         ⎞⎤ ⎡                      ⎤
     ⎢ ⎜∑φiεi Ẑ − (φiγ i + θ iδi )λ fi Ẑi ⎟ + ⎜⎜∑ (φ jγ j + θ jδ j )Q̂ j ⎟⎟ ⎥ ⎢                     ⎥
     ⎢ ⎝                                    ⎠    ⎝                          ⎠ ⎥  ⎢ (φ  γ   + θ  δ   ) ⎥Q̂
Yˆ = ⎢
         i=1                                       j=1
                                                                              ⎥+⎢ ⎛ k
                                                                                      i  i     i  i
                                                                                                                                             (22)
                                ⎛ k           ⎞                                                  ⎞ ⎥ i
     ⎢                          ⎜∑θ i π i ⎟                                   ⎥ ⎢ ⎜∑θ i π i ⎟ ⎥
     ⎢                          ⎝ i=1         ⎠                               ⎥ ⎢⎣ ⎝ i=1         ⎠ ⎥⎦
     ⎣                                                                        ⎦

where Q̂ j is the growth rate of productivity of the j ≠ i sector of the economy. In other words,
sector i is separated from the other j sectors in the numerator so that equation (22) has a form
similar to equation (9) of the KS model.
        The equilibrium of the model is found substituting equation (21) into equation (22) and
substituting equations (16) and (17) into it:

      # k                                                                                                                                                        &
      % ∑φiεi Ẑ + (φiγ i + θ iδi ){[(α i + τ iTi )ν iεi Ẑ − (α i + τ iTi )ν iγ i (α i + τ iT fi )Ẑi + β Gi ] / [1− (α i + τ iTi )ν iγ i ]− (α i + τ iT fi )Ẑ}(
      $                                                                                                                                                          '
Yˆ * = i=1
                                          # k                                                                          &
                                          % ∑θ i π i − µi (φiγ i + θ iδi )(α i + τ iTi ) / [1− (α i + τ iTi )ν iγ i ](
                                          $ i=1                                                                        '
                                                                                                                                             (23)

       Equation (23) is the Multi-Sectoral version of the equilibrium equation (10) of the
aggregated KS model. Note that in equation (23), as in equation (10), the first part of the numerator

7
  Introducing a similar equation for the foreign economy does not change the results of the model. Nonetheless, this
increases considerably the complexity of the model’s equilibrium.


                                                                                                                                                                     10
is associated with the growth rate of the foreign economy. Also analogously to equation (10), the
second part of the numerator shows the impact of technology transfer on output growth, as well as
the negative impact of the growth of the foreign economy on the growth rate of the domestic
economy. Furthermore, the denominator is also similar, with its positive and negative parts
multiplied by additional terms. The complexity of equation (23) stems from the fact that in a
sectoral framework, output growth in a given sector can take place without growth of exports from
this sector, provided BOP equilibrium holds. In other words, structural change in the domestic
economy is possible while respecting the BOP constraint. This possibility, captured in equation
(20), generates the additional terms in the equilibrium solution (23). Nonetheless, all the results
found for the aggregate KS model apply to the MSKS model. First, an increase in research intensity
in the domestic economy (T), ceteris paribus, increases the equilibrium growth rate. Second, an
increase in research intensity in the foreign economy (Tf), ceteris paribus, decreases the equilibrium
growth rate, given that such increase raises the growth rate of productivity in the foreign economy,
which benefits imports and hinders exports from the domestic economy. Third, the higher the
technology gap is, the higher the equilibrium growth rate is, ceteris paribus. And fourth, as in the
KS model, equation (23) becomes Araújo and Lima’s (2007) Multi-Sectoral Thirlwall’s Law
(MSTL) if it is assumed that relative productivity has no effect on exports and imports, i.e.
γ i = δi = 0 .8
          Figure 3 illustrates the equilibrium of the model dividing the economy in two sectors: low-
tech (LT) and high-tech (HT). This equilibrium is given by the joint intersection between the PR
and the BP curves of the two sectors. The figure shows that in equilibrium, the two sectors jointly
determine the equilibrium growth rate of aggregate output. Yet, each sector has different growth
rates of output and productivity, determined by the parameters of the equations associated with each
sector. As in the KS model, the shifts of the curves illustrated in Figure 2 also apply to each sector
of the economy in the MSKS model. Thus, following equation (23), ceteris paribus, increases in
research intensity and in the technology gap in any sector increase the equilibrium growth rate.

                                           Figure 3
            Equilibrium output and productivity growth rates in a two-sector KS model
                                           PRLT      Yˆ
                                                                           PRHT
                                                                                   BPHT
                                    BPLT




                             Q̂LT                                                 Q̂HT
                Source: Author’s elaboration.


        It is crucial to note, however, that introducing relative productivity in export and import
functions does not change the classical Kaldorian approach, which emphasizes the importance of
the income elasticities of demand for long-term growth.


8
 Some of the implications of the present model are similar to the Pasinettian-Kaldorian Multi-Sectoral model
developed by Araújo (2013).


                                                                                                         11
          Although part of the non-price competitiveness factors associated with the production of
each sector i is removed from the income elasticities with the introduction of relative productivity in
the demand functions, this variable captures only intra-sector non-price competitiveness, not taking
into account inter-sector non-price competitiveness. This stems from the specification adopted for
the demand functions, which does not take into account the cross non-price elasticities of demand.
This specification allows income elasticities of demand to differ between sectors. Hence, as income
grows, demand for different products grows at different rates following consumers’ preferences
between products, in spite of the quality of each product in relation to the quality of its competitors
within its product category (see Romero and McCombie, 2016b).
          Since elasticities are different between sectors in the MSKS model, as in Araújo and Lima’s
(2007) MSTL, the MSKS model suggests that an increase in the share of sectors with higher income
elasticities increases the equilibrium growth rate. Still, in the MSKS model, the growth effect of
sectoral shifts in trade shares works not only through the income elasticity of demand for exports (
εi ), but also through: (i) each sector’s response of increasing returns to scale to research intensity (
τ i ); (ii) non-price elasticity of exports ( γ i ); and (iii) demand elasticities of output ( µi and ν i ).
Nonetheless, the values of these parameters most likely change in the same direction in different
sectors. In other words, sectors with large income elasticities of demand for exports will probably
tend to have large responses of increasing returns to research intensity, as well as large non-price
elasticities of exports and demand elasticities of output.

3.1. Model’s dynamics

       In addition to sustaining the implications of the aggregate KS model, the MSKS model
generates two other interesting implications:

       (i) the model stresses the importance of inter-sector demand externalities in a context of
            BOP constraint;
       (ii) the model shows that the effect of foreign output growth on the domestic economy is
            not necessarily positive, given that an increase in output growth in a given sector has
            not only a positive demand effect on the domestic economy, but also a negative effect
            of the domestic economy via the resulting increase in foreign non-price
            competitiveness.

        The most interesting aspect of the MSKS model outlined in this paper is that it suggests that
changes in a given sector impact on the performance of the other sectors through inter-sector
demand externalities. This result follows from the fact that in the BOP equilibrium equation (23),
increases in the growth rates of productivity in sectors j = 1,..., k change the intercept of this curve
for sector i ≠ j . In other words, an increase in the growth rate of productivity in a given sector of
the domestic economy eases the BOP constraint, which allows higher growth rates of domestic
demand, impacting on the growth rates of sectoral output (equation (20)) and of sectoral
productivity (equation (14)) in other sectors. Analogously, the opposite holds for increases in the
growth rate of productivity in any given sector of the foreign economy.
        Figure 4 uses a two-sector KS model to illustrate the growth effect of an increase in research
intensity in one of the sectors of the domestic economy. In this figure, an increase in research
intensity in the low-tech sector of the domestic economy leads to a rightward shift of the PRLT
curve from PRLT1 to PRLT2 (equation (21)). The resulting increase in productivity growth in the low-
tech sector, however, generates an upward shift of the BP curve in the high-tech sector from BPHT1
to BPHT2 (equation (22)). This generates an increase in productivity growth in the high-tech sector,
which leads to a shift in the BP curve in the low-tech sector from BPLT1 to BPLT2, generating an


                                                                                                         12
additional increase in this sector’s productivity growth. In other words, an increase in research
intensity in the low-tech sector of the domestic economy leads to an increase in this sector’s
productivity growth rate, which eases the BOP constraint, increasing the growth rates of output and
productivity in the high-tech sector. Nonetheless, a higher productivity growth rate in the high-tech
sector eases once again the BOP constraint, increasing the growth rates of output and productivity
in the low-tech sector. Thus, this movement continues until a new simultaneous equilibrium in both
sectors is reached, now associated with a higher equilibrium growth rate of aggregate output.

                                            Figure 4
 Shift in equilibrium output and productivity growth rates in a two-sector KS model: increase in
                             research intensity in the low-tech sector
                                                       Yˆ
                                                                       PRHT1
                          BPLT2     PRLT2                                      BPHT2
                                               PRLT1
                          BPLT1                                                BPHT1




                            Q̂LT                                            Q̂HT
               Source: Author’s elaboration.


        The dynamics of the MSKS model illustrated in Figure 4 stress the importance of inter-
sector demand externalities in a multi-sectoral BOP constrained framework. In Araújo and Lima’s
(2007) MSTL, higher equilibrium growth rates are achieved through shifts in the sectoral
composition of trade. In the MSKS model discussed in this paper, higher equilibrium growth rates
are achieved either through structural change, as in Araújo and Lima’s (2007) model, or through
increases in productivity growth in any sector of the economy, even when sectoral shares are
assumed constant. This model shows, therefore, that in a BOP constrained framework, when
multiple sectors are considered, better export performance in any given sector leads to higher
growth rates of output and productivity in the other sectors as well, given the positive effect that an
attenuation of the BOP constraint exerts on the growth rates of all sector.
        Evidently, in a multi-sectoral framework, the magnitude of the externalities generated by an
increase in productivity growth in a given sector will depend on the value of the parameters for this
sector. In sectors with higher non-price elasticity of demand ( γ i ), the effect will be larger, given
that an increase in productivity will lead to a larger attenuation of the BOP constraint. Moreover,
the demand externalities will also be larger in countries with larger demand elasticities of output (
µi ) and larger research intensity (Ti).
        Interestingly, the fact that the MSKS model presented in this paper takes into account the
effects of inter-sector demand externalities implies also that increases in research intensity in a
given sector of the foreign economy have negative effects in all sectors of the domestic economy.
        Figure 5 illustrates the negative effect that an increase in research intensity in the low-tech
sector of the foreign economy exerts on productivity and output growth in each sector of the
domestic economy. Following equations (21) and (22), such increase not only shifts the PR curve to
the right, from PRLT1 to PRLT2, but it also shifts the BP curve downwards, from BPLT1 to BPLT2. The


                                                                                                    13
shift in the BP curve in the low-tech sector, however, shifts the BP curve from BPHT1 to BPHT2 in
the high-tech sector, reducing the growth rates of productivity and output in this sector as well. In
the end, therefore, both sectors experience reductions in output and productivity growth.

                                                 Figure 5
    Shift in equilibrium output and productivity growth rates in a two-sector KS model: increase in
                     research intensity in the low-tech sector of the foreign economy
                                                             Yˆ
                                                                                       PRHT1
                                           PRLT1 PRLT2
                                                                                               BPHT1
                                   BPLT1
                                                                                               BPHT2
                                   BPLT2




                                 Q̂LT                                                        Q̂HT
                    Source: Author’s elaboration.


        The second unique implication of the MSKS model, in turn, refers to the ambiguous effect
of an increase in the growth rate of foreign output. Equations (21) and (22) show that an increase in
output growth in a given sector has both a positive and a negative effect on aggregate output
growth.9 This ambiguous effect stems from the fact that although an increase in output growth in
the foreign economy increases the demand for products from the domestic economy (equation
(12)), it also increases the non-price competitiveness of the foreign economy (equation (15)),
harming the export performance of the domestic economy. In the PR curve, output growth in a
given sector of the foreign economy has, ceteris paribus, a positive effect on the growth of the
domestic economy if εi ΔẐ > γ i λ fi ΔẐi , where Δ denotes variation. In the BP curve, in turn, an
increase in output growth in a given sector of the foreign economy has, ceteris paribus, a positive
effect on the growth of the domestic economy if φiεi ΔẐ > (φiγ i + θ iδi )λ fi ΔẐi .
        Figure 6 illustrates the possible scenario of a negative growth effect stemming from an
increase in the growth rate of output in the high-tech sector of the foreign economy. Hence, in this
figure it is assumed that ε HT ΔẐ < γ HT λ fHT ΔẐ HT , φ HT ε HT ΔẐ < (φ HT γ HT + θ HT δHT )λ fHT ΔẐ HT , ΔẐ LT = 0
and sectoral shares are constant. Thus, following equations (21) and (22), an increase in the growth
rate of output in the high-tech sector shifts the PRHT curve upwards, from PRHT1 to PRHT2, and the
BPHT curve downwards, from BPHT1 to BPHT2. These shifts lead to a downward shift in the BPLT
curve, from BPLT1 to BPLT2, reducing the growth rates of productivity and output in this sector as
well. Yet, because ε LT ΔẐ > γ LT λ fLT ΔẐ LT , the PRLT curve shifts downward as well, from PRLT1 to
PRLT2, compensating for the tightening of the BOP constraint. Note, therefore, that although in this
example the increase in foreign output growth exerts negative effects on both the PR and the BP


9
    Note that the growth rate of aggregate output is simply the weighted average of the growth rates of sectoral output,
where the weights are the shares of each sector in total output (i.e.   Ẑ ≡ aẐ HT + (1− a)Ẑ LT ).


                                                                                                                      14
curves, a negative impact on one of the curves could be enough to negatively impact the growth rate
of the domestic economy, if the negative impact overrides the positive.

                                             Figure 6
 Shift in equilibrium output and productivity growth rates in a two-sector KS model: increase in
                   output growth in the high-tech sector of the foreign economy
                                                      Yˆ
                                                                        PRHT2 PRHT1
                                     PRLT2 PRLT1
                                                                                  BPHT1
                               BPLT1
                                                                                  BPHT2
                               BPLT2




                             Q̂LT                                               Q̂HT
                Source: Author’s elaboration.


3.2. Simulations

        As carried out in section 3, in order to quantify the implications of the MSKS model, the
parameters estimated by Romero and Britto (2016) and Romero and McCombie (2016b) were used
as reference. Thus, using these estimates, the MSKS model becomes composed of two sectors, a
low-tech sector (LT) and a high-tech sector (HT), while the values of the parameters for each sector
are: β LT = β HT = 0.04 , π LT = 2.36 , π HT = 1.96 , ε LT = 2.11 , ε HT = 2.65 , α LT = 0.27 , α HT = 0.43 ,
δLT = 1.28 , δHT = 1.96 , γ LT = 0.54 , γ HT = 1.38 , τ LT = 0.33 , and τ HT = 0.29 . In addition, assuming
plausible values for the rest of the parameters: TfLT=0.6, TfHT=0.9, TLT=0.2, THT=0.3, GLT=0.1,
GHT=0.2, Ẑ =0.03, Ẑ LT =0.02, and Ẑ HT =0.05. Still, to quantify the dynamics of the MSKS model, it
is also necessary to obtain estimates of the parameters of equation (20) for each sector. Basic
estimates of equation (20) for low-tech and high-tech industries are presented in the Appendix,
providing the following values for the parameters: µ LT = 0.64 , µ HT = 0.73 , ν LT = 0.15 and
ν HT = 0.41 . It is important to note, however, that in contrast with the other parameters, which have
been carefully investigated, further work is necessary to assess with more confidence the magnitude
of the parameters of equation (20).
        As in the KS model, using the values listed above indicates that a considerable increase in
research intensity is necessary to generate a meaningful effect on the equilibrium growth rate. With
the values listed, the equilibrium growth rate is 4.33 per cent.
        An increase in domestic research intensity from 0.2 to 0.3 in the low-tech sector increases
the equilibrium growth rate to 4.45 per cent. This means that an increase of 0.1 in the number of
patents created per millions hours worked in the low-tech sector generates an increase in output
growth of 0.22 percentage points. The growth rates of productivity in the low-tech and in the high-
tech sectors, in turn, increase from 1.69 and 4.52, to 1.85 and 4.59, respectively. This illustrates the
positive demand externality generated in the high-tech sector as a result of an increase in
productivity growth in the low-tech sector.




                                                                                                          15
        Alternatively, if the increase in research intensity takes place in the high-tech sector instead
of the low-tech, going from 0.3 to 0.4, the equilibrium growth rate increases to 4.68 per cent, with a
variation of 0.35 percentage points. Hence, this shows how the different magnitudes of the
parameters associated with each sector influence the magnitude of the growth enhancing effect. In
this case, the growth rates of productivity in the low-tech and in the high-tech sectors increase to
1.77 and 5.02, respectively. This shows once again the effect of the inter-sectoral externality
generated by an increase in productivity growth in a given sector. In this case, however, the sum of
the variations in the growth rates is higher: 0.58 percentage points compared to 0.23 in the first
scenario.
        Increases in research intensity in the foreign economy have a negative effect on the
equilibrium growth rate of the domestic economy. An increase in research intensity in the low-tech
sector of the foreign economy from 0.6 to 0.7 decreases the equilibrium growth rate from 4.33 to
4.27 per cent, with reductions also in sectoral output and productivity growth. Yet, the magnitude of
this effect is very small.
        In turn, an increase in the output growth rate of the low-tech sector in the foreign economy
from 0.02 to 0.03 has a large impact on the equilibrium growth rate of the domestic economy,
increasing it from 4.33 to 5.87. This positive effect occurs because εi ΔẐ > γ i λ fi ΔẐi and
φiεi ΔẐ > (φiγ i + θ iδi )λ fi ΔẐi , highlighting the importance of foreign demand for long-term growth, in
spite of the negative effect of foreign output growth on domestic output growth via increased
foreign non-price competitiveness.
         An increase in the output growth rate of the high-tech sector in the foreign economy from
0.05 to 0.06, however, exerts a negative impact on the equilibrium growth rate of the domestic
economy, decreasing it from 4.33 to 4.22. This negative effect occurs because ΔẐ LT = 0 ,
ε HT ΔẐ < γ HT λ fHT ΔẐ HT and φ HT ε HT ΔẐ < (φ HT γ HT + θ HT δHT )λ fHT ΔẐ HT , which generates a negative non-
price competitiveness effect large enough to offset the positive demand effect, as illustrated in
Figure 6.

4. Concluding remarks

        Taking into account the relevance of the Kaldorian and the Schumpeterian contributions to
macroeconomic growth theory, this paper proposed a growth model that consistently combines the
insights of these two traditions while solving some of the most important limitations of the original
Kaldor-Dixon-Thirlwall model. The most interesting characteristic of this model is the fact it takes
into account the main factors emphasized by the Kaldorian and the Schumpeterian literatures, while
keeping the importance of both demand and supply-side factors for economic growth. From the
demand side, long-term growth is determined by foreign output growth and by domestic
productivity growth, while the latter is influenced by output growth, forming a circuit of cumulative
causation through non-price competitiveness. From the supply side, the effect of output growth on
productivity growth, i.e. the degree of returns to scale, depends on the level of research intensity,
which means the capacity of each economy to take advantage of growing demand to increase
technical progress depends on research intensity. Furthermore, productivity growth is also
influenced by technological transfer. Thus, although demand (especially foreign demand) is still
crucial for growth, as the Kaldorian tradition highlights, supply-side factors as research intensity
and technological transfer are also key determinants of long-term growth rates.
        The proposed Kaldor-Schumpeter growth model was also transposed to a multi-sectoral
setting. Firstly, this multi-sectoral framework highlights that changes in the sectoral composition of
trade influence the magnitude of long-term growth rates. Secondly, this model shows that in a
multi-sectoral framework with BOP constraint, changes in the performance of a given sector affect


                                                                                                                   16
the performance of the other sectors through inter-sector demand externalities. More specifically, an
increase in productivity growth in a given sector, by increasing this sector’s non-price
competitiveness and its export growth, eases the BOP constraint, which allows higher growth of
domestic demand, generating higher productivity and output growth in the other sectors of the
economy. Thirdly, the model also shows that an increase in the growth rate of foreign output can
exert a negative impact on the domestic economy, provided that the negative effect that this
increase generates on the trade performance of the domestic economy (through higher foreign non-
price competitiveness) is larger than the positive demand effect created.
        To sum up, the models proposed in this paper provide several contributions to growth
theory. They not only address important limitations of the canonical Kaldorian growth model, but
they also consistently integrate the Schumpeterian contributions into the Kaldorian framework
without subverting the demand-side orientation of this approach. Finally, the analysis of the
models’ dynamics revealed the role of inter-sector demand externalities in the process of economic
growth, something that has not been consistently elaborated in the Kaldorian tradition, showing also
that foreign output growth not necessarily exerts a positive impact on the domestic economy, as
considered in the simple BOP constrained growth models.

Appendix

        Table A1 reports estimates of equation (20) for low-tech and high-tech sectors using the
same database adopted by Romero and McCombie (2016b). Due to the high correlation between the
logarithms of aggregate income and sectoral exports (0.59), alternative regressions were estimated
including only export growth as explanatory variable. A Two-Step Feasible Efficient System GMM
estimator was used to avoid simultaneity between the explanatory variables and the dependent
variable (see Blundel and Bond, 2000; Roodman, 2009), controlling also for the existence of fixed
effects. In all the regressions Hansen’s J Test indicates the orthogonality of the instruments cannot
be rejected at the 5% level of significance. Moreover, in all the regressions but one (column (i)),
Arellano and Bond’s (1991) AR Test accepts the null hypothesis of no-autocorrelation.

                                               Table A1
                          Response of industry output to increases in local and
                                           foreign demand
                                                     Low-Tech       Low-Tech       High-Tech       High-Tech
                       Sample                        Industries     Industries     Industries      Industries
                                                        (i)            (ii)           (iii)           (iv)
                       Ln of Aggregate Output        0.640***                        0.726++
                                                      (0.169)                        (0.351)
                       Ln of Exports                  -0.0660        0.154++          0.196         0.413***
                                                     (0.0773)        (0.0790)        (0.148)        (0.0910)
                       Constant                        -7.295        4.941**         -15.77*         -1.297
                                                      (3.779)         (1.736)        (6.785)         (2.119)

                       No. Observations                 336              336             126            126
                       No. Instruments/Lags            7/3-4             3/4            11/2-5           3/3
                       Arellano-Bond AR Test           0.017           0.329            0.171          0.362
                       Hansen J Test                   0.052           0.084            0.521          0.548
                       Note: The dependent variable is the Ln of Industry Value Added. Values in parentheses
                       are standard deviations. The values reported for the tests are p-values. The p-value
                       reported for the Arellano-Bond AR Test refers to the first lag used as instrument in the
                       regression. Significance: ++=10%; *=5%; **=1%; ***=0.1%.
                       Source: Author's elaboration.




                                                                                                                  17
References

Aghion, P.; Howitt, P. (1992) A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction, Econometrica,
        60(2), p. 323-351.
Aghion, P.; Howitt, P. (1998) Endogenous Growth Theory, Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Amable, B. (1993) Catch-up and convergence: a model of cumulative causation, International
        Review of Applied Economics, 7(1), pp. 1-25.
Amable, B.; Verspagen, B. (1995) The Role of Technology in Market Share Dynamics, Applied
        Economics, 27(2), pp. 127-204.
Angeriz, A.; McCombie, J. S.; Roberts, M. (2008) New Estimates of Returns to Scale and Spatial
        Spillovers for EU Regional Manufacturing, 1986-2002, International Regional Science
        Review, 31(1), pp. 62-87.
Angeriz, A.; McCombie, J. S.; Roberts, M. (2009) Increasing Returns and the Growth of Industries
        in the EU Regions: Paradoxes and Conundrums, Spatial Economic Analysis, 4(2), pp. 127-
        48.
Araújo, R. (2013) Cumulative causation in a structural economic dynamic approach to economic
        growth and uneven development, Structural Change and Economic Dynamics, 24, pp. 130-
        140.
Araújo, R.; Lima, G. T. (2007) A structural economic dynamics approach to balance-of-payments-
        constrained growth, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 31(5), pp. 755-74.
Blecker, R. (2013) “Long-run growth in open economies: export-led cumulative causation or
        balance-of-payments constraint?, in Harcourt, G. C.; Kriesler, P. (eds) Oxford Handbook of
        Post Keynesian Economics (4 vols.), Oxford University Press.
Cimoli, M.; Porcile, G. (2014) Technology, structural change and BOP-constrained growth: a
        structuralist toolbox, Cambridge Journal of Economic, 38, pp. 215-237.
Dixon, R.; Thirwall, A. P. (1975) A Model of Regional Growth-rate Differences on Kaldorian
        Lines, Oxford Economic Papers, 27(2), pp. 201-214.
Fagerberg, J. (1988) International Competitiveness, Economic Journal, 98(391), pp. 355-374.
Gouvea, R. R.; Lima, G. T. (2010) Structural change, balance-of-payments constraint, and
        economic growth: evidence from the multisectoral Thirlwall’s Law, Journal of Post
        Keynesian Economics, 33(1), pp. 169-204.
Griffith, R.; Redding, S.; Van Reenen, J. (2004) Mapping the two faces of R&D: productivity
        growth in a panel of OECD Industries, Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(4), pp. 883-
        895.
Hausman, J. (1997) Valuation of new goods under perfect and imperfect competition, in (Ed.)
        Bresnahan, T.; Gordon, R.; The Economics of New Goods, Studies in Income and Wealth,
        58, Chicago: NBER.
Hicks, J. R. (1950) A Contribution to the Theory of the Trade Cycle, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Kaldor, N. (1966) Causes of the Slow Rate of Economic Growth of the United Kingdom: an
        Inaugural Lecture, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kaldor, N. (1970) The Case for Regional Policies, Scottish Journal of Political Economy, 17, 337-
        48.
Krugman, P. (1989) Differences in income elasticities and trends in real exchange rates, European
        Economic Review, 33, pp. 1031-1054.
León-Ledesma, M. A. (2002) Accumulation, innovation and catching-up: an extender cumulative
        growth model, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 26, pp. 201-216.
Madsen, J. B. (2008) Semi-endogenous versus Schumpeterian growth models: testing the
        knowledge production function using international data, Journal of Economic Growth,
        13(1), pp. 1-26.



                                                                                               18
Nevo, A. (2001) Measuring Market Power in the Ready-to-Eat Cereal Industry, Econometrica,
        69(2), pp. 307-342.
Roberts, M. (2007) The Conditional Convergence Properties of Simples Kaldorian Growth Models,
        International Review of Applied Economics, 21(5), pp. 619-632.
Romer, P. (1990) Endogenous Technological Change, Journal of Political Economy, 98(5), p. S71-
        S102.
Romero, J. P.; Britto, G. (2016) Increasing Returns to Scale, Technological Catch-Up and Research
        Intensity: An Industry-level Investigation Combining EU KLEMS Productivity Data with
        Patent Data, Cambridge Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Romero, J. P.; McCombie, J. S. L. (2016a) The Multi-Sectoral Thirlwall’s Law: Evidence from 14
        Developed European Countries using Product-Level Data, International Review of Applied
        Economics, 30(3), pp. 301-25.
Romero, J. P.; McCombie, J. S. L. (2016b) Thirlwall’s Law and the Specification of Export and
        Import Demand Functions: An Investigation of the Impact of Relative Productivity Growth
        on Trade Performance, Cambridge Centre for Economic and Public Policy Working Papers
        Series, CCEPP WP 02-2016.
Romero. J. P.; Silveira, F.; Jayme Jr., F. G. (2011) Brazil: structural change and balance-of-
        payments-constrained growth, CEPAL Review, 105, pp. 185-208.
Roodman, D. (2009) How to do xtabond2: An introduction to difference and system GMM in Stata,
        The Stata Journal, 9(1), pp. 86-136.
Setterfield, M. (1997) ‘History versus equilibrium’ and the theory of economic growth, Cambridge
        Journal of Economics, 21, pp. 365-378.
Targetti, F.; Foti, A. (1997) Growth and productivity: a model of cumulative growth and catching
        up, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 21, pp. 27-43.
Thirlwall, A. (1979) The Balance of Payments Constraint as an Explanation of International Growth
      Rate Differences, BNL Quarterly Review, 128(791), pp. 45-53.
Thirlwall, A.; Dixon, R. J. (1979) A Model of Export-Led Growth with Balance of Payments
      Constraint, in Bowers, J. K. (ed) Inflation, Development and Integration: Essays in Honour of
      A. J. Brown, Leeds: Leeds University Press.
Verdoorn, P. J. (1949) Fattori che regolano lo sviluppo della produttività del lavoro, L’Industria, 1,
      pp. 3-10.




                                                                                                   19
