REFORMISM, CLASS CONCILIATION AND THE PINK TIDE: PROSPECTS FOR THE WORKING
CLASSES UNDER LEFT-OF-CENTRE GOVERNMENTS IN LATIN AMERICA

                    Pedro Mendes Loureiro – SOAS, University of London, London/United Kingdom
Abstract: This paper analyses how the ‘Pink Tide’ governments in Latin America have contributed or
not to improving the living conditions of the working classes. Surveying the continent, it argues that
these governments have chosen the paths of least resistance to conduct moderate reforms, with positive
results in the short-term. Rising minimum wages and conditional cash transfer policies were the main
levers. In order to obtain this, however, they relied on permissive foreign conditions and sapped the
longer-term capacities needed for sustained development. Economically, this refers to a neo-extractivist
pattern of accumulation and deindustrialisation. Politically, to neo-corporatist class conciliation
measures that curb popular self-organisation and tie the state to fractions of capital. Hence, as foreign
conditions worsen, the social formations are found in a debilitated position and the processes that
sustained these governments in power are no longer operative. The predictable crisis that ensues thus
does not lead to a deepening of the progressive elements in these hybrid state forms, but rather to a
reaction. The conclusion, then, is that the forces behind the Pink Tide have advanced an
‘inconsequential’ attempt at counter-hegemony, which relied too much on short-term factors and
marginal reforms, without transforming the state and the economy in ways that would progressively
establish structural conditions compatible with popular interests.
Key words: The Pink Tide; Latin America; neo-extractivism; neo-corporatism; class conciliation.
Resumo: Este trabalho analisa como os governos da ‘Maré Rosa’ na América Latina contribuíram ou
não para melhorar as condições de vida das classes trabalhadoras. Através de um olhar sobre todo o
continente, argumenta-se que tais governos escolheram os caminhos de menor resistência para levar a
cabo reformas moderadas, com resultados positivos no curto prazo. Os principais instrumentos para
tanto foram aumentos do salário mínimo e transferência de renda condicionadas. Para obtê-lo, contudo,
dependeram em condições externas permissivas e corroeram os requisitos de longo prazo para um
processo de desenvolvimento sustentado. Economicamente, isso se traduz em um padrão de
acumulação neoextrativista e em desindustrialização. Politicamente, em medidas neocorporativistas de
conciliação de classes que impedem a auto-organização popular e atam o Estado a frações do capital.
Desta maneira, à medida que as condições externas se deterioram, as formações sociais encontram-se
em uma posição debilitada e os processos que sustentaram esses governos no poder não mais se
encontram operantes. A previsível crise que se instaura não leva, assim, ao aprofundamento dos
elementos progressistas dessas formas de Estado híbridas, mas sim a medidas excludentes. Conclui-se,
portanto, que as forças por detrás da Maré Rosa avançaram um projeto ‘inconsequente’ de contra-
hegemonia, que dependeu demasiadamente em fatores de curto prazo e reformas marginais, sem
transformar o Estado e a economia de maneiras que progressivamente estabelecessem as condições
estruturais compatíveis com interesses populares.
Palavras chave: Maré Rosa; América Latina; neoextrativismo; neocorporativismo; conciliação de
classes.
JEL codes: B51; P51; I30.
Área ANPEC: Área 2: economia política.


*
  SOAS, University of London, London/United Kingdom. Email: lmpedro@gmail.com, pm_loureiro@soas.ac.uk. The author kindly
thanks CAPES – Brazil for the scholarship (BEX-0840-14-9) which supported the development of this project.
REFORMISM, CLASS CONCILIATION AND THE PINK TIDE: PROSPECTS FOR THE WORKING
CLASSES UNDER LEFT-OF-CENTRE GOVERNMENTS IN LATIN AMERICA


1. INTRODUCTION
       Towards the end of a long period of developmental regimes, from roughly 1930 to 1980, Latin
America became the world’s laboratory for neoliberalism, pioneering transitions in Chile and
Argentina in the early and mid-1970s. This soon spread to most of the continent and, alongside a crisis-
ridden decade of the 1980s, it underwent the most thorough neoliberal transformation in the world
(Sader 2011). Countries across the region promoted trade and financial liberalisation, cut the already
small welfare entitlements and privatised state assets, whilst firms integrated themselves into low
value-added sections of global value chains (de Medeiros 2009, 2011, Saad-Filho 2010). What resulted
was a highly unstable, low-growth model, systematically dependent on foreign direct investment (FDI):
the Latin American growth rate, on average 5.8% and never below 3.0% between 1961-1980, dropped
to 2.3% between 1981-2000, with several years of negative or near-zero growth (World Bank 2015).
The social record did not fare much better, with rising unemployment, labour market informality,
poverty and inequality. Illustratively, the simple country-average of the Gini index of household per
capita income increased by 0.05 (approximately 10%) between the early 1980s and 2002 (Cornia 2012:
4), whilst poverty rates increased from 40.5 to 44% of the population (Robinson 2008: 252) (Cornia
2012, Robinson 2008). Popular approval of governments consequently fell and, starting with
Venezuela in 1998, many countries have elected presidents running on platforms allegedly antithetical
to neoliberalism.
       This continental movement, known as the ‘Pink Tide,’ has been the object of much controversy.1
Assessments of the economic, social and political record of these governments vary widely. Some see
in them a reproduction of the patronage and clientelistic political models for which the region has been
known (e.g., Castañeda 2006, Edwards 2010). Others understand that these governments are committed
to deep-rooted political and economic change, perhaps capable of breaking with the region’s
entrenched patterns of inequality and exclusion (e.g., Sader 2011). A third group of scholars (e.g.,
Spronk and Webber 2014a, Veltmeyer 2013) is sceptical of the prospects for popular gains, considering
that they have not empowered the population, but co-opted social movements and trade union leaders
to implement a slightly modified version of neoliberalism. In spite of these interpretive disagreements,
the social record has indeed improved considerably when compared to the preceding decades, and
growth picked up for some years: the simple country-average of the Gini index for household per capita
income dropped by approximately 0.04 (8%) between 2002 and 2010 (Cornia 2012: 4), and the simple
average of growth rates was 4.1% for the region between 2004 and 2011 (World Bank 2015).
       More recently, however, several countries have experienced mounting political and economic
problems. With escalating crises in Argentina, Venezuela and Brazil, all the signs for another paradigm
shift in Latin America are in place. In light of the Pink Tide’s unravelling, the moment thus seems ripe

1
 There is now a burgeoning literature on the topic. As a sample of different positions aiming at a wider interpretation of the
phenomenon, see (Dello Buono and Bell Lara 2006, Flores-Macias 2012, Goodale and Postero 2013, Hershberg and Rosen
2006a, Leiva 2008, Macdonald and Ruckert 2009, Panizza 2009, Regalado 2007, Sader 2011, Silva 2009, Spronk and
Webber 2014a, Webber and Carr 2013).



                                                              1
for an appreciation of the significance of this historical moment and what it entails for the future of the
region. The present study attempts to offer such a contribution: understanding to what extent have the
Pink Tide governments contributed to launching a sustained process of material gains for the working
classes in Latin America. In order to do so, it discusses the economic and political trends prevailing in
the continent as a whole, focusing on changes to the productive structure of the economies, the new
matrix of social policies and the political strategies carried out to keep these governments in power.
These three dimensions can be respectively synthesised in a shift towards neo-extractivism, the rise of
conditional cash transfer policies (CCTs) and broad electoral fronts combined to a neo-corporatist
pattern of class relations.
       The main argument of this paper is that the Pink Tide governments have, in different ways,
indeed promoted changes that economically benefitted the working classes, but employing a strategy
incapable of securing the mid-term sustainability of this process. Conversely, the very processes that
led to better standards of living reinforced a precarious international insertion of the countries, as they
stimulated a neo-extractivist pattern of accumulation, and also disorganised the working classes and
social movements, as they depended on neo-corporatist class conciliation measures and the repression
of independent class struggle. Therefore, these improvements were not accompanied by self-
reinforcing economic and political conditions, but rather by an increased likelihood of any situation of
crisis being ‘solved’ via an exclusionary shift in policies or government. In broad terms, the forces
behind these governments have advanced an ‘inconsequential’ attempt at counter-hegemony, which
relied too much on short-term factors and did not transform the state and the economy in ways that
would progressively establish structural conditions compatible with popular goals. The argument can
be divided into four elements:
    i.  There were substantial material gains for the working classes not entirely ascribable to positive
        international economic conditions, but partially due to active government policies;
   ii.  To bring about these improvements, the governments have i) relied on and promoted a neo-
        extractivist pattern of accumulation; and ii) reproduced themselves politically via broad fronts,
        centrally relying on neo-corporatist class conciliation measures, cash transfers to the most
        destitute groups and repression of independent struggles, without promoting far-reaching
        transformations of the state institutionality or of class relations;
 iii.   Neo-extractivism and neo-corporatist class conciliation erode the sustainability of this process,
        as they respectively i) cement a peripheral insertion in the world market and a class structure
        with a sizeable amount of precarious employment; and ii) disorganise the working classes and
        social movements, which are then incapable of mounting (extra-institutional) pressure;
  iv. Therefore, it becomes increasingly likely that, when these social formations face a crisis, it will
        not be the progressive elements in these hybrid state forms that will be deepened. On the
        contrary, a transformation of state power in an exclusionary direction is to be expected.
       The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. The second section, after this introduction,
presents the debate on Latin America as a whole, at the most general level. It lays down three
interpretative frameworks that frame the later discussion. The third section discusses the recent political
and economic trends of the region. It sequentially covers the changes to the countries’ productive
structures and to their insertion in the world market, the resulting class structures and standards of
living, the changing mix of social policies and, finally, the participation of state power in class
relations. The last section presents some concluding remarks.




                                                    2
2. BETWEEN  POPULISM, POST-NEOLIBERALISM AND RECONSTITUTED NEOLIBERALISM: THREE
INTERPRETATIONS OF THE PINK TIDE

       As mentioned above, there are three main discernable approaches to the Pink Tide. Mainstream
analyses (Castañeda 2006, Edwards 2010, Levitsky and Roberts 2011, Weyland et al. 2010a) tend to
highlight the importance of global economic conditions, particularly the commodities boom, and of
market-conforming policies, especially conditional cash transfer programmes (CCTs), in bringing
about social improvements. On the other hand, they denounce the state’s greater involvement in the
economy, such as via nationalisations or planning measures, as inefficient (Weyland 2009, 2010). In
this general prescriptive framework, the necessity of maintaining balanced budgets and promoting trade
and financial openness is unquestionable, seen as ‘fundamental market principles’ (Weyland 2011: 74).
Much in line with the Post-Washington Consensus,2 targeted poverty-alleviation measures and public
investment in so-called human capital are considered desirable. There is thus much praise for
conditional cash transfer programmes (CCTs), education reform and labour training policies, as well as
the prudent macroeconomic policies of some countries, particularly Chile (Levitsky and Roberts 2011,
Weyland et al. 2010a). The line is drawn at economic policies that distort the allocation of resources by
influencing relative prices (e.g., exchange and price controls), at showing tolerance to inflation or by
attempting to implement universal social policies.3
       The cornerstone of this narrative is the ambivalent opportunity created by the commodities boom
and high international liquidity (Edwards 2010, Weyland 2009, 2010, 2011, Weyland et al. 2010b).
This has undoubtedly alleviated the balance of payments constraint on the economies and raised tax
revenues, thereby creating the possibility of extending state measures without short-term negative
consequences. And herein allegedly lies the risk. Whenever the leftist governments used this
opportunity to address social demands more rapidly, they have thereby created a boom and bust cycle.
As soon as the permissive foreign conditions are no longer in place, the policies will be reversed. Not
only this, but since the latter were inefficient to begin with, their net effect is negative. In other words,
the commodities boom creates the possibility of drifting from the neoliberal policy prescription, as it
decreases short-term constraints via rent appropriation, but if governments go down this path they are
really only harming their economies. In fact, some authors argue that the policy orientation of
governments is essentially defined by the constraints the foreign scenario presents, regardless of their
ideological preferences: if reserves are available, they will be leftist and favour redistributive measures;
if not, they will follow the neoliberal orthodoxy (Murillo et al. 2011, Weyland 2009)
       A second line of reasoning, whilst recognising the limitations of these governments, tends to see
in them the best viable option, a post-neoliberal alternative (Hershberg and Rosen 2006b, Kozloff
2008, Rodríguez-Garavito et al. 2008, Sader 2011, 2013a). The main point, often from a realist
geopolitical framework, regards the independent and multi-lateral foreign policies in place. As Sader
(2011: 141) puts it, the ‘fundamental dividing line is between those countries that have signed free
trade treaties with the United States, and those that prioritize processes of regional integration.’ These
foreign policies were responsible for reducing the US’s influence on the region and establishing
stronger links between Latin American countries, forging a regional bloc capable of autonomous
development (i.e., more independent from the US). The second dimension important in this current
concerns social policies. It stresses their role in lifting large swathes of the population from poverty and

2
 For a critical discussion of the Post-Washington Consensus, see Fine et al. (2001).
3
 Weyland’s (2011: 79) criticism of Bolivia is illustrative: ‘Morales has engaged in typical rentier behavior. He has created
new spending programs, especially "universal" health insurance and a conditional school grant, and has made old-age
protection more generous.’



                                                             3
reducing inequality, going against the trends of the preceding decades and arguably representing a
break with neoliberalism (Sader 2011: 60). Lastly, these authors also emphasise the state’s more active
role in the economy, considering that revamped planning capacities and a co-ordination of
accumulation to favour ‘national interests’ can bring about growth and redistribution.
       These authors do not deny that the Pink Tide governments have got shortcomings, to be sure. For
example, elements of neoliberal macroeconomic management, such as excessively prudent fiscal
balances and stringent monetary policy, are widely recognised. They are seen, however, as ultimately
beyond the reach of these governments, explained by opposition from the domestic media and right-
wing forces, imperialist pressures or notions of an ideological hegemony of neoliberalism. In other
words, little attention is paid to how the strategies these forces employ to hold on to the state might be
contradictory or bear self-defeating elements. A blind eye is turned, for example, to the processes
whereby these governments repress popular and working class organisations not allied to them. In light
of this, the message is that these governments are at the forefront of the fight for better conditions of
living for the population. The far left is seen as committed to sectarian politics, so the only other
possibility would be the return of the right. The political implication is that broad fronts and alliances
are necessary, incorporating, if need be, sectors of the local capitalist classes.
       Finally, a third line of argument is critical of the Pink Tide governments because, according to
this view, they have not promoted substantial breaks with neoliberalism or have, for different reasons,
disempowered the popular classes – it is a matter of a reconstituted neoliberalism (Modenesi 2012,
Petras and Veltmeyer 2007, Robinson 2008, Spronk and Webber 2014b, Veltmeyer 2013, Webber and
Carr 2013). Certain authors recognise the positive trends in poverty and inequality reduction, whilst
others downplay them, but the central elements in this narrative are the narrow character of the reforms
enacted, the consolidation of a particularly problematic pattern of accumulation (neo-extractivism) and
attempts at class conciliation. The conclusion, then, is that whatever gains might have obtained for the
working classes, they are both small and unsustainable.
       In this vein, the reforms are seen as timid changes within an exclusionary pattern of
accumulation, offering limited benefits to the popular classes whilst re-composing and better serving
the interests of capitalists. Riding the wave of the commodities super cycle, these governments have
stimulated a neo-extractivist pattern of accumulation that allegedly promotes deindustrialisation,
worsens the quality of jobs created, reduces the importance of the domestic market and strongly
degrades the environment (Veltmeyer 2013). With minor tax hikes on extractive activities, these
governments were able to distribute some benefits for the underclasses in manners that bypass or
prevent popular organisation. Hence the idea of a neodevelopmental state (Boito Jr and Berringer
2014), which organises the interests of the dominant classes via a more active participation in the
circuit of capital, or of a compensatory state (Gudynas 2012), which implements minimalist social
policies financed by extractivism without affecting basic class structures.
       This process was also marked by the disorganisation and de-mobilisation of the working classes,
whose leaders are co-opted into becoming state managers and whose independent struggles are strongly
repressed (Bonnet and Piva 2012, Castorina 2013, Oliveira et al. 2010). In more acute cases, such as
Bolivia and Argentina, state power under the Pink Tide is seen as an instrument to curb popular
radicalism, and thus actually works against the possibility of more progressive developments
(Castorina 2013, 2014, Webber 2011, 2013). The Pink Tide governments are, in short, essentially
responsible for recomposing capitalist hegemony after moments of crisis. It is thus expected that after a
prolonged downturn of the global economy these experiences will end, and, given the lack of
institutionalisation of social policies and the fact that basic class relations were not altered, the gains for
the working classes will be reversed.


                                                      4
3. NEO-EXTRACTIVISM, CCTS AND NEO-CORPORATIST CLASS CONCILIATION: A BIRD’S EYE VIEW OF
THE PINK TIDE

       Having surveyed the wider interpretative frameworks, the text now covers the relevant economic
and political developments. The first element is the changing productive structure and international
insertion of these economies. This comprises the rising importance of extractive activities and
deindustrialisation, leading to a re-primarisation of exports, with negative mid-term consequences. The
second point brings forth the class structures associated to this pattern of accumulation and changes to
the standards of living. It is shown that the latter have improved and there is reduced labour
informality, but also structural precariousness in face of the worse quality of the jobs created. Finally,
the text covers the changes to social policies and how the state has dealt with class relations. The
central points here are the dissemination of CCTs, which have actively reduced poverty and inequality,
the incorporation cum co-option of social movements and class entities into the state apparatus and the
repression of independent struggles. It is suggested that this can be understood as a form of neo-
corporatism, which brings class relations into the state apparatus and routinises social conflicts.


3.1. The productive structure: neo-extractivism and deindustrialisation
      One of the most salient aspects of the recent economic trends in Latin American countries is their
renewed dependence on the extraction of natural resources, particularly the export of primary
commodities. This has been variously described as a neo-extractivist pattern of accumulation
(Burchardt and Dietz 2014, Féliz 2012, Gudynas 2009, López and Vértiz 2012, Veltmeyer 2013,
Webber 2014), a re-primarisation of the structure of exports (Corrêa et al. 2013, Gonçalves et al. 2009,
Pinto 2011) or, indeed, a commodities consensus (Katz 2015, Svampa 2013). The central feature this
characterisation conveys is that the extraction and export of primary goods has become the driving
element of capital accumulation in Latin America. This does not imply such activities are the largest
element of GDP, but rather that they are the main dynamic force in the economic cycle. Consequently,
estimations show how the foreign sector drove the growth of Latin American economies during the
2000s, led by commodity exports (Caldentey and Vernengo 2010).4 Accordingly, agricultural and
extractive commodities have risen from 41 to 53% of total Latin American exports between 1999 and
2013, whilst manufacturing decreased from 58 to 44% (Ray et al. 2015: 5). If the centrality of
unprocessed commodity exports is similar to ‘old’ extractivism, what qualifies it as neo-extractivism is,
in turn, the greater participation of the state in these activities, essentially via tax regimes that capture a
varyingly higher parcel of rent, on which social policies are funded (Arsel 2012, Arsel and Angel 2012,
Gudynas 2009, 2012). The precise tax regimes, which affect the capacity of funding social policies, and
the reliance on mineral or agricultural exports, which have got different technological content and
linkages, are an important differentiation between these experiences. These are, however,
differentiations within a broad neo-extractive pattern of accumulation.
      The implications of this process can be felt at different levels. On a local scale, the communities
directly affected by extractive projects are subjected to environmental degradation and a destabilisation
of their social reproduction, given that very few benefits spill over (Veltmeyer 2013). This heightens
the spatial inequality of accumulation and sponsors processes of accumulation by dispossession, in
which transnational companies, guarded by state power, continuously advance over natural resources.

4
 In Central America, remittances are the driving factor, which can be conceptualised as an export of labour (Caldentey and
Vernengo 2010, Robinson 2008).



                                                            5
This amounts to the expanded commodification of nature and the forced proletarianisation of small
farmers and whatever peasantry there still is (Webber 2014).
       On a macro level, the results are more complex. The currency inflows obtained with commodity
exports present both opportunities and risks, which can be analysed under the so-called ‘Dutch disease’
and the possibilities of avoiding it (Saad-Filho and Weeks 2013). The risks exist insofar as a rapid
increase of foreign currency inflows, generally due to higher export prices, 5 might appreciate the
domestic currency and thus decrease the competitiveness of the manufacturing sector, forestalling the
diversification of the economic base (Bresser-Pereira 2011, 2012a, Frenkel and Rapetti 2012). Once
this boom is over, the economy would find itself in a worse position, given the lower technological
content and linkages of commodity production. This is not, however, a necessary outcome – given
appropriate policies, the currency overvaluation can be checked and the resources directed to
developmental objectives (Saad-Filho and Weeks 2013). Capital controls, the establishment of
sovereign funds and higher taxation of commodity exports are amongst some of the possible
mechanisms to prevent the Dutch disease. Natural resource-based booms are thus not a curse, but they
do present risks that must be faced via an appropriate set of policies.
       The actual results are mixed. On the one hand, the currency inflows obtained with commodity
exports relaxed the balance of payments constraint (particularly during the 2003-2007 period), allowing
for higher growths rates than would have otherwise have been possible (Ocampo 2007, 2009, 2014).
With different degrees of intervention in the foreign exchange market, the countries were also able to
accumulate a substantial amount of reserves, providing buffers against external volatility: the region’s
gross international reserves increased from US$ 163 billion in 2001 (ECLAC 2010: 272) to US$ 830
billion in 2013 (ECLAC 2014: 191). States throughout the region have also, to different extents,
increased the taxation of such activities, and these resources were central in expanding social policies.
       On the other hand, there is strong evidence that, except for Argentina, the region’s exchange rates
were overvalued during the 2000s (Frenkel and Rapetti 2012). This suggests that measures to neutralise
the Dutch disease, if existent in some cases, were mostly insufficient. Hence, the turn to neo-
extractivism has contributed to an already existent and ongoing process of deindustrialisation (Brady et
al. 2011, Bresser-Pereira 2011, 2012b, Frenkel and Rapetti 2012, Ocampo 2007, 2009, 2014). The
latter, to be sure, did not begin under the left-of-centre governments. Since its heyday as the
manufacturing centre of the global south, during the ISI period, Latin America has lost relative
importance in global manufacturing and the share of industrial employment has consistently decreased
(Palma 2010).
       There are two stages to this process. First, neoliberalism implied a restructuring of the region’s
insertion in the world market, dealing a first blow to manufacturing. The abandonment of active
industrial policies and the trade and financial opening are the main factors behind this (Bogliaccini
2013). What then followed was a ‘standing still,’ defensive policy that perpetuated deindustrialisation
and led to the conclusion that, ‘as far as manufacturing is concerned, in [Latin America] the three post-
1980 decades might well deserve [the “lost decade” label]’ (Palma 2010: 38). The region has,
moreover, also been specialising in less competitive manufacturing sectors (CEPAL 2007, Cimoli et al.
2010, Palma 2010). Consequently, whilst the Pink Tide governments cannot be held responsible for
initiating deindustrialisation, their rule has deepened it due to the reliance on a neo-extractivist pattern
of accumulation without sufficient measures to counteract the Dutch disease.


5
 It should be noticed that this inflow of reserves can be greatly magnified by accompanying financial movements, at least
partly speculating on future commodity markets.



                                                           6
      Summing up, under the pressure of the commodities boom, virtually all Latin American countries
have shifted to neo-extractivism. If this has allowed for financing social policies and alleviated the
balance of payments constraint, it also entails negative environmental consequences, spurs
deindustrialisation and heightens mid-term external vulnerability. The paper now explores how this
reflects on changing class structures, employment patterns and the standards of living of the population.


3.2. Class structures and standards of living under the Pink Tide
       During the neoliberal period (roughly 1980-2000), five trends dominated Latin American class
structures: greater structural unemployment; the rise of a migrant labour class and the ensuing
dependence of numerous households on remittances; the growth of labour market informality, also as
precarious self-employment and micro-entrepreneurialism; deregulation of the labour market; and
feminisation of labour (Cornia 2012, Portes and Hoffman 2003, Robinson 2008). This process led to a
widely documented rise in inequality and poverty (see note Error! Bookmark not defined. above),
not to mention stagnant or falling real wages.6
       What has happened since the turn of the century is a murkier picture, with many sceptical of
positive developments (e.g., Robinson 2008, Spronk and Webber 2014b, Webber 2014). Evidence does
indicate, however, that at least a partial reversal of these trends is (or was) underway. Poverty, labour
income inequality and informality have undoubtedly decreased during the last decade (Cornia 2012,
2014a, Keifman and Maurizio 2014, Lopez-Calva and Lustig 2010, Lustig et al. 2013). The simple
country-average of the Gini coefficient of household per capita income for Latin America fell by 0.04
between 2002 and 2010 (Cornia 2012: 4), whilst urban poverty dropped 14 percentage points between
2002 and 2012 (ECLAC 2014: 137). Informality decreased approximately 8% during the 2000s (ILO
2013: 59), a striking difference from the beginnings of the preceding decade, when 80% of the jobs
created were in the informal sector (ILO 2013: 45). Finally, the population-weighted average real
minimum wages increased by 54% between 2000 and 2012 (ILO 2013: 127).
       Importantly, there is strong evidence that these developments were in large measure due to
government policies (see Cornia 2012, and the contributions in Cornia 2014a). Using panel data for 18
countries to explain the behaviour of inequality, Cornia (2012: 37) finds that changes in external
conditions and in the growth rate were positive but of minor importance (a 0.3 to 5.0% contribution to
total changes, depending on the model), whilst the appreciation of the real exchange rate had a negative
effect on inequality. The main determinants, which overlap with social policies analysed below, were a
reduction in the skills premium, due to greater access to secondary education (2.9 to 11.2%
contribution to total changes); rising and less unequal labour market incomes, with a central role played
by politically determined minimum wage hikes and reduced informality (9.4 to 23.0% contribution);
and increased government transfers (9.8 to 23% contribution).
       Furthermore, the left-of-centre governments were seen to have, adjusted for all variables
employed, reduced inequality considerably more than the rest – with the more radical ones in the Pink
Tide positively standing out (Cornia 2012, 2014b). In light of this, it is clear that the Pink Tide
governments have positively impacted the livings standards of the working classes. These results
discredit interpretations that ascribe to foreign conditions the direct or sole determinant of improved
living standards, and likewise require at least a more nuanced view than that of many critics of the Pink


6
 Average real minimum wages dropped 30% between 1980 and 1990 for Latin America, and were mostly stagnant until
2000 (ILO 2002: 115).



                                                      7
Tide. The issue is thus not assessing whether the latter has improved the material conditions of the
working classes, but exploring the limits and future prospects for this process.


3.3. The changing character of state power: social policies, class relations and struggles
       State power has assumed a different role in class relations. As explained below, if the neoliberal
state was mainly the enforcer of market discipline on capital and labour, it now takes on a more active
character, as it attempts to mediate (intra-)class relations via economic and social policies and
negotiation procedures. This holds true for all levels, and is synthesised in tripartite negotiation forums.
They bring capital-labour relations into the state, by which the latter attempts to mediate their class
strategies and gains to limits compatible with the continuity of accumulation. This is predicated upon a
more direct participation of state power in intra-capitalist relations and in the reproduction of labour
power. As regards the former, the attempt to steer accumulation towards a national development project
leads to arbitration between different fractions of capital, by actively using procurement policies,
sector-specific tax subsidies and the like. For the latter, a significant increase in social policies,
however not universal, and rising minimum wages can be observed. Finally, as class conciliation
reaches its limits, the continued repression of ‘hardliner’ popular organisations ensues. It is argued that
this state form, on the one hand, is capable of securing greater gains (as compared to the neoliberal
state) for the working classes. On the other hand, as its legitimacy is strictly associated to securing the
profitability of various fractions of capital and modest gains for the working classes, it is prone to
destabilisation as growth falters, and is also relatively incapable of promoting wide-ranging
transformations. In short, it secures certain gains for the working classes whilst preventing greater
transformations. These developments are reviewed in order.
       In the neoliberal period, with the privatisation of state-owned enterprises (SOEs), market
liberalisation and the rollback of sector-specific policies, there were relatively few channels through
which the state could arbitrate between fractions of capital. Likewise, to assure price stability and
repress distributional conflicts, the state intervened less in wage negotiations and repressed workers’
mobilisations. Competing in an increasingly globally integrated market was the way to achieve wage
gains or higher profitability, and state power was put to enforce this (Bonnet and Piva 2012).
       On the other hand, under the Pink Tide the more active role of state power is based on a more
negotiated approach. Tripartite forums are central in this process. Through these, qualified class entities
enter in negotiation processes with the government, so that issues related to distributional conflicts,
wage levels, investment priorities etc., are addressed in an explicitly politicised and state-centred
manner (Bonnet 2012, Bonnet and Piva 2012, Piva 2011). Whereas in the ‘traditional’ idea of
corporatism this is usually restricted to tripartite negotiations between organised labour, firm
representatives and state managers, what we now observe also encompasses social movements.
       There are three main results that come from this neo-corporatist pattern of organising class
relations. First, if successful, it routinises social conflicts and is capable of directing capitalist
accumulation strategies towards potentially developmental objectives (such as a pro-poor growth
pattern). Second, it politicises accumulation, as state power comes to be seen as responsible for the
outcomes of the various class fractions. Third, and as a consequence of this, the legitimacy of the
government becomes increasingly attached to securing modest gains for the relevant classes –
bankruptcies of industrialists, for example, can no longer be ‘explained away’ as a result of inefficient
competition (as in the 1990s), but become a directly political problem (Bonnet and Piva 2012).
Therefore, state power also takes on a more active role in intra-capitalist relations and in reproducing
labour power to maintain its legitimacy, as analysed below.


                                                     8
       With the Pink Tide, there was a recovery of planning capacities, a shift towards more
discretionary economic policies and, in some cases (e.g., Argentina, Bolivia and Venezuela), a partial
re-nationalisation of formerly privatised SOEs. This is what many authors see as a neodevelopmental
state form, which actively intervenes via subsidies and tax exemptions to stimulate particular economic
sectors, sponsors the internationalisation of ‘national champions’ with the aid of development banks,
takes on a greater role in providing infrastructure and other public goods, redirects procurement
policies to domestic firms of strategic sectors and, in general, attempts to steer accumulation towards a
pattern compatible with a particular – and always selective – view of what national development would
be (Biancareli and Rossi 2014, Boito Jr and Berringer 2014, Ebenau 2014, Féliz 2012, Morais and
Saad-Filho 2012, Petras and Veltmeyer 2007, Schutte 2013). National development comes to be
associated, in particular, with the accumulation strategies of the internal bourgeoisie,7 and this class
fraction displaces the hegemonic position of transnationalised financial capital (Boito Jr and Berringer
2014).
       In contradistinction to the ‘traditional’ Latin American developmental state, however, the
neodevelopmental state does not seek to overcome the countries’ position in the world market and
relies less on the domestic market; it is a watered-down version of its precursor (Boito Jr and Berringer
2014, Katz 2014a, 2014b, 2014c). Or, in Boito’s and Berringer’s words, ‘neodevelopmentalism is the
developmentalism of the era of neoliberal capitalism [...] the development policy that is possible within
the limits of the neoliberal capitalist model’ (2014: 97, emphasis in the original). The concept then
regards this state form that organises a relationship between capitalist class fractions wherein state
power is an overt element, attempting to steer accumulation, by a mix of active economic policies,
towards a pattern that serves the interests of the internal bourgeoisie relatively more.
       As indicated above, for a modicum of stability to obtain, the state must also guarantee at least
moderately rising living standards for the working classes. State power thus assumes a greater
participation in the reproduction of labour power. There are two dimensions to this. The first is
mediating labour negotiations and stimulating a growth pattern capable of securing rising wages. As
already mentioned, the element more amenable to political influence, the minimum wage, has been
systematically rising under Pink Tide governments (ILO 2013: 127).
       The second dimension refers to social policies. The overriding development in this regard was the
widespread diffusion of CCTs, with universal social safety nets and public services showing little
improvement. CCTs are currently present in twenty countries and reach approximately 120 million
people, or 20% of the region’s population (Cecchini 2013). They are not exclusive to the Pink Tide
governments (for their diffusion, see Pena 2014), but are nevertheless central in the mix of social
policies adopted. Their alleged low cost, political viability and effectiveness in targeting both short-
and long-term poverty, have gained them widespread acceptance amongst policy-makers and
international development agencies.
       On the positive side, there is strong evidence that they are indeed able to reach the poor and very
poor. There is also no evidence that, if properly designed, they significantly stimulate labour market
segmentation and informality, increase the fertility rate of beneficiaries (Alves and Cavenaghi 2013,
Stecklov et al. 2007) or reduce labour market participation (Alzúa et al. 2013). That they have lifted
millions out of poverty at a very low cost of approximately 0.4% of the region’s GDP is no mean feat
(Cecchini 2013, Cecchini and Madariaga 2011, Valencia Lomelí 2008).

7
 A Poulantzian concept, their interests are somewhat tied to accumulation in the domestic or regional (i.e., Latin American)
market, as opposed to fully transnationalised class fractions, but not to the extent of the now-defunct national bourgeoisie
(Boito Jr and Berringer 2014: 95).



                                                             9
       Nevertheless, the claims about their capacity of achieving longer-term goals – breaking the inter-
generational transmission of poverty – are much harder to sustain, and as of yet there is no evidence in
this regard (Handa and Davis 2006, Valencia Lomelí 2008). Moreover, given the small amount of the
benefits provided, in most cases poverty vulnerability is not adequately addressed, and improvements
in the labour market were more important in reducing inequality. Finally, cheap though they might be,
their cost-effectiveness is by no means demonstrated, given leakages and higher administrative costs as
compared to universal programmes (Bastagli 2009, Handa and Davis 2006, Saad-Filho forthcoming,
Stampini 2012). The extension of CCTs can thus be considered a welcome, if far from sufficient,
development.
       Summing up, the state form under the Pink Tide is characterised by a neo-corporatist pattern of
mediating class relations, whose legitimacy depends on arbitrating between different classes and class
fractions. Regarding material outcomes, this is done via i) a neodevelopmental participation in
accumulation, with discretionary economic policies benefitting the internal bourgeoisie; ii) active
labour market policies and rising minimum wages, benefitting formal workers; and iii) CCTs to reach
the population in more destitute situations. It is now necessary to look at how this is associated to a
political (i.e., not directly material) relation between the government and class entities. This is a two-
sided process. It comprehends, first, incorporating or co-opting the representatives of trade unions and
social movements, who participate in the negotiation forums. As a corollary, it also involves isolating
or repressing independent entities.
       The central element is thus ‘convincing’ labour and social movements to abandon extra-
institutional mobilisation and direct action in favour of official channels. As part of this, many leaders
of trade unions and social movements have been incorporated into the state apparatus, assuming offices
(Antunes 2013, Castorina 2013, Farthing and Kohl 2014, Oliveira 2010, Webber 2014). To the extent
that this is effective, it amounts to a routinisation of social conflicts and a curtailment of the tools
popular sectors can use in their struggles, albeit in exchange for the possibility of sharing, to an extent,
in the gains capital enjoys.
       Many refer to this as the co-option of popular leaderships that, for particularistic reasons, actively
support the state managers and de-mobilise their bases, which become passive supporters of the
government (Braga 2012, Oliveira et al. 2010). Whilst in principle a valid analysis, co-option is
actually a sub-group of the processes herein analysed, only applicable when some sort of ‘treason’ is in
place. Overextending it to whenever entities abandon extra-institutional mobilisation and opt for
negotiation both denies the agency of the bases, seen as incapable of going against the leaders, and
downplays the possibility of there being actual gains in negotiations. It also focuses too much on the
individual decisions of the leaders. The more general case is thus one of convincing the relevant
strategic actors of limiting themselves to a negotiated institutional process. However this might happen,
it does indeed imply abandoning a ‘maximalist’ perspective for, in turn, sharing in some of the gains
that are possible under the constraints of the current pattern of accumulation.
       The second element involved in this process is dividing class entities and social movements into
‘good,’ negotiating ones, and ‘bad,’ independent ones (Boito Jr et al. 2009, Castorina 2013, Galvão
2014, Webber 2014). A line is thus drawn between the demands that can be processed and those that
must be ignored and repressed. Accumulation is thereby stabilised, and within certain limits
negotiations around material distribution can be conducted by qualified class entities. This ‘us versus
them’ approach creates divisions within the popular sectors, and thus further restricts the horizons of
what is at stake in official negotiations (Modenesi 2012). Combined as it has been to actively
repressing all forms of independent struggle, it leads to demobilisation and smaller independent




                                                     10
grassroots organising. Ironically, then, in the mid-term it might hamper the continuity of reforms as it
hinders popular mobilisation from below, an important element in obtaining concessions from capital.
       All of these are widespread processes under Pink Tide governments, illustrated below. In Brazil,
after the PT came to power it appointed many union leaders to key positions in the state apparatus, with
which the Central Única dos Trabalhadores (CUT), the main trade union federation, became
organically linked to the routine management of the state. Once a combative and innovative
organisation, it was already moderating itself throughout the 1990s; with the PT in power, however, it
opted for a clear negotiating strategy and abandoned tactics reliant on wide mobilisations of its base
(Antunes 2013, Galvão 2014). As for the MST, they did not establish organic links with the
government, but likewise opted for a negotiating strategy in which the resort to direct action was
strongly curtailed (Antunes 2013, Vergara-Camus 2009, 2013, 2014).8 Finally, independent struggles
were met with indifference to their demands, repression and police violence, as the 2012 strike of
federal university professors and the mass mobilisations of 2013 show.
       In Argentina, the introduction of Plan Jefes y Jefas de Hogar (PJyJH), a CCT programme, had
important implications for the unemployed workers organisations known as piqueteros, hitherto at the
forefront of popular resistance to neoliberalism and the 2001-2002 crisis (Castorina 2013). The
government selectively incorporated the leaders of certain organisations into the state apparatus to
administer PJyJH benefits whilst repressing those that did not cooperate, and thus destroyed horizontal
linkages between the various grassroots movements and stabilised conflicts. As for labour struggles,
the Labour and Social Development ministries were reinstated as the site of tripartite negotiations. The
state thus emerged as the arbiter of class relations and was capable of bringing important trade unions
into this strategy, such as the Confederación General del Trabajo de la República Argentina (General
Confederation of Labour of the Republic of Argentina, CGT) (Bonnet 2012, Bonnet and Piva 2012).
       In the case of Bolivia a similar process ensued, as various organisations whence the Movimiento
al Socialismo (Movement Towards Socialism – MAS, the left governing party since 2006) comes have
become intertwined with the state apparatus and opted for institutional-based forms of struggle. The
leaders of entities in between indigenous movements and trade unions, such as the Confederación
Sindical Única de Trabajadores Campesinos de Bolivia (Unified Trade Union Confederation of
Bolivian Peasant-Workers, CSUTCB), have assumed several positions in office (Farthing and Kohl
2014) and are important agents in implementing government policies (Webber 2014). This ‘de-
colonisation’ of the state, a central platform of the MAS government, has arguably led many
marginalised groups to see themselves reflected in the state apparatus and allowed for real gains in
negotiation processes (Ikemura Amaral 2014). It comes with a caveat, nevertheless. When social
movements understand the state is not acquiescing to their demands and go for direct action – which, it
must be remembered, stands behind the insurrectionary movement that culminated in MAS’s rise to
power (Webber 2011) –, they are deemed ‘imperialist conspiracies’ or the agents of foreign NGOs, and
are repressed, as became clear in the TIPNIS conflict (Webber 2014, 2015).
       This whole process receives its perhaps clearest expression in the thought of Álvaro García
Linera, Bolivia’s vice-president and a prolific theoretician. As he puts it, ‘the Bolivian people have
consolidated their historical unity around a single project for the state, the economy and the society’
(García Linera 2011: 7, our emphasis). In fact, since the consolidation of the revolutionary process we
would be witnessing the dissolution of the state form into society, creating an ‘integral state’ (p. 10),
and the national-popular bloc – in all effect the government and its allies – would thus concentrate in

8
 The number of families in MST encampments dropped from 10,750 in 2002 to 4,570 in 2014 (CPT 2015). As a militant
put it, ‘When government is ours, it’s worse. The MST stops organizing protests’ (Vergara-Camus 2009: 186).



                                                       11
itself all the ‘creative tensions’ of the revolution, which are (the only ones) capable of further
advancing popular goals (p. 28). The corollary is that every mobilisation not contained within these
limits, such as those of communities that resist extractivism, must of necessity be denounced as
particularistic, counterproductive or even imperialist (Webber 2014). The state form is thus the arbiter
of all that is progressive, and there are only two positions: one is either for it, and (critically) supports it
from within, or a right-wing agent of counter-revolution. No progressive stance outside of the state’s
realm is possible. Whilst García Linera restricts his analysis to Bolivia, it can arguably be extended to
encompass the strategies and rhetoric of various others Pink Tide governments.9


4. FINAL REMARKS
       As presented above, Latin America has undergone a multifaceted process of social change in the
past years that defies all summary interpretations. There were undeniable material gains for the popular
classes, as inequality, poverty and labour informality levels decreased, in large measure due to the
political initiative of Pink Tide governments. This has, nevertheless, occurred under very particular
foreign conditions, given the coincidence of the commodities supercycle and abundant international
liquidity. Whilst the latter did not determine the processes indicated above, they do seem to have
played a contradictory enabling role, and their overall impact is still far from clear. Additionally, the
Pink Tide governments have promoted problematic economic and political developments, which might
sap the potential for a continued process of gains for the population.
       Regarding the wider interpretive frameworks put forth above, little evidence is found in support
of mainstream analyses. As Cornia (2012, 2014b) shows, inequality decreased more in those countries
that further departed from neoliberalism, suggesting that it is not the strict obeisance of the Post-
Washington Consensus, as this line advocates, that led to better results. Moreover, whilst highlighting
the undeniable importance of the commodities boom, in some variants (e.g., Murillo et al. 2011,
Weyland 2009) domestic factors and policy choices are overlooked, naturalised as almost an
epiphenomenon of the foreign scenario.
       The idea of a post-neoliberal state, in turn, underscores the social gains achieved, taking them as
indicative of there being a fundamental change towards a pro-poor, inclusive growth pattern, as well as
the more independent foreign policy of the Pink Tide governments. If this line duly emphasises certain
gains for the working classes, it sheds little light on the shortcomings of these governments and the
reasons behind their current troubles. Fundamentally, it disregards how interconnected are the
dependence on commodity exports and the social policies put forward, the one financing the other, and
the impact of class conciliation and the repression of independent forms of struggle.
       It is for variants of the third framework that a stronger case can be made, with the following
concepts being of particular relevance. Neo-corporatism suggests a state form that internalises class
conflicts, circumscribing them to what is compatible with the prevailing pattern of accumulation. This
is seen as an attempt to promote class conciliation by distributing material gains to various social
movements and class fractions, whilst moderating their goals (Bonnet and Piva 2012).
Neodevelopmentalism suggests a more active role for state power in coordinating the circuits of
capital, which lifts the internal bourgeoisie to the hegemonic position and distributes some gains to
subaltern classes to cement its supporting base, without attempting to change the countries’

9
  As Sader (2013b) put it for Brazil: ‘This group, which allegedly took to the left of PT to found PSOL [Partido Socialismo
e Liberdade], quickly added itself, in a subordinate manner, to the right-wing attack on the government. [...] The extreme
left [...] has, tacitly or explicitly, allied itself with the right against these [Pink Tide] governments.’



                                                            12
international position (Boito Jr and Berringer 2014, Féliz 2012). The neo-extractivism or commodity
consensus (Svampa 2013, Veltmeyer 2013) and the compensatory state theses (Gudynas 2009, 2012),
in turn, highlight the dependence on resource-extraction, the state’s role in fostering the latter and the
use of taxes therefrom derived to buy the acquiescence of the popular classes.
       A synthesis is proposed highlighting a common element to these concepts: how they describe
processes of moderate reforms, which provide some gains to the working classes at the cost of avoiding
more confrontational politics and popular empowerment. Hence, to different degrees, these
governments have chosen the paths of least resistance in trying to advance a reformist project –
 specifically, neodevelopmentalism. They have strongly restricted their goals, adopted tactics consistent
with this and got what was possible under these circumstances. Within this strategy, they have achieved
‘the best of the worst,’ neoliberalism with a social face. Lower informality combined to precarious
employment, reducing inequality but only to the levels of the 1980s and achieving higher growth rates
whilst cementing a peripheral insertion in the world market are illustrative. Neo-corporatism might thus
be understood as an institutionality to manage the prevailing class relations within small margins,
whilst preventing greater changes. In order to obtain this, the Pink Tide governments relied on
permissive foreign conditions and, more importantly, progressively sapped the longer-term capacities
that would allow for a sustained improvement of social conditions. There are two main processes in
this latter regard. On the economic front, stimulating a neo-extractivist pattern of accumulation, with its
negative consequences in terms of their insertion in the world market and associated class structures.
And, on the political front, relying on class conciliation measures that i) tie the governments to the
interests of several fractions of capital, forestalling attempts at wider economic restructuring, and ii)
limit the potential of popular organisation and extra-institutional pressure, the main features capable of
altering the balance of forces in favour of the popular classes. As foreign conditions worsen, the social
formations are found in a debilitated position and the processes that sustained these governments in
power are no longer operative. The predictable crisis that ensues is thus not expected to lead to a
deepening of the progressive elements in these hybrid state forms, but rather to exclusionary
adjustments. In the medium-term, then, the most realistic option these paths of least resistance
represent might erode their conditions of existence, ironically becoming the more utopic ones.
       This underscores the dangers of broad political fronts and minimalist reformist programmes.
Their very condition of success in the short-term – appealing to a broad section of the population and
avoiding overt conflict – creates the constraint that they are incapable of confronting established
(capitalist) interests. On the contrary, the economic and political dynamics that unfold are all geared
towards class conciliation and incremental reforms, preventing more transformative actions. In this
sense, there is a strategic complementarity between neo-corporatism, neodevelopmentalism and a
social policy mix based on CCTs financed via foreign reserves forthcoming in a neo-extractivist pattern
of accumulation. These are all mechanisms for social compromise that, compared to the preceding
phase of strict neoliberalism, allow for relatively greater gains for the working classes, albeit at the cost
of preventing the empowering of the latter, contentious politics and a clearer break with the prevailing
productive and class structure.
       Whilst it is beyond the scope of this paper to try to discern the precedence or causation of each of
these elements, it is argued that over time, through a trial-and-error process, they reinforce and support
each other: as neo-extractivism offers funding for CCTs there is interest in stimulating it, CCTs
together with rising real minimum wages sustain popular approval of the governments, and the ensuing
results in terms of faster growth and lower inequality and poverty legitimate neo-corporatist,
conciliatory class relations – which, in turn, help guarantee the interests of local capitalists and so on.
This does not in any sense imply that such an arrangement is stable in the long-term. In fact, the


                                                     13
argument is precisely that this least-resistance strategy becomes increasingly vulnerable. What the idea
of strategic complementarity conveys is, on the other hand, that through a series of processes
(experimentation, political manoeuvring, imitation/inspiration from neighbouring countries...) there is a
tendency for these economic and political forms to develop alongside each other and forestall
alternatives in any single dimension (e.g., ‘why go for independent labour mobilisation when neo-
corporatism has been bringing about wage gains?’ or ‘why attempt a larger overhaul of macroeconomic
policies if this would require confronting powerful interests and it has allowed for growth with
redistribution?’ – not to mention the more vexing question of how to do so without strong popular
organisation). Attempting to change one dimension without supporting transformations in the others is
hence extremely hard. The different elements are thus likely to stand and fall together, in the latter case
particularly if subjected to foreign-determined shocks, but in so doing will still obviously have been
path-shaping processes whose legacy will continue to mark the history of Latin America in years to
come, for better or for worse.




                                                    14
REFERENCES
Alves, J. E. D. and Cavenaghi, S., 2013. O Programa Bolsa Família e as taxas de fecundidade no
   Brasil. In: Campello, T. and Neri, M. C. eds. Programa Bolsa Família: uma década de inclusão e
   cidadania. Brasília: IPEA, 233-246.
Alzúa, M., Cruces, G. and Ripani, L. 2013. Welfare programs and labor supply in developing
   countries: experimental evidence from Latin America. Journal of Population Economics, 26(4),
   1255-1284.
Antunes, R., 2013. Trade unions, social conflict, and the political left in present-day Brazil: between
   breach and compromise. In: Webber, J. R. and Carr, B. eds. The new Latin American left. Cracks in
   the empire. Plymouth: Rowman & Littlefield, 255-275.
Arsel, M. 2012. Between ‘Marx and markets’? The state, the ‘left turn’ and nature in Ecuador.
   Tijdschrift voor economische en sociale geografie, 103(2), 150-163.
Arsel, M. and Angel, N. A. 2012. “Stating” Nature’s Role in Ecuadorian Development: Civil Society
   and the Yasuní-ITT Initiative. Journal of Developing Societies, 28(2), 203-227.
Bastagli, F. 2009. From social safety net to social policy? The role of conditional cash transfers in
   welfare state development in Latin America. IPC-IG Working Papers, (60), 1-32.
Biancareli, A. M. and Rossi, P. 2014. A política macroeconômica em uma estratégia social-
   desenvolvimentista. Revista Brasileira de Planejamento e Orçamento, 4(1), 21-38.
Bogliaccini, J. A. 2013. Trade Liberalization, Deindustrialization, and Inequality: Evidence from
   Middle-Income Latin American Countries. Latin American Research Review, 48(2), 79-105.
Boito Jr, A. and Berringer, T. 2014. Social Classes, Neodevelopmentalism, and Brazilian Foreign
   Policy under Presidents Lula and Dilma. Latin American Perspectives, 41(5), 94-109.
Boito Jr, A., Galvão, A. and Marcelino, P. 2009. Brasil: o movimento sindical e popular na década de
   2000. Observatorio social de América Latina, 10(26), 35-55.
Bonnet, A., 2012. La crisis del Estado neoliberal en la Argentina. In: Rey, M. T. ed. El estado en
   América Latina: continuidades y rupturas. Santiago: Editorial ARCIS, 279-302.
Bonnet, A. and Piva, A., 2012. Un análisis de los cambios en la forma de estado en la
   posconvertibilidad. In: Grigera, J. ed. Argentina después de la convertibilidad (2002-2011). Buenos
   Aires: Imago Mundi, 3-31.
Brady, D., Kaya, Y. and Gereffi, G. 2011. Stagnating Industrial Employment in Latin America. Work
   and Occupations, 38(2), 179-220.
Braga, R., 2012. A política do precariado: do populismo à hegemonia lulista. São Paulo: Boitempo.
Bresser-Pereira, L. C. 2011. An account of new developmentalism and its structuralist
   macroeconomics. Revista de Economia Política, 31(3), 493-502.
Bresser-Pereira, L. C. 2012a. Structuralist macroeconomics and the new developmentalism. Revista de
   Economia Política, 32(3), 347-366.
Bresser-Pereira, L. C. 2012b. Summing Up Structuralist Development Macroeconomics and New
   Developmentalism. Challenge, 55(5), 59-78.
Burchardt, H.-J. and Dietz, K. 2014. (Neo-)extractivism – a new challenge for development theory
   from Latin America. Third World Quarterly, 35(3), 468-486.
Caldentey, E. P. and Vernengo, M. 2010. Back to the future: Latin America's current development
   strategy. Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, 32(4), 623-644.
Castañeda, J. 2006. Latin America's left turn. Foreign Affairs, 85(3), 28-43.



                                                  15
Castorina, E., 2013. Crisis and recomposition in Argentina. In: Webber, J. R. and Carr, B. eds. The new
    Latin American left. Cracks in the empire. Plymouth: Rowman & Littlefield, 233-254.
Castorina, E., 2014. The reproduction of democratic neoliberalism in Argentina: Kirchner's 'solution' to
    the crisis of 2001. In: Spronk, S. and Webber, J. R. eds. Crisis and contradiction: Marxist
    perspectives on Latin America in the Global Political Economy. Leiden: Brill, 73-97.
Cecchini, S., 2013. Transferências condicionadas na América Latina e Caribe: da inovação à
    consolidação. In: Campello, T. and Neri, M. C. eds. Programa Bolsa Família: uma década de
    inclusão e cidadania. Brasília: IPEA, 367-396.
Cecchini, S. and Madariaga, A., 2011. Conditional cash transfers programmes: the recent experience
    in Latin America and the Caribbean. Santiago: ECLAC.
CEPAL, 2007. Progreso técnico y cambio estructural en América Latina. Santiago: Naciones Unidas.
Cimoli, M., Porcile, G. and Rovira, S. 2010. Structural change and the BOP-constraint: why did Latin
    America fail to converge? Cambridge Journal of Economics, 34(2), 389-411.
Cornia, G. A. 2012. Inequality trends and their determinants: Latin America over 1990 - 2010. WIDER
    Working Papers, (2012/09), 1-46.
Cornia, G. A., ed., 2014a. Falling inequality in Latin America: policy changes and lessons. Oxford:
    Oxford University Press.
Cornia, G. A. 2014b. Income inequality in Latin America: recent decline and prospects for its further
    reduction. DISEI Working papers, 2014(14).
Corrêa, V. P., Santos, C. H. and Filho, N. A., 2013. Structural changes in Brazil – advances and limits.
    2013 IIPPE Conference. The Hague.
CPT, 2015. Série histórica de acampamentos. [online]. Available from: http://www.cptnacional.org.br/
    [Accessed 10/05/2015].
de Medeiros, C. A. 2009. Asset-stripping the state: political economy of privatization in Latin America.
    New Left Review, (55), 109-132.
de Medeiros, C. A. 2011. The Political Economy of Institutional Change and Economic Development
    in Latin American Economies. Journal of Economic Issues, XLV(2), 289-300.
Dello Buono, R. A. and Bell Lara, J., 2006. Imperialism, neoliberalism and social struggles in Latin
    America. Leiden: Brill.
Ebenau, M. 2014. Comparative capitalisms and Latin American neodevelopmentalism: A critical
    political economy view. Capital & Class, 38(1), 102-114.
ECLAC, 2010. Economic survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 2009-2010: The distributive
    impact of public policies. Santiago: ECLAC.
ECLAC, 2014. Economic survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 2014: Challenges to sustainable
    growth in a new external context. Santiago: ECLAC.
Edwards, S., 2010. Left behind: Latin America and the false promise of populism. Chicago: University
    of Chicago Press.
Farthing, L. C. and Kohl, B., 2014. Evo's Bolivia: continuity and change. Austin: University of Texas
    Press.
Féliz, M. 2012. Neo-developmentalism: Beyond Neoliberalism? Capitalist Crisis and Argentinas
    Development since the 1990s. Historical Materialism, 20(2), 105-123.
Fine, B., Lapavitsas, C. and Pincus, J., 2001. Development policy in the twenty-first century: beyond
    the post-Washington consensus. London: Routledge.
Flores-Macias, G., 2012. After neoliberalism? : the left and economic reforms in Latin America.
    Oxford ; New York: Oxford University Press.




                                                  16
Frenkel, R. and Rapetti, M. 2012. External fragility or deindustrialization: what is the main threat to
   Latin American countries in the 2010s? World Economic Review, 1, 37-57.
Galvão, A. 2014. The Brazilian Labor Movement under PT Governments. Latin American
   Perspectives, 41(5), 184-199.
García Linera, A., 2011. Las tensiones creativas de la revolución: la quinta fase del proceso de
   cambio. La Paz: Vicepresidencia del Estado Plurinacional de Bolivia.
Gonçalves, R., et al., 2009. Vulnerabilidad estructural externa en América Latina. In: Arceo, E. O. and
   Basualdo, E. M. eds. Los condicionantes de la crisis en América Latina: inserción internacional y
   modalidades de acumulación. Buenos Aires: CLACSO, 119-138.
Goodale, M. and Postero, N., 2013. Neoliberalism, interrupted: social change and contested
   governance in contemporary Latin America. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Gudynas, E., 2009. Diez tesis urgentes sobre el nuevo extractivismo: contextos y demandas bajo el
   progresismo sudamericano actual. In: Schuldt, J., et al. eds. Extractivismo, política y sociedad.
   Quito: Centro Andino de Acción Popular – CAAP & Centro Latinoamericano de Ecología Social –
    CLAES, 187-225.
Gudynas, E. 2012. Estado compensador y nuevos extractivismos: las ambivalencias del progresismo
   sudamericano. Nueva Sociedad, 237, 128-146.
Handa, S. and Davis, B. 2006. The Experience of Conditional Cash Transfers in Latin America and the
   Caribbean. Development Policy Review, 24(5), 513-536.
Hershberg, E. and Rosen, F., eds., 2006a. Latin America after neoliberalism. Turning the Tide in the
   21st Century? New York: The New Press.
Hershberg, E. and Rosen, F., 2006b. Turning the tide? In: Hershberg, E. and Rosen, F. eds. Latin
   America after neoliberalism. Turning the Tide in the 21st Century? New York: The New Press, 1-
   25.
Ikemura Amaral, A., 2014. Os caminhos da politização da indigeneidade: um estudo sobre a
   identidade indígena na política boliviana pós-1985. Dissertação (Mestrado em Ciência Política).
   Universidade de São Paulo.
ILO, 2002. 2002 labour overview Latin America and the Caribbean. Lima: ILO.
ILO, 2013. 2013 labour overview Latin America and the Caribbean. Lima: ILO.
Katz, C., 2014a. ¿Qué es el neo-desarrollismo? I - Una visión crítica. Economía. Claudio Katz personal
   webpage [online]. Available from: http://katz.lahaine.org/?p=232 [Accessed 20/10/2014].
Katz, C., 2014b. ¿Qué es el neo-desarrollismo? II - Una visión crítica. Argentina y Brasil. Claudio Katz
   personal webpage [online]. Available from: http://katz.lahaine.org/?p=233 [Accessed 20/10/2014].
Katz, C., 2014c. ¿Qué es el neo-desarrollismo? III - Una visión crítica. Teoría y política. Claudio Katz
   personal webpage [online]. Available from: http://katz.lahaine.org/?p=234 [Accessed 20/10/2014].
Katz, C. 2015. Dualities of Latin America. Latin American Perspectives, 42(4), 10-42.
Keifman, S. N. and Maurizio, R., 2014. Changes in labour market conditions and policies, and their
   impact on wage inequality during the last decade. In: Cornia, G. A. ed. Falling inequality in Latin
   America: policy changes and lessons. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 251-273.
Kozloff, N., 2008. Revolution! : South America and the rise of the new left. 1st ed. ed. Basingstoke:
   Palgrave Macmillan.
Leiva, F. I., 2008. Latin American neostructuralism: The Contradictions of Post-Neoliberal
   Development. Minneapolis and London: University of Minnesota Press.
Levitsky, S. and Roberts, K. M., eds., 2011. The resurgence of the Latin American left. Baltimore:
   Johns Hopkins University Press.




                                                  17
López, E. and Vértiz, F., 2012. Capital transnacional y proyectos nacionales de desarrollo en América
    Latina. Las nuevas lógicas del extractivismo neodesarrollista. Herramienta [online], 50. Available
    from: http://www.herramienta.com.ar/revista-herramienta-n-50/capital-transnacional-y-proyectos-
    nacionales-de-desarrollo-en-america-latin.
Lopez-Calva, L. F. and Lustig, N., eds., 2010. Declining inequality in Latin America: a decade of
    progress? Washington DC and New York: United Nations Development Programme and
    Brookings Institution Press.
Lustig, N., Lopez-Calva, L. F. and Ortiz-Juarez, E. 2013. Declining Inequality in Latin America in the
    2000s: The Cases of Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico. World Development, 44(0), 129-141.
Macdonald, L. and Ruckert, A., 2009. Post-neoliberalism in the Americas. Basingstoke: Palgrave
    Macmillan.
Modenesi, M., 2012. Revoluciones pasivas en América Latina: una aproximación gramsciana a la
    caracterización de los gobiernos progresistas de inicio del siglo. In: Rey, M. T. ed. El estado en
    América Latina: continuidades y rupturas. Santiago: Editorial ARCIS, 139-166.
Morais, L. and Saad-Filho, A. 2012. Neo-Developmentalism and the Challenges of Economic Policy-
    Making under Dilma Rousseff. Critical Sociology, 38(6), 789-798.
Murillo, M. V., Oliveros, V. and Vaishnav, M., 2011. Economic constraints and presidential agency.
    In: Levitsky, S. and Roberts, K. M. eds. The resurgence of the Latin American left. Baltimore:
    Johns Hopkins University Press, 52-70.
Ocampo, J. A. 2007. The Macroeconomics of the Latin American Economic Boom. CEPAL Review,
    (93), 7-28.
Ocampo, J. A. 2009. Latin America and the global financial crisis. Cambridge Journal of Economics,
    33(4), 703-724.
Ocampo, J. A. 2014. Latin America’s mounting economic challenges. Baker Institute Issue Briefs,
    10.17.14, 1-8.
Oliveira, F. d., 2010. Hegemonia às avessas. In: Oliveira, F. d., Braga, R. and Rizek, C. S. eds.
    Hegemonia às avessas: economia, política e cultura na era da servidão financeira. São Paulo, SP:
    Boitempo, 21-27.
Oliveira, F. d., Braga, R. and Rizek, C. S., eds., 2010. Hegemonia às avessas: economia, política e
    cultura na era da servidão financeira. São Paulo, SP: Boitempo.
Palma, J. G. 2010. Why has productivity growth stagnated in most Latin American countries since the
    neo-liberal reforms? Cambridge Working Papers in Economics, (1030), 1-44.
Panizza, F., 2009. Contemporary Latin America : development and democracy beyond the Washington
    consensus. London: Zed.
Pena, P. 2014. The politics of the diffusion of conditional cash transfers in Latin America. BWPI
    Working Papers, (201), 1-32.
Petras, J. and Veltmeyer, H. 2007. The ‘development state’ in Latin America: Whose development,
    whose state? Journal of Peasant Studies, 34(3), 371-407.
Pinto, E. C. 2011. O eixo sino-americano e a inserção externa brasileira: antes e depois da crise. Textos
    para discussão do IPEA, (1652), 1-61.
Piva, A. 2011. Una aproximación a los cambios en la Forma de Estado en Argentina (2002 – 2009).
    Theomai: estudios sobre sociedad, naturaleza y desarrollo, (23), 1-23.
Portes, A. and Hoffman, K. 2003. Latin American Class Structures: Their Composition and Change
    during the Neoliberal Era. Latin American Research Review, 38(1), 41-82.
Ray, R., et al., eds., 2015. China in Latin America: lessons for south-south cooperation and sustainable
    development. Boston: Boston University's Global Economic Governance Initiative (GEGI).


                                                   18
Regalado, R., 2007. Latin America at the crossroads: domination, crisis, social struggles, and political
    alternatives for the left. Melbourne, Vic. ; London: Ocean.
Robinson, W. I., 2008. Latin America and global capitalism. A critical globalization perspective.
    Baltimore: The John Hopkins University Press.
Rodríguez-Garavito, C., Barret, P. and Chavez, D., 2008. Utopia reborn? Introduction to the study of
    the new Latin American left. In: Barret, P., Chavez, D. and Rodríguez-Garavito, C. eds. The new
    Latin American left: utopia reborn. London: Pluto Press, 1-41.
Saad-Filho, A. 2010. Neoliberalism, democracy, and development policy in Brazil. Development and
    Society, 39(1), 1-28.
Saad-Filho, A. forthcoming. Social policy for neoliberalism: the Bolsa Família Programme in Brazil.
Saad-Filho, A. and Weeks, J. 2013. Curses, Diseases and Other Resource Confusions. Third World
    Quarterly, 34(1), 1-21.
Sader, E., 2011. The new mole: paths of the Latin American left. London: Verso.
Sader, E., ed., 2013a. 10 anos de governos pós-neoliberais no Brasil: Lula e Dilma. Rio de Janeiro:
    FLACSO-Brasil.
Sader, E., 2013b. Por que a extrema esquerda fracassou. Blog do Emir [online]. Available from:
    http://www.cartamaior.com.br/?/Blog/Blog-do-Emir/Por-que-a-extrema-esquerda-
    fracassou/2/29430 [Accessed 05/02/2015].
Schutte, G. R. 2013. Brazil: New Developmentalism and the Management of Offshore Oil Wealth.
    European Review of Latin American and Caribbean Studies, (95), 49-70.
Silva, E., 2009. Challenging neoliberalism in Latin America. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Spronk, S. and Webber, J. R., 2014a. Crisis and contradiction: Marxist perspectives on Latin America
    in the Global Political Economy. Leiden: Brill.
Spronk, S. and Webber, J. R., 2014b. Introduction: systemic logics and historical specificities. In:
    Spronk, S. and Webber, J. R. eds. Crisis and contradiction: Marxist perspectives on Latin America
    in the Global Political Economy. Leiden: Brill, 1-25.
Stampini, M. 2012. The growth of conditional cash transfers in Latin America and the Caribbean: did
    they go too far? IZA Policy Papers, (49), 1-30.
Stecklov, G., et al. 2007. Unintended effects of poverty programmes on childbearing in less developed
    countries: Experimental evidence from Latin America. Population Studies, 61(2), 125-140.
Svampa, M. 2013. Consenso de "commodities" y lenguajes de valoración en América Latina. Nueva
    Sociedad, (244), 30-46.
Valencia Lomelí, E. 2008. Conditional Cash Transfers as Social Policy in Latin America: An
    Assessment of their Contributions and Limitations*. Annual Review of Sociology, 34(1), 475-499.
Veltmeyer, H. 2013. The political economy of natural resource extraction: a new model or extractive
    imperialism? Canadian Journal of Development Studies/Revue canadienne d'études du
    développement, 34(1), 79-95.
Vergara-Camus, L. 2009. The Politics of the MST: Autonomous Rural Communities, the State, and
    Electoral Politics. Latin American Perspectives, 36(4), 178-191.
Vergara-Camus, L., 2013. Revolution in times of neoliberal hegemony: the political strategy of the
    MST in Brazil and the EZLN in Mexico. In: Webber, J. R. and Carr, B. eds. The new Latin
    American left. Cracks in the empire. Plymouth: Rowman & Littlefield, 95-115.
Vergara-Camus, L., 2014. Sugarcane ethanol: the hen of the golden eggs? Agribusiness and the state in
    Lula’s Brazil. In: Spronk, S. and Webber, J. R. eds. Crisis and contradiction: Marxist perspectives
    on Latin America in the Global Political Economy. Leiden: Brill, 211-235.
Webber, J. R., 2011. Red October: left-indigenous struggles in modern Bolivia. Leiden: Brill.


                                                  19
Webber, J. R., 2013. From left indigenous insurrection to reconstituted neoliberalism in Bolivia:
  political economy, indigenous liberation, and class struugle, 2000-2011. In: Webber, J. R. and Carr,
  B. eds. The new Latin American left. Cracks in the empire. Plymouth: Rowman & Littlefield, 149-
  189.
Webber, J. R., 2014. Revolution against ‘progress’: neo-extractivism, the compensatory state, and the
  TIPNIS conflict in Bolivia. In: Spronk, S. and Webber, J. R. eds. Crisis and contradiction: Marxist
  perspectives on Latin America in the Global Political Economy. Leiden: Brill, 302-333.
Webber, J. R., 2015. Crisis and class, advance and retreat: the political economy of the new Latin
  American left. In: Pradella, L. and Marois, T. eds. Polarizing development: alternatives to
  neoliberalism and the crisis. London: Pluto Press, 158-168.
Webber, J. R. and Carr, B., eds., 2013. The new Latin American left: cracks in the empire. Plymouth:
  Rowman & Littlefield.
Weyland, K. 2009. The Rise of Latin America's Two Lefts: Insights from Rentier State Theory.
  Comparative Politics, 41(2), 145-164.
Weyland, K., 2010. The performance of leftist governments in Latin America: Conceptual and
  theoretical issues. In: Weyland, K. G., Madrid, R. l. L. and Hunter, W. eds. Leftist governments in
  Latin America: successes and shortcomings. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1-27.
Weyland, K., 2011. The left: destroyer or savior of the market model? In: Levitsky, S. and Roberts, K.
  M. eds. The resurgence of the Latin American left. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 71-
  92.
Weyland, K. G., Madrid, R. l. L. and Hunter, W., eds., 2010a. Leftist governments in Latin America:
  successes and shortcomings. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Weyland, K. G., Madrid, R. l. L. and Hunter, W., 2010b. The policies and performance of the
  contestatory and moderate left. In: Weyland, K. G., Madrid, R. l. L. and Hunter, W. eds. Leftist
  governments in Latin America : successes and shortcomings. New York: Cambridge University
  Press, 140-180.
World Bank, 2015. World Bank Open Data. [online]. Available from: http://data.worldbank.org/
  [Accessed 04/05/2015].




                                                 20
