   Competition, Market Share and Technological Change in a
                Post-Keynesian Duopoly Model

                                   Ana Bottega
                     Federal University of Minas Gerais, Brazil
                            anabottegalima@gmail.com

                                  Rafael Ribeiro
                     Federal University of Minas Gerais, Brazil
                           rsmribeiro@cedeplar.ufmg.br

                                        Abstract

The aim of this paper is to analyze the role of technological change in altering the intra-
sector competitive landscape of an industry within a post-Keynesian framework. In order
to do so, we propose a duopoly model that extends the post-Keynesian theory of the firm
accounting for the relationship between market share, technological change and the growth
of firms. With our formalization, we notice more than one possible scenario of changes
in market domain and technical advantage driven by a technological shock, also affecting
the firms’ growth trajectories. By doing so, we are able to cast light upon possible market
configurations and how these can be propelled or hindered by firm strategies and by public
policy that aims to promote growth through innovation. But this model can also be seen as a
basis for other analytic micro models, and more comprehensive macro models of growth
and distribution that aim to incorporate changes in the micro competitive structure.

Keywords: technological change, innovation, market share, competition, market concentra-
tion.


                                        Resumo

O objetivo deste artigo é analisar o papel da mudança tecnológica em alterar o cenário
competitivo intra-setorial de uma indústria dentro de um arcabouço pós-Keynesiano. Para
tanto, propõe-se um modelo de duopólio que estende a teoria pós-Keynesiana da firma ao
considerar a relação entre market share, mudança tecnológica e crescimento das firmas. Com
esta formalização, nota-se mais de um cenário possível de mudanças no domínio do mercado
e na vantagem tecnológica impulsionadas por um choque tecnológico, afetando também
as trajetórias de crescimento das firmas. Assim, o artigo ressalta possíveis configurações
de mercado e como estas podem ser impulsionadas ou prejudicadas por estratégias das
firmas e políticas públicas que busquem promover crescimento por meio de inovação. No
entanto, este modelo também pode ser visto como base para outros modelos micro analíticos
e para modelos macro mais abrangentes de crescimento e distribuição que visem incorporar
mudanças na estrutura de competição microeconômica.

Palavras-chave: mudança tecnológica, inovação, market share, competição, concentração
de mercado.

JEL: O31, O33, O38, L13, E12, C02.
Área ANPEC: Área 6 - Crescimento, Desenvolvimento Econômico e Instituições.
                                                                                                    2


1   Introduction

         In Schumpeter’s (1934, 1942) notion of creative destruction, innovation has an important
role in transforming economic activity. His concept, in simple terms, refers to the process in
which a new product or new method displaces an old one, which becomes obsolete. Since
innovation usually starts from one firm, this process generates a temporary monopoly for this
innovative agent. Through innovation, firms obtain decisive cost, quality or variety advantages
over their competitors that affect their profits and market shares, threatening the existence of other
firms. The very nature of this process is thus uneven and asymmetric, with few firms leading
the transformation of the economy, whereas the rest follows, trying to adapt (METCALFE,
1998). And as Dosi (1988) shows, there is empirical evidence of a causality from successful
technological change to a higher degree of industrial concentration.
         However, Schumpeter (1942) also highlights how the process of innovation is affected
by features of market structure. Perfect competition would eliminate any incentives to innovate,
since it allows for instant imitation of a firm’s novelty. In this way, non-price competition, as
with innovation, needs to be a possibility while remaining a threat. And also, for the author "the
business man feels himself to be in a competitive situation even if he is alone in his field" (p.
85). In regard to the empirical support of this statement, Kamien & Schwartz (1975) highlight
that most empirical investigations fail to deal with the simultaneity of the matter. Nevertheless,
some studies suggest the hypothesis that an "intermediate" market structure, between monopoly
and perfect competition, would promote higher inventive and innovative activity. More recently,
Blundell, Griffith & Reenen (1999) investigate the relationship between market share and
innovation in a sample of British manufacturing firms. Controlling for firm specific heterogeneity
in the estimation of a dynamic count data model, they find evidence that market share influences
innovation according to how competition is structured. Therefore, the characteristics of market
competition could both influence and be influenced by technological change. In this sense, the
conformation of those two aspects would define other firm related variables, like its rates of
growth and profit (METCALFE, 2013).
         The competitive features of an industry also have a relationship with the asymmetries
between firms’ technical capabilities. This is implied in the "Schumpeterian competition" process
described, since as firms innovate, they create asymmetries between them and their competitors.
Those asymmetries relate to competitive differences between firms, but also to production
procedures and quality of the final output, creating an inter-firm technological gap. As Dosi
(1984) argues, imitation and technological diffusion would then decrease this gap, through an
adjustment mechanism related to changes in production method and in the product itself. These
asymmetries imply that firms are heterogeneous agents in their respective industry. This industry,
in turn, is conformed by the competitive process in which some firms survive given heterogeneous
factors like their technological variety, their behaviour and strategies, and the industry’s degree
of imitation and diffusion. Thus, to understand the relationship between technological change
and firm growth, the asymmetric competitive process also needs to be analyzed.
         This sort of analysis is important given other effects that market concentration could have
on social welfare and on the economy as a whole. Since 2000, there has been an increase in
corporate market power in advanced economies, specially with more productive and innovative
firms (DíEZ; DUVAL, 2019). As Stiglitz (2019) recently argued, the range of damages of
market concentration goes from costumers and employees - increasing inequality, reducing labor
income shares and shortening demand - to the growth of the economy as a whole, by detaining
investment and innovation. Therefore, the theoretical and empirical grounds of this process need
to be assessed in order to guide a plausible combination of innovation and antitrust policies.
                                                                                                  3


Such reforms are needs to maintain market competition to avoid the aforementioned undesirable
effects of concentration.
        Regarding theoretical investigations of this matter, the dynamics between competition
and innovation described by the concept of creative destruction is similar to the one that post-
Keynesian theory has in mind, as Lavoie (2014) summarizes. This literature offers a more realistic
view of the firm, as depicted for example in Eichner (1976) and Galbraith (1967) accounts of the
current corporation. According to this theory, firms aim at power and growth instead of profits, in
an environment with fundamental uncertainty. Markets are also seen as being imperfect, where
a mark-up or full-cost pricing strategy prevails. In this case, the main competition mechanism
between firms becomes non-price factors. Competition is then driven not by the adjustment of
price, but by adjustments in the different branches of innovation, branding and advertisement.
        Although this microeconomic perspective is assumed in most post-Keynesian macroeco-
nomic models, there are not many formal micro models of this competition dynamics, and how
it changes intricately with technological progress. There is a recent literature that incorporates
Schumpeterian microfoundations - mostly evolutionary neo-Schumpeterian ones (POSSAS et al.,
2001) following the seminal work of Nelson & Winter (1982) - into macrodynamic models with
effective demand along Keynesian lines. These models have greatly contributed to the literature
by incorporating important Keynesian and Schumpeterian features into the same theoretical
framework with the aim to describe the competitive process among firms in an oligopolistic
market. However, by assuming that firms essentially compete on prices, these models disregard
one of the most salient features of the competitive process in modern oligopolistic markets, which
is precisely non-price competition and its relation to the patterns of technological innovation and
marketing strategies.
        Thus, this paper proposes a theoretical duopoly model of how technological change,
market share and the growth of firms are dynamically related, inspired by the post-Keynesian
theory of the firm. This model allows us to analyze the role of technological change in altering the
intra-sector competitive landscape of an industry within this framework. With our formalization,
we notice fundamental changes in market domain and technical advantage driven by innovation,
much like what is proposed by the Schumpeterian literature. By doing so, we are able to cast
light upon possible market configurations and how these can be propelled/hindered with firm
strategies and public policy.
        The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the basic assumptions to describe the
duopolist industry modelled. Section 3 looks at the medium-run behaviour of this economy, and
how it is affected by an exogenous technology shock. Section 4 examines the long-run dynamics
and the possible paths driven by technological change. Finally, section 5 concludes.

2     Framework of the Model

2.1    The duopoly setting
       The model developed here involves two firms A and B competing in the same sector. Both
firms belong to the same industry and produce goods with imperfect substitutability. Each firm
uses two factors of production with a fixed coefficients technology, as the following production
functions specify:

                                   YA = min{aA LA , bA KA }                                     (1)
                                   YB = min{aB LB , bB KB },                                    (2)
                                                                                                            4


where for each firm - as indicated in the subscripts throughout the paper - Y is output, L is
employment, and K is capital stock, while a and b are labor and capital productivity, respectively.
Here we assume that total employment L is divided between the two firms, formally, L = LA + LB .
It is also assumed an infinitely elastic supply of labor, and employment is then determined only
by the demand for labor. Assuming away capital depreciation, we have:

                                              YA = bA KA                                                  (3)
                                              YB = bB KB .                                                (4)

       Provided that the technical coefficients bA and bB remain constant, the growth of output
of each firm is then equal to the growth of its capital stock, as follows:

                                              gYA = gKA = gA                                              (5)
                                              gYB = gKB = gB ,                                            (6)

where gY and gK denote each firm’s growth rate of output and growth rate of capital stock,
respectively. For simplicity, from now on only gA and gB will be used.
        Since there are only two firms in this sector, they are responsible for the total amount of
value produced in it at a given time, so that:

                                           PY d ≤ PAYA + PBYB ,                                           (7)

where P represents prices and Y d is the sector’s aggregate demand. The inequality states that
the firms operate with excess capacity, while the equality defines the theoretical full capacity
level of output. Here we are assuming that firms maintain a constant fraction of production as
stock, in order to avoid a mismatch between potential and effective supply. Firms producing at a
level in which there are reserves of capacity is one of the stylized facts of the post-Keynesian
firm (LAVOIE, 2014, p. 147). As we have already established with the production functions (1)
and (2), in this model no substitution is acceptable, so there is a fixed combination of inputs
that generates a certain level of output. And if this level is obtained with "adequate" production
techniques, Steindl (1952) calls it "practical capacity". He defines such level as ". . . the output
achieved with normal length of working time, with sufficient shut-downs to allow for repairs and
maintenance, and without disturbance in the smooth running of the production process" (ibid., p.
7). However, it is standard to just name it "full capacity".
        In the post-Keynesian theory of the firm, marginal costs are constant up to full capacity,
while average unit costs are decreasing (KALECKI, 1969; KALDOR, 1961). Yet, they start rising
after this point. Therefore, the very shape of the cost curves corroborates that firms operate with
reserves of capacity. There are also a number of technological reasons related to indivisibility
and scale specifications of machines and plants that justify firms having planned excess capacity.
Nevertheless, we can ultimately relate this fact to the presence of fundamental uncertainty in the
real world (STEINDL, 1952). In this sense, reserves of capacity would be necessary for firms to
respond to demand shifts that cannot be foreseen.
        This assumption also refers to the idea of real markets as imperfect markets. Since the
market structure analyzed here is duopolistic, prices in the short run will be cost-determined,
following a procedure of mark-up pricing, as the standard Kaleckian approach proposes. In fact,
as Kalecki (1971) points out, market imperfection, as the degree of monopoly, is a fundamental
condition for firms to be able to maintain reserves of capacity in the long-run. And this extra
capacity, in turn, would make them able to fix prices. 1
1   However, as Lavoie (2014, p. 126) argues, the market does not need to be oligopolistic to be imperfect. He
                                                                                                                    5


        For simplicity, it is assumed that each firm’s prices remain unchanged. In other words,
firms in this model do not compete on prices, but only on non-price factors such as product quality
and variety. In regard to possible demand shifts, firms would respond to these with adjustments
in quantity, not in prices. We also assume that both firms set their prices at a sufficiently low
level in order to prevent the entry of potential competitors in the market 2
        Since the two firms are responsible for the total output produced, they are sharing the
market between themselves. In that way, each firm contributes to total output growth in an
amount proportional to their market share. Thus, rewriting equation (7) in rates of change, we
obtain:
                                        ḡ = mA gA + mB gB ,                                   (8)
where prevails the assumption that demand in this sector grows at a constant rate ḡ. Moreover,
mA and mB are the market shares of firms A and B, respectively. From equation (8), their market
shares can be thus defined as:
                                                           YA
                                                   mA =                                                          (9)
                                                           Y
                                                           YB
                                                   mB    =    ,                                                 (10)
                                                           Y
where mA + mB = 1. In equilibrium, the two firms would grow at the same rate, maintaining their
respective market shares, such that the following relationship would be valid:

                                                     gA = gB .                                                  (11)
         In the neoclassical theory of the firm, firms decide to produce at the level that yields
them the maximum rate of profit. Instead, in the post-Keynesian theory firms maximize power,
regardless of size and control scheme (GALBRAITH, 1973). Power, in turn, is related to growth.
On the one hand, in a world with fundamental uncertainty, the bigger the firm, the bigger its
control over unpredictable events. On the other hand, there is a scale effect related to size of the
firm and the market it holds. Hence, it is not just a matter of ultimate control over the market, but
how to survive in it. Power, growth and survival are inevitably intertwined.
         Assume, without loss of generality, that firm A is the leading competitor in terms of
technical efficiency and hence has some freedom to set its investment rate and output growth. That
said, first we model the financial frontier and the investment function of firm A. In an economy
with no financial sector, profits become the means that enable firms to grow, considering Kalecki’s
principle of increasing risk 3 . Firms can finance their expansion with the retention of part of
their profits in order to invest. Therefore, following Sylos-Labini (1971) and Wood (1975), we
can establish a function of the financial constraint faced by the firms, with growth as a positive
function of profits:
                                              gFA = sA rA                                       (12)
    claims that all markets could be considered imperfect markets, where prevails some sort of administered pricing
    mechanism, even with higher degrees of competition. From a different approach, Lee (2013) also criticizes
    Kalecki’s assumption that the degree of competition has a direct effect on mark-ups. According to his studies
    and interpretation, there does not seem to exist empirical grounds to justify the shape of Kalecki’s cost curves.
2   See Sylos-Labini (1962) and Bain (1956) for a more detailed explanation on the relationship between prices and
    barriers to entry.
3   If a financial sector were added to the model, it would be necessary to define interest rates on borrowed funds.
    However, given that Kalecki’s principle of increasing risk holds, the firm is willing to borrow only a limited
    amount of their funds. This amount, in turn, is directly related to its internal and previously accumulated funds.
    For that reason, for the purposes of this paper we can simplify the model and not consider a financial sector.
                                                                                                            6


where gFA is the growth rate of firm A compatible with its financial constraint, rA is firm A’s
rate of profit and sA is its retention ratio, 0 < sA < 1. Equation (12) indicates that in order for
the growth rate of the firm to increase, a higher rate of profit is necessary, given an admissible
retention ratio 4 . Some empirical studies such as the one from Fazzari & Mott (1986) have also
provided evidence of the role of internal finance for investment. With a large sample of U.S.
manufacturing firm data from 1970 to 1982, the authors find independent effects of internal
finance on investment.
        Since firms would obtain power through growth, the expansion frontier of firm A can be
defined as an investment function. In the present model, the investment function of firm A has
the following configuration:

                                   gEA = γ0A + γ1A rA − γ2A mA + γ3A T,                                  (13)

where gEA is the rate of expansion of the capital stock desired by the firm, T is the relative
technology level of firm A in relation to firm B, γ0 represents animal spirits and γi are positive
parameters, i = [0, 3]. The assumption that investment depends positively on the rate of profit
is derived from Robinson (1956). An upward shift in expected profits leads firms to decide to
undertake a greater amount of investment. For simplicity, current and expected rates of profit are
taken as equal, with the former assumed to be a good enough approximation of the latter.
        The profit rate here depends on the volume of sales and the relative price of the market.
Although we are assuming away price competition in the medium run, prices thus vary in the
short run to adjust the profit rate. However, this adjustment can only be made until reaching the
previously mentioned threshold that avoids entry of possible competitors.
        Equation (13) also states that the competitive features of the industry have an important
role in determining the firm’s investment decision. In general terms, the coefficient γ2A is
ambiguously signed. It means that, depending on the marketing strategy of the firm, a higher
market share could either encourage or reduce capital accumulation. However, without loss of
generality, we assume that γ2A is positively signed, thus implying that the desired rate of capital
accumulation, gEA , and the market share, mA , are inversely related. This assumption means that
these firms have a strategy of maintaining their market share. This implies that if firm A obtains
a higher market share, it holds a better competitive position in the industry, and does not need
to keep expanding to increase its power. In this case, higher investment would lead only to a
bad use of resources, going further from the firm’s full capacity level. We also assume that this
strategy does not change with increases or decreases in the concentration of the industry.
        There are empirical grounds for inversely relating capital accumulation and market share.
Gilbert & Lieberman (1987) provide empirical evidence of a pattern of investment consistent
with market share maintenance for large firms, whereas for the smaller ones, the preemptive
investment hypothesis would rule. Since the market here consists of two firms, they are considered
to be large ones. Therefore, their strategy would be to increase capital accumulation if they
encounter a significant reduction in their market shares unrelated to historical random variations.
With a similar approach, Hay & Liu (1998) investigate whether investment in capacity could be
used as a competition strategy in oligopolistic markets. For an oligopoly in which a group of
firms dominate, similar to the one treated in this paper, they find that a cooperation strategy is
preferred over an aggressive one.
        Finally, in this model a higher level of technological content induces investment, fol-
lowing the Schumpeterian argument. Assuming that the firms are in different positions on the
4   See Stockhammer (2005) for a discussion in how the financialization and an increase in shareholder’s power
    have impacted the retention ratio and other related decisions of the firm
                                                                                                                        7


technological race, since they have heterogeneous artifacts and technical production attributes,
this relative technological level can be called the "technology gap" between the two firms. As we
are taking firm A as the one equipped with the most efficient technique of production within this
sector, this gap can be defined as:
                                                    EA
                                              T=       ,                                     (14)
                                                    EB
where EA and EB are the stocks of technology and knowledge of firms A and B, respectively5 .
        The assumption that technological progress affects investment is important for the Schum-
peterian approach, but it is also highlighted by post-Keynesian authors. It is central to the theory
of Schumpeter (1934), that focuses on the role of innovation in changing the dynamics of the
economy. However, Kalecki (1971) also favors this channel. Technological progress would result
in new machines and production routines more productive than the old ones. This causes the
costs of the old methods to rise, which spurs new investment. In a different occasion, Kalecki
(1941) proposes that innovation increases the expected rate of profit, generating indirectly a
higher investment rate than in the case without innovation. Innovation would then change the
expectations of the entrepreneur, who would become more optimistic, investing more.
        Dutt (1986) proposes a macroeconomic model in Kaleckian lines that encompasses the
effects of technological change in economic growth and income distribution. In his model,
technological change does not impact investment directly. Instead, it affects indirectly the
parameters of the investment function on a direction determined by the sort of constrains that
the economy faces (from capital, labor or demand). In the model developed here, however, the
technology gap influences the investment of firm A positively and directly. Similar to the creative
destruction theory of Schumpeter (1942), innovation influences investment through the channel
of competition. This implies that a higher level of technology of firm A would spur its investment,
but that would also happen with a lower technological level of firm B. Supposing that firm A has
a sufficiently more efficient technology relative to firm B, the costs of the old machinery would
increase even more in relation to the ones of firm B, increasing investment of firm A.
        Firm A would reach its highest growth and power position when the expansion frontier
reaches the finance frontier, such that:

                                                       gFA = gEA ,                                                  (15)

which can be resolved for the profit rate. The equilibrium profit and growth rates of firm A are
then:
                                               γ0A − γ2A mA + γ3A T
                                       rA∗ =                                                                        (16)
                                                     sA − γ1A
                                       g∗A   = ωA (γ0A − γ2A mA + γ3A T ).                                          (17)
                sA
where ωA = sA −γ   1A
                      , with ωA > 0 as a stability condition.
        In the case treated here, firm B would capture the residual demand of the market, the
one that is not already with the leader firm A. Therefore, the equilibrium rate of growth for firm
B is obtained substituting the equilibrium growth rate of firm A given in equation (17) in the
specification of this market’s demand in equation (8). Following this procedure and using the
definitions of the market shares of the firms in expressions (9) and (10), the equilibrium rate of
5   In an oligopoly setting with three or more firms, T can be represented as T = E j /T̄ , where E j is the technological
    content level of each firm j and T̄ would be the average technological content of the rest of the sector. Hence,
    firms with T > 1 would be more competitive than firms with 0 < T < 1.
                                                                                                   8


growth obtained for firm B is:
                                   1
                        g∗B =          (ḡ − mA ωA (γ0 A − γ2A (mA ) + γ3A T ).                 (18)
                                1 − mA

2.2   Market Share
        From (9), let us assume that the differential equation of the market share of firm A can be
expressed as a positive function of the difference in growth rates between the two firms, favoring
firm A:
                                        ṁA = ΨA (gA − gB )                                    (19)
with ΨA > 0 and mA ∈ [0, 1). The latter assumption is expressing that the model developed
here does not involve the case where firm A drives firm B completely out of the market and
becomes monopolist. Evidently, for mB a symmetric relationship is valid. This assumption is
stated according to the already established view that firms aim at growing, and they do so to
obtain a larger share of the market. As proposed by Robinson (1962) and Kaldor (1978), and
highlighted by Lavoie (2014), firms expand to keep or increase their share of the market.
        Substituting the growth rates of both firms, gA and gB , for their equilibrium expressions,
(17) and (18), the differential equation of the market share of firm A can be rewritten as:
                                                                          
                                      1
                       ṁA = ΨA           [ωA (γ0A − γ2A mA + γ3A T ) − ḡ] .                 (20)
                                   1 − mA

       Equation (20) relates the rate of growth of firm A’s market share with its level and the
technology gap positively or negatively according to the values of the parameters of interest.

2.3   Technological Progress
       We can also assume that the rate of technological change can be expressed by the
following differential equation:

                                   Ṫ = α0 + α1 (gA − gB ) − α2 T,                              (21)

where αi > 0, i = [0, 2] and α0 designates the autonomous component of technological progress
of firm A relative to firm B. The technology gap, T , is assumed to have a negative relationship
with the rate of change of technical progress. The higher the gap, more chances firm B would
have to catch up, thus decreasing the rate of change of the technology gap (ABRAMOVITZ,
1986).
        Besides, the rate of capital accumulation is taken as a driver of technical change, through a
Kaldor-Verdoorn channel (MCCOMBIE; THIRLWALL, 1994). Supposing a given rate of capital
accumulation of firm B, an increase in the one of firm A leads to a higher flow of technological
innovations from this firm. As Palley (1996, p. 124) argues, technical progress is an endogenous
result of capital accumulation, that simultaneously expands the capital stock and introduces
innovations in the production process, while also showing other possible innovations. Therefore,
investment is both an expansion of capital stock as well as a mean of introducing innovations into
this capital stock. This introduction occurs through the acquisition of newer or more productive
capital goods, but also through the knowledge and research inherent to the firm, that allows
further improvements in productivity and the final quality of production (POSSAS, 2008, p.
290).
                                                                                                  9


       Substituting the difference between the rates of capital accumulation given by equations
(17) and (18) in (21) above, we obtain:
                                                                            
                               1                                     α1 ωA γ3A
            Ṫ = α0 + α1           [ωA (γ0A − γ2A mA ) − ḡ] − α2 −              T,        (22)
                            1 − mA                                    1 − mA
where we can restrain α2 > α1 ωA γ3A /(1 − mA ) to keep the catching up mechanism running.
This equation states that in this case market share and technological change have a non-linear
relationship.
        As Metcalfe (1998) highlights, although small firms in competitive markets have larger
incentives to innovate, since they need innovation to gain power in the market, most of the times
they lack the resources to do so. Firms with large shares of the market, however, have little or no
incentive to innovate, because they do not need to obtain any more competitive advantage. But
they have the resources to go ahead and risk innovation, what could increase their productivity
even further. At the same time, they could employ these resources in product variety, in order to
conquer or create other markets. This sort of diversification could open new markets with greater
opportunities to earn temporary monopoly profits. Hence, depending on the strategy that rules, a
higher market share would increase or decrease the rate of technological change. It is reasonable,
then, to consider that this relationship is in fact a non-linear one for this duopoly configuration.

3     Medium-Run Market Share and Technological Progress Dynamics

3.1    Equilibrium and stability
        Equations (20) and (22) form a non-linear dynamical system that characterizes the
medium-run dynamics of this industry. We are only considering the medium-run, since technical
innovation involves a considerable gestation period to reach maturity. It is reasonable to assume
that this system has at least one non-trivial equilibrium solution in the loci ṁA = 0 and Ṫ = 0.
The linear approximation of this system at a generic equilibrium point (meA , T e ) is described by
the following expression:

                                              J11 J12 mA − meA
                                                            
                                d ṁA /dt
                                           =
                                 d Ṫ /dt     J21 J22     T −Te
where the matrix formed by Ji elements on the right-hand side of the equation is the Jacobian
matrix of the system, and its components are its partial derivatives, as follows:


                              ∂ ṁA ΨA [ωA (γ0A − γ2A + γ3A T e ) − ḡ]
                      J11 =          =                                     ≶0                  (23)
                              ∂ mA                (1 − meA )2
                              ∂ ṁA ΨA ωA γ3A
                      J12   =        =            >0                                           (24)
                               ∂T        1 − meA
                               ∂ Ṫ    α1 [ωA (γ0A − γ2A + γ3A T e ) − ḡ]
                      J21   =        =                                     ≶0                  (25)
                              ∂ mA                (1 − meA )2
                              ∂ Ṫ    α1 ωA γ3A
                      J22   =       =           − α2 < 0.                                      (26)
                              ∂T       1 − meA

         We now analyze the stability of the linearized system around the equilibrium solution meA
and T e , which is not formally presented here for simplicity. This property can be assessed with
the system’s Jacobian matrix above. From this matrix, we can see that different values of certain
                                                                                                  10




                           Figure 1 – Unstable loci ṁA = 0 and Ṫ = 0


parameters will determine if the solution is stable or not. But these parameters still need to fall
within a relevant economic domain, validating further analysis of this system.
        First, let us consider the case in which J11 > 0 and J21 > 0. This configuration implies
a downward-sloping straight line for ṁA = 0 and an upward-sloping one for Ṫ = 0. In this
scenario, the determinant of the Jacobian matrix (J11 J22 − J21 J12 ) is negative, suggesting that the
equilibrium is a saddle point, so that changes of any kind are amplified. Figure (1) illustrates this
case.
        In this case, if for example the equilibrium solution shifts to a point with a higher
market share of firm A, this leads to a deepening of the technology gap. Firm A possibly would
have considerable advantages in its overall innovative and learning process against firm B, that
would fall behind in the technological race. However, by reaching a certain magnitude of the
technological gap, this advantage starts to get slimmer, because firm B eventually develops
strategies to imitate firm A. From that moment on, firm B starts the catching up process, and the
gap decreases again, while firm A’s market share increases. A vicious cycle is formed, which in
this case would lead to a continuous concentration of the market.
        Another possible configuration of this duopoly is characterized by J11 < 0 and J21 < 0.
This means that, on the contrary of the previous case, the ṁA = 0 line is upward-sloping, while
the Ṫ = 0 line is downward-sloping. In this case, the determinant of the Jacobian matrix is
positive, but the matrix’s trace (J11 + J22 ) is negative, characterizing a stable equilibrium, as
depicted in Figure (2).
        The stability refers to the following dynamics: if again the equilibrium solution shifts to a
point in the area A of Figure (2), an increase in market share of firm A leads to a decrease in the
technology gap, because this firm now has less incentives to incorporate innovations. However,
the smaller technology gap means that firm B is catching up, which would decrease firm A’s
market share again, reversing its incentives to innovate. In phase C, the technology gap starts to
grow again, and with it, firm A’s market share. The process continues until the equilibrium meA
and T e is reached again.
        One interesting featured of this industry is that a higher demand, as represented by an
increase in the rate ḡ, makes the stable case more likely. A higher demand could then decrease
the intensity of the competition, allowing the sector to remain duopolistic. In the opposite case,
                                                                                                  11




                             Figure 2 – Stable loci ṁA = 0 and Ṫ = 0

when demand is lower, this model shows that the competition tends to be unstable and the market
tends to rapidly become extremely concentrated with the leader, firm A.

3.2   Comparative statics of a technology shock
         We can then analyze the effect of an exogenous shock in the autonomous component of
technological progress. This exogenous technology shock is a type of technical change that is
independent from the firms’ resources. This could imply a technological innovation coming from
the public sector, most likely from university R&D. In this case, however, firm A is able absorb it
better than firm B, or even only firm A has the capabilities to absorb it at all. Another possibility
would be an organizational innovation implemented by firm A, that did not have costs for this
firm and improved, for example, its branding.
         In terms of the model, this can be seen as a shock in the parameter α0 , which represents the
exogenously determined level of firm A’s technological content relative to firm B’s technological
content. A shock in this parameter affects both the intercept and the slope of both straight lines
ṁA = 0 and Ṫ = 0 given by the linear approximation. However, the direction and the magnitude
of these possible variations are ambiguous. They depend on the values of the parameters, which
reflect different possibilities of stability as discussed above.
         In the unstable case, the most likely situation is the one where both straight lines move
upwards, with the variation on their slopes as seen in Figure (3). In this case, an exogenous
increase in the technological progress leads the dynamics of this system to start from point D,
instead of C, with a higher technology gap and a higher market share of firm A. The instability
of this dynamics suggests that this exogenous shock gives way to firm A to expand its advantage
in the technology race faster, eventually being able to cast firm B completely out of the market.
         This same shock could have different effects in the case where the initial equilibrium point
is a stable one. In this scenario, while the ṁA = 0 line becomes steeper and shifts downwards,
the opposite happens for the Ṫ = 0 line, that shifts upwards and becomes flatter. However, the
ambiguity of the magnitude of these variations makes two cases possible. In both cases, the
exogenous shock increases the market share of firm A. But this change could be accompanied by
a higher or lower technological gap. Figures (4) and (5) illustrate these two possibilities. The
first case, outlined in Figure (4), shows how firm A incorporates either a higher technological
                                                                                                   12




              Figure 3 – Effects of an exogenous innovation shock - unstable case


content in its production or a more efficient technique of production, that increases the quality
of the product. And the greater quality confers to it larger market power. This is reflected in an
increase in market share, with the system reaching a new equilibrium at point D. The second
case is depicted in Figure (5). In this configuration, firm B could actually have seized the shock
in some way, by its own access or by imitations, lowering the technology gap. However, this
catching-up did not succeed so well as to make firm B reach to the competitive spot of firm A.
Firm A, for instance, could have a branding that is hard to undermine. But we could imagine that
future shocks, or even firm B’s own spending with innovation could even level the market.
         The second situation, although mathematically possible, is not so theoretically intuitive as
the fist one. Both results agree with most of the theoretical work on innovation and competition
that suggests the dynamic of market concentration with the leader firm after a technology shock
as the typical one in a capitalist economy. Despite that, it is interesting to notice how this analytic
formulation gives scope to different competition configurations following a technology shock.
Both firms could obtain some gain from this shock, but the leader continues to appropriate it
better.

4     Effects of Technological Change in the Long-Run: Growth and Market Concentration

4.1    Growth instability and market dominance
        The previously described exogenous technological shock would also have long-run
consequences for the duopoly system. Schumpeter (1942)’s idea of creative destruction suggests
that innovation would change the dynamics of the firm, increasing its rate of growth. However,
it would also change the scenario of the competition in this sector in the long-run, what would
have another round of effects over technology, competition and growth.
        In the long run, the rate of growth of the firms is subject to innovation related changes.
The effect of the technological shock on the growth of firms is given by how changes in the
technology gap and the market shares affect this rate. Formally, the total magnitudes of these
                                                                                               13




             Figure 4 – Effects of an exogenous innovation shock - first stable case




           Figure 5 – Effects of an exogenous innovation shock - second stable case


changes are given by the following total derivatives:

                                       ∂ gA       ∂ gA
                                 ∆gA =      ∆T +       ∆mA                                    (27)
                                       ∂T        ∂ mA
                                      ∂ gB       ∂ gB
                                ∆gB =      ∆T +       ∆mA ,                                   (28)
                                      ∂T        ∂ mA
so that the net change of this result depends on the values and signs of the parameters of the
various expressions describing this industry, as implied by the partial derivatives. But the impact
on growth also depends on the magnitudes of the changes in the technology gap and the market
share of firm A. Therefore, the effect of innovation on growth could be ambiguous in this model.
        After an exogenous technological shock, a shock in the parameter α0 , there will be a
disequilibrium between the growth rates of both firms in the long run. In this moment, when the
market share of firm A increases, most likely ∆gA > ∆gB . If that is the case, innovation will lead
                                                                                                 14




                    Figure 6 – Long-run dynamics of the firms’ growth rates


to a greater growth rate of firm A, which in turn leads to a higher technological gap and market
share with this firm.
        In the unstable case, firm A could keep growing more than firm B, concentrating the
market. This concentration, in turn, could lead to stagnation. When firm A dominates the market
by maintaining gA > gB , if it keeps growing, at one point we will have gA > ḡ, where ḡ represents
the rate of growth of the demand as specified in equation (8. Firm A will then change its strategy
towards innovation, since the demand constraint will prevent it to increase its growth rate further.
Therefore, demand could impose a restriction on growth leading to stagnation.
        From the system of differential equations (19) and (21, however, when we have medium-
run stability, an increase in gA will require that mA and T adjust in order to keep ṁA = 0. Thus,
eventually the growth rates equalize again, as illustrated in figure (6). After the shock, the growth
rate of firm A, gA , increases to g0A . If demand continues to grow at a constant rate, the greater
growth rate of firm A implies firm B growing at a smaller rate. Hence, as the growth rate of firm
A increases, the growth rate of firm B, gB , necessarily decreases to g0B . But since the system
tends to an equilibrium, it eventually shifts to a new equilibrium combination of T and mA that
equalizes both growth rates again. To reach this new point, the growth rate of firm A decreases,
while the one of firm B increases, as the latter is able to catch up.

4.2   Maintaining the duopoly market configuration
         From now on, let us focus on the stable case when after a technology shock favoring firm
A, it grows faster temporarily and obtains a higher market share, also increasing the technology
gap. This course goes accordingly to the predictions of the Schumpeterian growth theory, from a
mainstream branch (AGHION; AKCIGIT; HOWITT, 2014), where the rate of creative destruction
and the growth rate are positively correlated. But it also agrees with some of the predictions of
the neo-Schumpeterian evolutionary theory, as in the seminal work of Nelson & Winter (1982).
In their model, the authors incorporate the idea that competition is a dynamic game, so that firm’s
growth will reflect the pattern of winner/loser in a specific game. Applying this reasoning to our
model, if firm A has a greater technological advantage than firm B, it "wins" by obtaining a larger
share of the market, a higher growth rate, and also by increasing the technology gap between its
competitor. Nelson & Winter (1982) also predict that competition leads to market concentration,
                                                                                                 15


but they argue that this process could be avoided. In the scope of our model, knowing that firm A
has a chance to dominate a larger share of the market, it is relevant to think about what strategies
firm B could employ in order to survive and the possible effects of public policy.
        Since in this model competition between the firms is based on technological advantages,
since they are not competing over price, the evident course for firm B to take is related to
catching up strategies, like imitation. The strategy of firm B is then mainly focused on lowering
the technology gap, T . In that way, as Metcalfe (1998) argues, if firm B could copy the new
technologies fast enough, no competitive gains would come from innovation, or the almost
monopoly of firm A would last less. Then, firm B would not lose its share of market, even if it is
a smaller one than the leader’s, which in the case continues to be firm A.
        Imitation and catching up have a specific configuration in this model, that allows us to
see how they can be boosted. In terms of the model, in equation (21), which sets the law of
the dynamics of technological change, parameter α2 indicates the amount by which the rate of
technological change decreases with an increase in the level of the gap. A higher absolute value
of α2 would mean a greater decrease in the rate of technological change, thus giving firm B a
greater opportunity to catch up. Therefore, firm B would increase its market share and compete
closer to firm A. This would lead to a more dynamically stable long-run path for this duopoly
market, since the new equilibrium would be less concentrated with the leader.
        A possible change in the value of the catching up parameter α2 relates to internal
procedures of the firms. Firm B strategy of increasing this value, trying to increase its imitation
capacity, relates mainly to learning procedures, like its R&D expenditure and organizational
structure. Therefore, to catch up with firm A, firm B could employ strategies like reverse
engineering, trying to imitate the leader, but also try to close the gap by investing in its own
technical advances.
        This result also refers to possible configurations of public policy that would affect the
dynamics of this industry. Given that patenting policies are important to foster innovation,
since they increase the incentives that firms have to innovate, these policies should consider
the concentration that such an innovation process entails. In this case, antitrust policies should
benefit from a formal analysis of the concentration effect of technological change. The key is to
change the profit incentive of market power, thinking it to be the only way to assure profits that
last. For that, competition should be encouraged as well as innovation. Therefore, technology
related considerations need to be included in order to shape a more parsimonious policy plan.

5   Concluding Remarks

        In this paper we have developed a microeconomic model of a duopolist industry based
on the Post-Keynesian theory of the firm. This model encompasses the dynamic relationship
between market share and relative technical change, and how these factors influence the firms’
growth rates in this general framework. The model implies a negative relation between market
share and firm growth, but a positive one between a relative technological superiority and growth.
        This paper has some theoretical implications. The mathematical analytic formulation
presented is able to convey different scenarios for the industry following an exogenous technol-
ogy shock. Nonetheless, the most intuitive one remains the shock increasing the competitive
advantage of the industry leader, that gains a higher share of the market. Therefore, a deepening
of the technological gap between the two competitors is accompanied by concentration of the
market with the leader. The model also indicates that the effect of this exogenous technology
shock on the firms’ growth rates is ambiguous, but the scenarios considered indicate a tendency
of technical change to favor the growth of the leader firm. However, the long-run leader obtains
                                                                                                 16


only a temporary higher rate of growth, since as the system shifts to a new equilibrium the rates
of growth equalize again.
         Therefore, using the theoretical predictions of post-Keynesian theory, this paper is able to
replicate the concentration consequence that comes even with a broad creative destruction process.
This result reinforces that firms should be aware of this dynamics and be prepared to counteract
it with catching up strategies. But given other malicious effects that market concentration could
entail, policy makers should also interfere with this process through a conscious innovation and
antitrust policy combination.
         These conclusions, however, apply only to this industry and cannot be extrapolated to
the macroeconomic scenery with this formulation. Yet, as macroeconomic models must be
grounded in microeconomic theory, we argue that this model can serve as a basis for future more
comprehensive Post-Keynesian macro models that incorporate changes in the micro competitive
structure. Therefore, on the one hand, further works could rely on some flexibilizations and
extensions of this simple model into the micro setting. Other aspects of firms’ decisions to
innovate can be incorporated and firms’ strategies can be taken as dynamically determined/altered
by changes in the competitive status of the market. On the other hand, the effects of innovation
on competition and firms’ growth, as this model shows, can also be better explored, in order to
analyze how they affect macroeconomic variables, such as the functional income distribution.
Specially given the relative scarcity of the micro discussion in this literature, this attempt could
be already a bridge between Post-Keynesian modelling of micro and macroeconomics.

                                          Bibliography

ABRAMOVITZ, M. Catching up, forging ahead, and falling behind. The Journal of Economic
History, v. 46, n. 2, p. 385–406, 1986.

AGHION, P.; AKCIGIT, U.; HOWITT, P. What do we learn from schumpeterian growth theory?
In: Handbook of Economic Growth. [S.l.]: Elsevier, 2014. v. 2, p. 515–563.

BAIN, J. S. Barriers to New Competition: Their Character and Consequences in Manufacturing
Industries. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1956.

BLUNDELL, R.; GRIFFITH, R.; REENEN, J. V. Market share, market value and innovation in
a panel of british manufacturing firms. The Review of Economic Studies, v. 66, n. 3, p. 529–554,
1999.

DOSI, G. Technical Change and Industrial Transformation: The Theory and an Application to
the Semiconductor Industry. London: Macmillan, 1984.

DOSI, G. Sources, procedures, and microeconomic effects of innovation. Journal of Economic
Literature, v. 26, n. 3, p. 1120–1171, 1988.

DUTT, A. K. Growth, distribution and technological change. Metroeconomica, v. 38, n. 2, p.
113–133, 1986.

DíEZ, F.; DUVAL, R. The rise of corporate market power and its macroeconomic effects.
In: World Economic Outlook: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery. [S.l.]: International
Monetary Fund, 2019. p. 55–76.

EICHNER, A. The Megacorp and Oligopoly: Micro Foundations of Macro Dynamics.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976.
                                                                                            17


FAZZARI, S. M.; MOTT, T. L. The investment theories of kalecki and keynes: an empirical
study of firm data, 1970–1982. Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, v. 9, n. 2, p. 171–187,
1986.

GALBRAITH, J. K. The new industrial state. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1967.

GALBRAITH, J. K. Economics and the Public Purpose. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1973.

GILBERT, R. J.; LIEBERMAN, M. Investment and coordination in oligopolistic industries. The
Rand Journal of Economics, v. 18, n. 1, p. 17–33, 1987.

HAY, D. A.; LIU, G. S. The investment behaviour of firms in an oligopolistic setting. The
Journal of Industrial Economics, v. 46, n. 1, p. 79–99, 1998.

KALDOR, N. Capital accumulation and economic growth. In: LUTZ, F. A.; HAGUE, D. C.
(Ed.). The Theory of Capital. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1961. p. 177–228.

KALDOR, N. Further Essays on Economic Theory. London: Duckworth, 1978.

KALECKI, M. A theorem on technical progress. The Review of Economic Studies, v. 8, n. 3, p.
178–184, 1941.

KALECKI, M. Studies in the Theory of Business Cycles 1933-1939. Oxford: Basil Blackwell,
1969.

KALECKI, M. Selected Essays on the Dynamics of the Capitalist Economy 1933-1970.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971.

KAMIEN, M. I.; SCHWARTZ, N. L. Market structure and innovation: a survey. Journal of
Economic Literature, v. 13, n. 1, p. 1–37, 1975.

LAVOIE, M. Post-Keynesian Economics: New Foundations. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar
Publishing, 2014.

LEE, F. S. Competition, going enterprise, and economic activity. In: MOUDUD, J. K.; BINA,
C.; MASON, P. L. (Ed.). Alternative Theories of Competition: Challenges to the orthodoxy.
Abingdon, Oxon: Routhledge, 2013. cap. 7, p. 160–173.

MCCOMBIE, J. S.; THIRLWALL, A. Economic Growth and the Balance-of-Payments
Constraint. London: Macmillan, 1994.

METCALFE, J. S. Evolutionary Economics and Creative Destruction. London: Routhledge,
1998.

METCALFE, J. S. Schumpeterian competition. In: MOUDUD, J. K.; BINA, C.; MASON, P. L.
(Ed.). Alternative Theories of Competition: Challenges to the orthodoxy. Abingdon, Oxon:
Routhledge, 2013. cap. 5, p. 111–126.

NELSON, R. R.; WINTER, S. G. An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 1982.

PALLEY, T. I. Growth theory in a keynesian mode: some keynesian foundations for new
endogenous growth theory. Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, v. 19, n. 1, p. 113–135, 1996.
                                                                                          18


POSSAS, M. L. Economia evolucionária neo-schumpeteriana: elementos para uma integração
micro-macrodinâmica. Estudos Avançados, v. 22, n. 63, p. 281–305, 2008.

POSSAS, M. L. et al. Um modelo evolucionário setorial. Revista Brasileira de Economia, v. 55,
n. 3, p. 333–377, 2001.

ROBINSON, J. The Accumulation of Capital. London: Macmillan, 1956.

ROBINSON, J. Essays in the Theory of Economic Growth. London: Macmillan, 1962.

SCHUMPETER, J. A. The Theory of Economic Development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1934.

SCHUMPETER, J. A. Socialism, Capitalism and Democracy. New York: Harper, 1942.

STEINDL, J. Maturity and Stagnation in American Capitalism. Oxford: Blackwell, 1952.

STIGLITZ, J. Market Concentration Is Threatening the US Economy. 2019. Ac-
cessed 01-July-2019. Disponível em: <https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/
united-states-economy-rising-market-power-by-joseph-e-stiglitz-2019-03>.

STOCKHAMMER, E. Shareholder value orientation and the investment-profit puzzle. Journal
of Post Keynesian Economics, v. 28, n. 2, p. 193–215, 2005.

SYLOS-LABINI, P. Oligopoly and Technical Progress. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1962.

SYLOS-LABINI, P. La theorie des prix en regime d’oligopole et la theorie du developpement.
Revue d’economie politique, p. 244–272, 1971.

WOOD, A. A Theory of Profits. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975.
