Área 6 - Crescimento, Desenvolvimento Econômico e Instituições


       Conflicting-claims and labour market concerns in a Supermultiplier model

                                                                                                            Lı́dia Brochier?


Abstract

We propose to introduce inflation via conflicting-claims between workers and firms, an endogenous labour productivity regime
à la Kaldor-Verdoorn and an explicit account for the labour market into a Supermultiplier Stock-Flow Consistent (SFC) model
that combines an endogenous autonomous expenditure component with the induced investment behaviour of firms. The aim of
the paper is to analyse the dynamics of real wage and productivity growth and the impacts on the long run growth trend, income
shares and the employment rate, following: (i) changes in the propensity to consume (paradox of thrift) for different initial
workers’ and firms’ income target sensitivities to changes in economic activity; (ii) changes in the bargaining power of workers
and firms under different initial institutional conditions: namely, a more unionised economy and a more competitive one. As a
secondary goal, we also compare these results with those obtained for an endogenous autonomous expenditure supermultiplier
model with exogenous income distribution and only demand side concerns. The results suggest that the higher growth rate that
follows the increase in the propensity to consume will be accompanied by higher inflation and employment rates in the long run.
In addition to this, the higher the sensitivity of workers’ income target to changes in the employment rate in comparison to firms’
income target sensitivity to changes in economic activity and the more unionised the economy, the more likely a higher growth
rate will be associated with a higher wage share in the long run.
Keywords: Super-multiplier; autonomous expenditures; conflicting-claims; labour market; growth theories.
JEL classification codes: B59, E11, E12, E25, O41.



Resumo

Esse artigo introduz a abordagem da inflação via conflito distributivo entre trabalhadores e firmas, um regime de produtividade do
trabalho à la Kaldor-Verdoorn e o mercado de trabalho num modelo stock-flow consistent (SFC) que combina um componente de
gasto autônomo endógeno com o investimento induzido das firmas. O objetivo do artigo é analisar a dinâmica do crescimento dos
salários reais e da produtividade e os impactos sobre a trajetória de crescimento de longo prazo, sobre a distribuição funcional
da renda e sobre o emprego, a partir de: (i) mudanças na propensão a consumir (paradoxo da poupança) para sensibilidades
diferentes das metas de renda de trabalhadores e firmas a mudanças na atividade econômica; (ii) mudanças no poder de barganha
de trabalhadores e firmas a partir de condições institucionais distintas: isto é, uma economia mais sindicalizada e uma economia
mais competitiva. Como objetivo secundário, os resultados obtidos são comparados com aqueles obtidos para um modelo super-
multiplicador com gastos autônomos endógenos, distribuição de renda exógena e que considera apenas o lado da demanda. Os
resultados sugerem que uma taxa de crescimento mais elevada que se segue a um aumento na propensão a consumir será acom-
panhada por taxas de inflação e de emprego mais elevadas no longo prazo. Além disso, quanto maior a sensibilidade da meta de
renda dos trabalhadores a mudanças na taxa de emprego em relação à sensibilidade da meta de renda das firmas a mudanças na
atividade econômica e quanto mais sindicalizada for a economia, maior a probabilidade de que uma taxa de crescimento mais
elevada estará associada a parcelas mais elevadas dos salários na renda no longo prazo.
Palavras-chave: Supermultiplicador; gastos autônomos; conflito distributivo; mercado de trabalho; teorias de cresci-
mento.

   ?
    Postdoctoral Research Fellow in Economics at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. E-mail address: lidia-
brochier@gmail.com




                                                                 1
1     Introduction
         Since the 1970s, US and continental Europe have experienced a lower GDP growth followed by a lower trend
of labour productivity growth. This tendency is more accentuated in European countries, while the US had some
periods of recovery (Hein and Tarassow, 2009) – yet interrupted by the financial crisis of 2007-08. Further exploring
this relation, some studies attribute the weakness of labour productivity growth to the lower pace of investment,
indicating that the fall in labour productivity is an endogenous response to the contraction in economic activity brought
about by the shortfall of aggregate demand (Hein and Tarassow, 2009; Reifschneider et al., 2015; Bivens, 2017).
         At the same time, real wage growth has lagged behind labour productivity growth in these economies
(Naastepad, 2006; Storm and Naastepad, 2012; Lazonick, 2014; Bivens, 2017; Ciarli et al., 2018), certainly adding
to the observed decline of the labour share over GDP during this period (Hein and Tarassow, 2009; Karabarbounis
and Neiman, 2013). According to Naastepad (2006), that might indicate that wage moderation policies have been
successful in increasing profit rates, but not in improving the macroeconomic performance of OECD countries, that
fell short of Golden Age standards from the 1980s onwards.
        In what concerns the relation between wages and unemployment, there is some empirical evidence suggesting
an inverse relation (Blanchflower and Oswald, 1994; Flaschel et al., 2007; Stirati, 2016; Stirati and Meloni, 2018).
This evidence seems to be more marked for the wage curve, which establishes an inverse relation between unemploy-
ment and real wages (instead of nominal wages as in the original Phillips curve) (Dosi et al., 2017).
         These stylized facts provide enough motivation to further explore the relations of output, real wages, produc-
tivity and employment. Certainly the heterodox literature has shown some concern in discussing these issues both
on empirical and theoretical grounds. Yet more often than not, a productivity regime is absent of theoretical growth
models and an explicit account of the labour market is also missing (Ryoo and Skott, 2008, 2013a; Skott, 2017).
          Aware of this, some authors concentrated efforts in analysing the conflicting-claims approach to inflation
(Nah and Lavoie, 2017; Cassetti, 2017) and the effects of growth on labour productivity and on unemployment under
the Supemultiplier approach (Nah and Lavoie, 2016; Fazzari et al., 2017; Caminati and Sordi, 2017; Allain, 2018;
Palley, 2018). In the latter, exogenous non-capacity creating autonomous expenditures lead growth while capacity
utilization converges towards the normal rate due to firms’ induced investment behaviour in the long run (Allain,
2015; Freitas and Serrano, 2015; Lavoie, 2016).
        For the most part, these very interesting papers do not tackle these issues simultaneously and it is fair to
say they do not aim at doing so. However, for the purpose of analysing the endogenous interactions among growth,
income distribution and employment, it seems appropriate to address them altogether. Based on this, we propose to
introduce inflation via conflicting-claims between workers and firms, an endogenous labour productivity regime à la
Kaldor-Verdoorn and an explicit account for the labour market into a Supermultiplier Stock-Flow Consistent (SFC)
model that combines an endogenous autonomous expenditure component with the induced investment behaviour of
firms.
         We adopt the supermultiplier closure to deal with these interactions relying on its capacity of reproducing
well-know stylized facts. According to empirical studies departing from different theoretical strands, aggregate de-
mand is found to have persistent effects on employment and capital accumulation (Rowthorn, 1995; Haltmaier, 2012;
Ball, 2014; Martin et al., 2015; Fatas and Summers, 2016; Blanchard and Leigh, 2013; Girardi et al., 2017). Some
recent papers also find that an increase in autonomous expenditures – consumption, exports, government expenditures
or residential investment – induces a permanent increase in the GDP and in the investment-output ratio not only for the
US case, but also for some European and OECD countries (Wen, 2007; Girardi and Pariboni, 2016; Stirati and Meloni,
2018). Besides that, the accelerator effect on business investment can be considered as a robust finding (Girardi and
Pariboni, 2016; Girardi et al., 2017; Bivens, 2017). The induced nature of business investment, the leading role of
autonomous expenditures in explaining growth (or changes in GDP levels) and the positive correlation between GDP
levels and investment-to-GDP ratios are all essential features of supermultiplier models.
        In turn, the SFC methodology allows us to take into account the role finance can play in a growing econ-
omy, since the channels through which the financial stocks, mainly financial wealth in this case, impact the capital
accumulation and vice-versa can be parsimoniously introduced. For this very same reason, it serves the purpose of
making autonomous expenditures partially endogenous (and, thus, the growth rate) without losing track of its financial

                                                           2
determinants.
         That said, the aim of the paper is to analyse the dynamics of real wage and productivity growth and the impacts
on the long run growth trend, income shares and employment rate, following: (i) changes in the propensity to consume
(paradox of thrift) for different initial workers’ and firms’ income target sensitivities to changes in economic activity;
(ii) changes in the bargaining power of workers and firms under different initial institutional conditions: namely, a
more unionised economy and a more competitive one. As a secondary goal, we also compare these results with those
obtained for an endogenous autonomous expenditure supermultiplier model with exogenous income distribution and
only demand side concerns.
         The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the Supermultiplier growth literature
on conflicting-claims, labour productivity and employment in order to better place the discussion proposed by the
paper and to make it clear how it can further contribute to this literature. In section 3 we present the model, focusing
on the extensions needed to address inflation via conflicting-claims, labour productivity and employment. In what
follows, the experiments based on numerical simulations are carried out (section 4). At last, the final remarks (section
5) sum up the main findings of the experiments and the contributions of the paper.



2       Conflicting-claims, labour productivity and employment in Supermul-
        tiplier models
         There have been some efforts in the Supermultiplier literature to include conflicting-claims inflation and to
tackle endogenous technical progress, although not simultaneously for most of the cases. Addressing one of the
main criticisms usually directed towards neo-Kaleckian models (Ryoo and Skott, 2008; Skott, 2010; Ryoo and Skott,
2013b; Skott, 2017), that is, the absence of the labour market1 , some of these models also discuss the determinants of
the employment rate and allow for an endogenous adjustment of the natural rate of growth to the exogenous growth
rate of autonomous expenditures.
         Regarding the conflicting-claims approach to inflation in this framework, it has been discussed (as far as we
are aware) by Nah and Lavoie (2017) and Cassetti (2017). Nah and Lavoie (2017) integrate a conflicting-theory of
inflation into the supermultiplier model developed in Lavoie (2016), in which workers’ real wage target is a positive
function of the employment growth rate and firms’ profit target is exogenously determined. As productivity growth is
ruled out of the model, an stable wage share in the long run requires that nominal wages and price inflation grow at
the same rate.
         In turn, Cassetti (2017) analyses the process of cost-induced inflation in a Supermultiplier SFC model, in
which government expenditures lead growth. In this case, both workers and firms income claims are a positive
function of the higher level of activity as represented by the gap between actual and normal capacity utilization rates.
The extent to which a higher level of activity translates into a higher rate of price inflation and nominal wages growth
represents respectively firms and workers bargaining power positions. The author emphasizes just the case called
Radical, in which workers’ bargaining power is higher than firms’ bargaining power, so that real wages increase
with the higher level of capacity utilization. It is worth to highlight that wage and profit shares are path dependent
in Cassetti (2017)’s model, so that different levels of wage share and inflation are consistent with the equilibrium
position in which capacity utilization is at the normal rate.
        An increase in the growth rate of autonomous expenditures will have a positive effect on the employment rate
but no permanent effect on income distribution in Nah and Lavoie (2017). The initial boost to demand is followed by
an increasing growth rate of employment, that increases workers’ bargaining power and, temporarily, raises the wage
share. However, the rise in the active population growth (that endogenously reacts to an increasing employment rate)
reduces the employment rate, weakening workers’ bargaining power and compensating for the initial effect on wages.
         As for Cassetti (2017), in the Radical regime, a higher pace of increase in government spending will be asso-
    1
     Usually neo-Kaleckian models assume that labour supply is infinitely elastic so that increases in demand can always be ac-
commodated by supply through higher employment levels (Ryoo and Skott, 2008) – both for developing and developed countries,
as the latter can count on a larger inflow of immigrants for instance.


                                                              3
ciated with a redistribution of income towards wage earners due to the higher increase in wage inflation in comparison
to price inflation following the expansion of government expenditures. Since autonomous expenditures are exogenous
in both models, changes in the bargaining power of workers or firms will only have temporary effects on the accu-
mulation rate. Besides that, we notice that in both cases the interactions with labour productivity are not analysed, as
income distribution has no effect on labour productivity (nor indirectly through output) – since it is either absent (Nah
and Lavoie, 2017) or exogenous(Cassetti, 2017).
         Symmetrically those Supermultiplier models that extend the framework to deal with an endogenous labour
productivity regime take income distribution as exogenously given – real wages are implicitly assumed to grow in line
with labour productivity. Labour productivity growth in these models, in addition to an exogenous component, will
depend positively on the capital accumulation rate or on the output growth rate (Nah and Lavoie, 2016; Fazzari et al.,
2017; Palley, 2018), following the Kaldor-Verdoorn law, and in some instances also on the labour market conditions
as proxied by the unemployment rate (Fazzari et al., 2017; Palley, 2018). Since the capital accumulation rate will
converge towards the autonomous expenditure growth rate in the long run, labour productivity growth will also depend
on this exogenous growth rate (Nah and Lavoie, 2016; Fazzari et al., 2017; Palley, 2018). Accordingly, changes in
income distribution or in the propensity to save will have only a temporary positive effect on labour productivity
through the Kaldor-Verdoorn component; and changes in the exogenous component of productivity growth will have
only a transitory effect on the capital accumulation rate.2 This last result is also in line with Cesaratto et al. (2003),
where technical progress also temporarily affects the capital accumulation rate through the propensity to invest and
the depreciation rate.
        However, the effect of a shock to the exogenous component of labour productivity growth will be permanent
on the employment rate. Considering a Leontief production function with fixed technology coefficients (the case of
the considered papers), for a given autonomous expenditure growth rate, a higher labour productivity growth means a
lower labour demand to produce the same amount of output and thus the employment rate falls. As for the effect of
an increase in the autonomous expenditures growth rate on the employment rate, it will be positive for all the models,
provided the elasticity of labour productivity (and labour supply) to output is lower than the unity.
        When dealing with the long run dynamics, it is also important to take into account the growth rate of labour
supply (or active population), since for a given labour supply (active population) a divergence between the autonomous
component and labour productivity growth rates would mean an ever growing or decreasing employment rate. Nah
and Lavoie (2016) leave this issue for future work while Nah and Lavoie (2017) and Fazzari et al. (2017) make active
population (or labour supply) growth a function of the (un) employment rate, which allows for the convergence of
the natural rate of growth towards the autonomous expenditure trend and, consequently, for the stabilization of the
employment rate.3 In Palley (2018), labour productivity growth itself is the adjustment variable that makes the natural
growth rate converge towards the autonomous expenditure growth in the long run, as labour supply also grows at an
exogenously given rate.
         At last, in Allain (2018), the autonomous expenditure component – subsistence consumption arising from the
redistribution of wages in a kind of unemployed benefits system – grows at the population rate. This means that the
natural rate of growth and the autonomous growth rate are the same in the long run, as labour productivity is absent.
Differently from previous papers, in Allain (2018)’s model, a temporary increases in the output growth rate due to
a lower profit share or propensity to save will have a permanent effect on the employment rate. This happens since
labour demand will grow temporarily at a faster pace (with output) while the population growth rate remains constant,
increasing the employment rate.
         In a somewhat different light, the work by Caminati and Sordi (2017) is also noteworthy since it builds
a Supermultiplier model in which autonomous expenditures – investment in R&D and consumption which grows in
line with productivity – grow endogenously. In their model, a redistribution of income towards wages has a permanent
effect on the long run growth rate – in line with the results of Brochier and Macedo e Silva (2018) – and, thus, also on
   2
     In Nah and Lavoie (2016) an increase in the exogenous component of labour productivity has a temporary positive effect
on the capital accumulation, since productivity enters the investment function as a shift parameter, while this effect is absent in
Fazzari et al. (2017) and Palley (2018).
   3
     In Fazzari et al. (2017), the natural rate of growth is composed by the rate of growth of labour productivity and labour
supply while in Nah and Lavoie (2017) since labour productivity is absent, it its composed only by the rate of growth of active
population.


                                                                4
the employment rate.
         We notice that the Supermultiplier models that deal with the conflicting-claims approach to inflation and, thus,
make income distribution endogenous usually take labour productivity as exogenous. This eliminates the channels
through which income distribution could impact labour productivity. On the other hand, the papers that add an
endogenous labour productivity regime take income distribution as exogenous. The latter assumption, in turn, blocks
the feedbacks that labour productivity could have on income distribution, as real wage growth could temporarily
diverge from labour productivity growth.
         Besides that, changes in income distribution, in the marginal propensity to save and in the labour productivity
growth rate have only temporary effects on growth. The assumption of an exogenous autonomous expenditure growth
rate also means, for most cases, that changes in the above mentioned variables will also have a transitory impact on the
employment rate, which depends also on this autonomous expenditure growth rate. With the exceptions of Caminati
and Sordi (2017), in which the growth of the autonomous component variable is endogenous; and of Allain (2018),
in which the natural rate of growth is exogenous and, thus, a temporary increase in the growth rate has a permanent
effect on the employment rate.
         All these papers provide very useful and interesting insights. Yet for the purpose of analysing the interactions
of growth, income distribution and employment, it would be best to consider the implications of having endogenous
interactions among these variables. This is what we propose in the next sections.



3       Framework of the model
         Motivated by the issues raised in sections 1 and 2, we extend the Supermultiplier Stock-Flow Consistent
(SFC) model built in Brochier and Macedo e Silva (2018), in which autonomous expenditures are endogenous (namely
consumption out of household wealth), to account for both inflation via conflicting-claims between workers and firms,
a labour productivity growth regime and the employment determinants.
        In this section we describe the general behaviour of the institutional sectors of the economy. Yet in order to
be parsimonious, we present just the equations that make the model in Brochier and Macedo e Silva (2018) different
from other recent Supermultiplier models – such as Freitas and Serrano (2015); Lavoie (2016); Allain (2015) – and
the equations concerning the inclusion of the inflation dynamics and of the supply side (labour market and labour
productivity regime equations).4
         The model deals with a pure credit closed economy in which inflation is determined by the conflict between
workers’ and firms’ income aspirations. Banks lend to firms and receive deposits from households. As banks do not
profit, deposits earn the same interest rate of loans granted to firms. Firms sell equities to households and are not
credit constrained, for banks grant all demand for loans.
         Government issues bills to finances its expenditures which are not covered by household taxation. These bills
will be held by households. We define government expenditures in real terms, so that they are a fraction of real output
in the beginning of the period. Besides that, the monetary authority tries to keep a constant real interest rate on bills,
setting a real interest rate target towards which the real interest rate adjusts, as in Godley and Lavoie (2007).
          Households earn wages and financial income accruing from their held assets. The desired proportion of
wealth allocated in equities will depend on the comparison of the expected rate of return of this asset with the real
interest rate at the beginning of the period. This will impact equity prices, since equity supply is determined by firms.
Real household consumption expenditure comprises a fraction (α2 ) of real household wealth at the beginning of the
period and a fraction of after-tax real wages (α1 ) (equation 1). Similar consumption functions can be found in other
post-Keynesian models, as in Dos Santos and Zezza (2008).
                                                                WB
                                            c = α1 .(1 − τ ).      + α2 .vh−1                                            (1)
                                                                 p
    4
   For the balance sheet and the transactions and flow of funds matrices see Appendix A and for the full set of equations see
Appendix B.



                                                             5
         Usually in the supermultiplier approach, autonomous expenditures – defined as those expenditures that cannot
be directly deduced from the circular flow of income and that are not related to the current level of income coming from
firms’ production decisions (Freitas and Serrano, 2015) – grow at an exogenously given rate. This assumption rules
out the paradox of thrift and the paradox of costs in terms of growth effects. Income distribution and the propensities
to spend will have only transitory effects on growth rates (Lavoie, 2016).
         In this model, since autonomous consumption is partially endogenous (and the other demand components
are induced by income), the paradoxes of thrift and of costs are allowed to emerge in terms of growth effects. As a
consequence, a change in income distribution or in the propensities to spend can affect the long run growth rate of the
economy. This result is attained in a framework that keeps the supermultiplier approach essentials – a non-capacity
creating autonomous expenditure and the induced business investment with the adjustment of the capacity utilization
towards the normal rate (Brochier and Macedo e Silva, 2018).
         That said, Firms’ investment behaviour is based on the flexible accelerator principle. Aggregate investment
of firms (id) is induced by output (equation 2) and the marginal propensity to invest (h) will endogenously react to
the discrepancies between the actual (u) and the normal utilization rate (un ), according to the sensitivity parameter γ
(equation 3) (Freitas and Serrano, 2015; Lavoie, 2016; Allain, 2015). We further assume that if the utilization rate is
inside a certain range (χ), firms will want to keep their investment strategy unchanged, not triggering changes in the
propensity to invest, as in Pedrosa and Macedo e Silva (2014).5

                                                          id = h.y                                                        (2)
                                            (
                                             h−1 .γ.(u − un ), if |u − un |> χ
                                       ∆h =                                                                               (3)
                                             0,                otherwise
Moving to firms financing decisions, we suppose they finance their investment through retained earnings, equity
issuance and bank loans, which clear firms’ demand for funds. Equities are issued as a fixed proportion of the real
capital stock at beginning of the period. Besides that, firms retain a fraction of their profits net of interest on loans and
distribute the rest of it to households in the form of dividends.
         After presenting the basic framework of the model, we can specify the extensions needed in order to analyse
the interactions of growth, employment and income distribution.


3.1    Labour market

         Production decisions by firms also entail a demand for labour (nd ), which depends on both real output (y)
and labour productivity (β). We assume that all labour demand is satisfied – as long as the economy is below full
employment – and thus labour demand also defines the actual employment level (n) (equation 4). The employment
rate is given by the employed population divided by the labour supply (ns ) (equation 5). Since we are dealing with
a long run growth model, we suppose that labour supply growth will depend on a component θ0 , which captures
exogenous demographic movements, and to some extent (θ1 ) on the employment rate, since changes in economic
activity can affect the rate of labour force participation (equation 6). This labour supply growth function is similar to
that proposed by Fazzari et al. (2017).6
                                                                   y
                                                        n = nd =                                                      (4)
                                                                   β
                                                              n−1
                                                          e= s                                                        (5)
                                                              n−1
                                                     gns = θ0 + θ1 e−1                                                    (6)
   5
    For a justification for such a band see Hein et al. (2012) and Dutt (2011).
   6
    If we were not to include a rule for labour supply growth in the model, the employment rate would only be constant if we
assumed that output and labour productivity would grow at the same rate in the long run, which does not seem to be a realistic
assumption looking at the data for these historical series.




                                                              6
3.2     Labour productivity growth regime
         We add to the model an endogenous labour productivity regime, which takes into account the Kaldor-
Verdoorn law, broadly researched in the post-Keynesian empirical literature.7 According to the Kaldor-Verdoorn
law (Kaldor, 1966), labour productivity growth is positively affected by output or capital accumulation growth rate.
This relation could be explained by the increasing returns to scale that can originate from a demand expansion (new
markets), leading to a more intense process of mechanization and rationalization and, thus, positively contributing
to technical progress and labour productivity growth (Kaldor, 1966; Boyer and Petit, 1991; McCombie et al., 2002;
Storm and Naastepad, 2012). Besides that, it is also more likely that improvements and innovations will be introduced
in the production process when new investments are made (Kaldor, 1957; Lavoie, 2014).
        Along these lines, labour productivity growth (β̂) depends on an exogenous component (η0 ) and on a compo-
nent which measures the output growth effect on labour productivity, being η1 the Kaldor-Verdoorn (K-V) coefficient
(equations 7 and 8).8


                                                     β = β−1 .(1 + β̂−1 )                                                    (7)
                                                      β̂ = η0 + η1 .gy−1                                                     (8)

         It is worth noting that we are assuming a Leontief-type production function with fixed coefficients technology:
                                                                     
                                                              k
                                                   y = min      , β.n                                                (9)
                                                              v

Consequently, if demand exceeds supply, output will be restrained by supply. In our model, since we are assuming that
firms attain their planned capacity utilization rate in the long run and that they keep spare capacity to meet unexpected
demand changes, capital supply will not impose a restraint to production. It is more likely that labour supply will
restrain production first.9
         Once we included the employment rate determinants and the labour productivity regime, we have completed
the representation of the supply side in the model. There still remains to specify how conflict inflation unfolds.


3.3     Conflicting-claims inflation
         The conflicting-claims approach to inflation is based on the idea that income shares demanded by workers
and firms tend to be inconsistent with each other and, as a result of the “aspirational gap” (or real wage resistance),
inflation arises. Income claims are neither fully nor automatically satisfied. On the one hand, labour unions negotiate
increases in the nominal wage based on the gap between the real wage target and the actual real wage and on the
previous period inflation rate (indexation). On the other hand, firms try to compensate for higher labour costs by
increasing prices based on the discrepancy between their desired profit margin and the actual profit margin, giving
rise to a wage-price spiral. Wage and profit targets can be exogenous or endogenous. In the latter, they take into
account the effect of real economic variables (Lavoie, 2014).
        In the post-Keynesian literature, regarding the determinants of real wage (or wage share) target, there is a
broad consensus that it should be a positive function of the employment rate or the growth rate of the employment
rate (Dutt, 2002; Lima, 2005; Cassetti, 2003, 2012; Lavoie, 2014; Nah and Lavoie, 2017). Following Cassetti (2003),
   7
      See, for instance, Dixon and Thirlwall (1975); McCombie et al. (2002); Angeriz et al. (2008); Hein and Tarassow (2009);
Hartwig (2013); McCombie and Spreafico (2016); Magacho and McCombie (2017); Tridico and Pariboni (2018); Deleidi et al.
(2018).
    8
      Whether we write labour productivity growth as a function of output or the capital stock does not affect qualitatively the
results, since business investment is fully induced by output in the model.
    9
      Even if labour supply is partially endogenous and adjusts to the employment rate, if the boost to demand is too strong,
nothing guarantees that the economy will not reach full employment of labour. In that case, there could operate a mechanism of
the Cambridge type, in which excess demand would cause accelerating inflation. Yet, before that, a restrictive fiscal or monetary
policy would probably be triggered.


                                                               7
we define real wage aspirations in terms of the wage share, so that whenever the employment rate is increasing
                                                T ) is also increasing (decreasing). ξ represents the wage share target
(decreasing) (ge ) workers’ wage share target (ωw
sensitivity to changes in the employment rate. Wage share aspirations will remain still when the employment rate
stabilizes (equation 10). Notice that changes in the economic environment will permanently affect workers’ income
share aspirations.
                                                    T      T
                                                  ωw  = ωw   −1
                                                                + ξ.ge                                             (10)
The aspirational gap between workers’ wage share target and the actual wage share (ω) will be the main determinant
of the nominal wage growth function and the higher workers’ bargaining power (1 ), the larger will be the effect of
wage aspirations on the nominal wage growth rate (ŵ). Besides that, past inflation will also impact nominal wage
negotiations through an indexation component (2 p̂−1 ) (equations 11 and 12).

                                                W = W−1 .(1 + ŵ−1 )                                              (11)
                                                        T
                                             ŵ = 1 .(ωw − ω) + 2 .p̂−1                                         (12)

        Following Rowthorn (1977), Dutt (1992) and Lima (2005), we assume that firms’ desired mark-up increases
and thus their wage (profit) share (ωfT ) target decreases (increases) as they attempt to take advantage of a booming
economy, as represented by an increase of capacity utilization over the normal level. Contrariwise, when sales are low,
firms will reduce their desired margins (increasing their wage share target) in order to avoid market losses (equation
13). ψ measures the sensitivity of firms’ income target to changes in economic activity.

                                              ωfT = ωfT−1 − ψ.(u − un )                                           (13)

        The rate of inflation (p̂) will thus react to the gap between the actual wage share and the wage share targeted
by firms. Inflation will accelerate as the gap between actual unit costs and desired unit costs increases. The higher
firms bargaining power (φ1 ), the larger the pass through of increased unit costs to the inflation rate. Past nominal
wage inflation will also have an impact on price inflation (φ2 ŵ−1 ) (equations 14 and 15).


                                                 p = p−1 .(1 + p̂−1 )                                             (14)
                                             p̂ = φ1 (ω − ωfT ) + φ2 .ŵ−1                                        (15)

        With a complete structure of the model we can introduce the long run equilibrium conditions.


3.4    Equilibrium conditions
          For the economy to be in a steady growth configuration in the long run – that is, a long run equilibrium
position – all stock and stock-flow ratios have to be constant. This will happen, as was the case for the growth
model in Brochier and Macedo e Silva (2018), when all stocks and the output grow at the same rate and capacity
utilization converges towards the normal utilization rate – or an inertia zone (which implies that the propensity to
invest stabilizes):
                                          g ∗ = gk = gvh = gb = gl = gy                                         (16)
                                                 u∗ = un → ∆h = 0                                                 (17)
Besides these conditions, since income distribution is now partially endogenous and given our assumptions concerning
the production function and the conflicting-claims inflation dynamics, for the wage (and profit) share to attain a
constant equilibrium value, real wage must grow (wp)  ˆ at the same rate as labour productivity (equation 18). This
condition can be stated as follows (since we are dealing with a discrete time framework):

                                           (1 + ŵ)
                                                            ˆ = (1 + β̂)
                                                    = (1 + wp)
                                           (1 + p̂)

                                                        ˆ = β̂
                                                       wp                                                         (18)


                                                          8
        On the labour market, for the employment rate to attain its equilibrium long run value, labour demand (since
we suppose that all labour demand is met as long as the economy is bellow full employment) and labour supply must
grow at the same rate:
                                                     gnd = gns                                                  (19)
In other words, the economy will be growing at its natural rate, as can be seen by calculating gnd from equation 4 and
substituting the result into equation 19:
                                                    gy = β̂ + gns                                                 (20)



4     Simulation experiments
          Given the complex nature of the model, we rely on numerical simulation experiments to evaluate some of
its main features. We run three main simulation experiments (for a summary of the experiments and their results see
table ??) starting from a steady growth state configuration (baseline) built based on the equilibrium conditions stated
in subsection 3.4. The first experiment is an aggregate demand expansion – namely, a positive shock to the propensity
to consume out of after-tax wages (α1 ) –, which we test under different initial conditions regarding workers’ and firms’
aspirational targets sensitivity to changes in the economic environment. The second experiment is a positive shock to
workers’ bargaining power under two different baseline scenarios: (i) a first baseline scenario, which is the same one
for the first and the third experiments, that we call a more competitive regime; (ii) a second baseline scenario in which
the initial gap between workers and firms bargaining power is amplified, illustrating a more unionised economy.


4.1    The paradox of thrift
          A higher propensity to consume out of after-tax wages (α1 ) will raise consumption and, therefore, stimulate
activity, raising output and capacity utilization over the normal capacity rate (figure 1b). In turn, this will trigger firms
reaction, through a higher propensity to invest and, consequently, capital accumulation rate speeds up (figures 1a and
1c). The rise in output growth rate also feedbacks into a faster labour productivity growth rate. Yet, as the spur in
output growth is larger than that in labour productivity growth, firms’ labour demand will grow temporarily at a faster
pace than labour supply, which culminates into a spike in the employment rate (figure 1d).
         On the one hand, workers see themselves in a favourable position – as the employment rate accelerates –
and target a higher wage share, which raises their aspirational gap. This larger aspirational gap will quickly translate
into a faster growth rate of nominal wages. On the other hand, firms will increase (reduce) their profit (wage) share
target as capacity utilization increases and they try to take advantage of the booming economy. As a consequence,
firms’ aspirational gap also increases and leads to a higher inflation rate. Since workers aspirational gap has a stronger
impact on nominal wages than firms’ aspirational gap on inflation, real wages will grow at a faster pace. In the short
run, real wages grow faster than labour productivity expanding the wage share and reinforcing the initial demand
shock (figures 1e and 1f).
        The aspirational gap of workers soon starts to fall – as the increment in the wage share becomes effective –
leading to a slower pace of growth of nominal wages. On the contrary, firms’ aspirational gap keeps on increasing
while capacity utilization is building up, so that the inflation rate pace will surpass that of nominal wages growth rate.
The fall in real wage growth in comparison to labour productivity growth reverses the initial increase in the wage
share. Once the lower wage share reduces the pace of consumption the level of activity slows down. The decline in
output growth will drag labour productivity growth down as well but to a shorter extent than output itself, decreasing
employment growth and, therefore, the employment rate.
         The worsening in labour market conditions will make workers accept a lower wage share target, for they fear
to be unemployed. In turn, this will reduce their aspirational gap – despite the lower wage share – further reducing
the nominal wage growth rate. The slowdown in activity will translate into a lower capacity utilization, which will be
below the desired level, increasing firms’ wage share target – they will be willing to reduce their margins – and, hence,
tightening their aspirational gap as well. The smaller gap will reduce the inflation rate, contributing to the upswing in
real wage growth, which again will precede the increase in labour productivity growth. The wage share will increase


                                                             9
until productivity catches up with real wages. Due to the inflation dynamics and productivity response to demand,
on average real wages will grow at a lower pace than productivity, explaining the stabilization of the wage share at a
lower level in comparison to the baseline scenario.
         Nevertheless, these are not the only effects operating on aggregate demand. The increase in the propensity
to consume out of after-tax wages will initially have a negative impact on real household wealth growth, since it
temporarily reduces households’ savings. This effect will be reinforced by short run capital losses. The latter happens
due to the fall in equity prices brought about by the larger equity supply by firms (as capital accumulation accelerates)
whereas demand falls (as household wealth growth slows down). As the boost in consumption fosters the utilization
rate and firms are able to appropriate a larger profit share, distributed dividends will make household wealth grow
at a faster pace – compensating for the low wage share through a relative increase in consumption out of wealth
and anticipating the second ascending phase of capital accumulation rate. Besides that, as household wealth grows
temporarily faster than the capital stock, the higher equity prices will translate into larger capital gains, which also
contribute to the recovery of household wealth growth (figure 1a). Household wealth to capital ratio decreases as the
capital stock grows faster than household wealth on average.
         Focusing on the other financial assets ratios for a moment, we see that government bills to capital ratio
decreases in relation to the baseline (figure 1i). The government pure deficit to GDP will be reduced in relation to
the baseline, since taxation revenues will expand more than government expenditures due to the faster pace of capital
accumulation that contributes to increase household income in relation to total income.10 As there is an increase in
the interest payment on bills in relation to GDP, the nominal deficit slightly increases in relation to the baseline (figure
1j).
          Firms’ loans to capital ratio will decrease in relation to the baseline as retained profits build up faster than
investment needs (that also expand with the larger propensity to invest of firms). It is worth noting that, in the short
run, the rise in equities as a source of finance (the market value of newly issued equities increases) will add to the
retained earnings negative effect on the loans to capital ratio (figure 1i). Regarding the profit rates, the total profit rate
increases after the initial shock due to both the higher profit share and the temporarily higher capacity utilization rate.
As the utilization rate converges back to the normal utilization rate, the remaining effect will be that of the profit share,
which amounts to a larger profit rate in relation to the baseline. The profit rate net of interests on loans will increase
only temporarily given that the higher profit share will not compensate for the larger normalized interest payments
ratio (figure 1h).
         From this experiment we observe that an expansion of aggregate demand accruing from the propensity to
consume leads to higher capital accumulation rate in the long run. Now income distribution changes due to the
dynamics of real wages and labour productivity growth. For this scenario, a higher capital accumulation rate will be
associated with a higher profit rate in the long run, for the profit share permanently rises. As a result of the exacerbation
of the conflict between workers and firms in the aftermath of the expansion (expressed in larger aspirational gaps for
both groups), the inflation rate will also be higher (and stable) in relation to the baseline.
         Since the long run growth rate depends on the size of the supermultiplier and on the autonomous consump-
tion ratio (Brochier and Macedo e Silva, 2018) and that the supermultiplier increases (the combined effects of the
propensity to consume and to invest predominate over the lower wage share) enough to compensate for the lower
autonomous consumption share, it will be permanently higher in relation to the baseline – so that the paradox of thrift
can be said to hold in growth terms.
        Differently from other supermultiplier models (Fazzari et al., 2017; Nah and Lavoie, 2017; Palley, 2018) – in
which a reduction in the propensity to save would have only a temporary effect on the employment rate, for it depends
on the exogenous growth rate of autonomous expenditures in the long run – here the increase in the propensity to
consume will also translate into a higher employment rate in the long run, since it has a permanent effect on the
economy’s growth rate.11 For given labour supply conditions and for a K-V coefficient lower than the unity, a positive
shock to demand will make output growth accelerates more than productivity growth – raising firms’ labour demand
  10
     The sharp reduction in pure government deficit, which temporarily becomes a surplus, happens due to the lagged nature of
government expenditures. The effects of the demand expansion are felt first on the revenue side.
  11
     To be fair, in Allain (2018) a reduction in the propensities to save and in the profit share has a permanent effect on the
employment rate as already mentioned, since the natural rate of growth is exogenous and output grows temporarily at a faster
pace than the natural rate.


                                                              10
temporarily at a faster rate than labour supply –, permanently raising the employment rate.
         At last, it its worth to highlight that the effects of an increase in the propensity to consume out of household
wealth (α2 ) – in the autonomous expenditure component – will be similar to the ones presented here for an increase in
the propensity to consume out of after tax wages. It will permanently increase the employment rate, the capital accu-
mulation rate and it will have an ambiguous effect on income distribution. The difference between both experiments
lies on the short run dynamics of household wealth and autonomous consumption: consumption out of household
wealth increases in the short run and household wealth growth decreases due to the lower savings brought about by
the higher consumption.
        One could ask what would change in terms of employment, income distribution and growth if the initial
conditions were different in what concerns agents reaction to changes in economic activity. In what follows we
compare the results of the same demand expansion under different initial conditions for the sensitivity of workers’
and firms’ income targets.


4.1.1   Same aggregate demand shock for different income share targets’ sensitivity parameters

          In this subsection we shock the propensity to consume out of after-tax wages (scenario 1) under four different
initial configurations: (i) with a higher workers’ income target revision parameter (ξ) in relation to the baseline
(scenario 1a); (ii) with a higher firms’ income target revision parameter (ψ) in relation to the baseline (scenario 1b);
(iii) with lower income target revision parameters for both groups (scenario 1c); and (iv) with higher income target
revision parameters for both groups (scenario 1d);
          If workers’ wage share target has a larger sensitivity to employment growth (scenario 1a), each increment
in the employment rate brought about by the higher aggregate demand will have a larger impact on nominal wage
growth in relation to scenario 1 (and vice-versa). As firms behaviour regarding its aspirational target does not change,
initially the inflation rate grows at the same pace of the former scenario. Accordingly, real wage growth accelerates
more in response to the initial demand shock whereas labour productivity growth response is still the same, which
leads to a higher wage share (figure 2a). The higher wage share in relation to scenario 1 provides an extra stimulus
to demand which explains the higher capacity utilization and, consequently, capital accumulation and output growth
rates in the short run (figure 2c). The higher output growth rate will feedback into labour productivity growth and on
the inflation rate.
          The inflation rate will be higher in relation to scenario 1 due to: (i) the higher wage share and the higher
capacity utilization, since both contribute to increase firms’ aspirational gap; (ii) the faster pace of nominal wages
increments, which feedbacks into inflation through the indexation component (figure 2d). As the inflation rate ac-
celerates and nominal wages growth slows down (after the higher wage share is realized), real wages growth falls
below labour productivity growth, reducing the wage share and, consequently, output growth and the employment
rate. As the fall in the employment rate exacerbates the unemployment fear and reduces workers’ income aspirations,
it reinforces nominal wages deceleration and explains the sharp fall of real wages (figures 2a, 2b and 2c).
         In the upswing phases, real wage growth will increase enough and for a sufficient long period above labour
productivity growth, accounting for the higher wage share in the long run in comparison to scenario 1. The higher
wage share in the long run will add up to the positive effects of the higher propensities to invest and to consume on
the growth rate. We notice that the same initial shock to demand, through its larger feedback on income distribution,
exemplifies a different growth regime: now, according to the different institutional settings, a higher capital accumula-
tion rate in the long run is associated with a lower profit rate (figures 2a and 2c). The slight increase in output growth
rate in comparison to the previous scenario is also enough to increase the long run employment rate (figure 2d).
         Regarding the financial assets ratios, government debt to capital ratio falls more intensively in comparison to
scenario 1 due to the higher household income to total income brought about by the higher wage share, which means
also a higher tax revenue in relation to government expenditures. Firms’ loans to capital ratio will fall to a lesser
extent due to the lower profit share that also means lower retained earnings as a share of capital in comparison to
scenario 1. Household wealth to capital ratio will decrease to a larger extent due to the faster capital accumulation
rate, even if the capital gains ratio increases.
        The opposite will happen after an increase in the propensity to consume if firms’ increase the sensitivity of

                                                           11
their income share target (scenario 1b): the initial positive effect on aggregate demand through consumption will be
partially compensated by the lower wage share in the long run – generated by the lower growth of real wages in
relation to labour productivity growth. Thus, the same shock to the propensity to consume will have a smaller total
effect on output growth due to the worsening in income distribution in relation to scenario 1. Besides that, since output
grows at a slower pace, it will reduce the increments of firms’ demand for labour, reducing the long run employment
rate in relation to scenario 1 (figure 2). In what concerns the financial assets ratios, the results will be the opposite of
scenario 1a.
         For the case in which both workers and firms incorporate changes in economic activity into their income
targets to a lesser extent (scenario 1c), so that wage and price inflation dynamics is mitigated, the long run impact of
an increase to the propensity to consume will be larger over growth and employment rates in comparison to scenario
1 (figures 3c and 3b). But how does this happen since there seems to be no increase in the wage share in the long run?
The short run larger increase in the wage share will further boost consumption and, accordingly, capacity utilization
to a larger extent in comparison to scenario 1. The increase in capacity utilization will trigger a stronger reaction
of firms through a permanently higher propensity to invest and capital accumulation rate. Therefore the short run
effect of a higher wage share is carried over to the long run through a higher propensity to invest, which raises the
supermultiplier in addition to the increase in the propensity to consume and, as a result, the growth rate.
         When both groups increase the sensitivity of their income targets to changes in the economy (scenario 1d),
the conflict between workers and firms after the boost in consumption will escalate: workers’ wage share target will
increase to a larger extent to the changes in the employment rate, raising the aspirational gap and nominal wage
growth; and firms will also react more intensively to the increase in capacity utilization over the normal rate and, as a
consequence, the inflation rate will rise to a larger extent as well. In the short run, as real wage growth oscillates more
intensively than labour productivity growth and the oscillations are asymmetric downwards, the wage share will be
lower than in scenario 1.The lower wage share will lead to a weaker consumption stimulus, capacity utilization and,
therefore, to a faint reaction of firms through the propensity to invest in comparison to scenarios 1 and 1c (figure 3d),
which will carry over to the long run, mitigating the effect of a higher propensity to consume out of after tax wages in
the growth path of the economy and in the employment rate, that stabilizes at a lower level as well.
         In what concerns the financial assets ratios, it is worth to mention that firms’ loans to capital ratio will fall
more in comparison to scenario 1, even if the profit share does not change the share of retained earnings in relation to
the capital stock, due to the slower pace of investment.


4.2       Changes in the bargaining power of workers and firms
         So far we have looked at the secondary effects that the interaction of wage and price inflation dynamics
and productivity growth may have on income distribution, employment and growth after an initial demand shock
elsewhere. In this section we evaluate what can happen if there is an institutional change that allows for a higher
bargaining power of workers (1 ) or firms (φ1 ), departing from (i) the same baseline of scenario 1 (ss1 ); (ii) a second
baseline scenario (ss2 ), in which the initial gap between workers and firms bargaining power is larger.12 This makes
an allusion to a more unionised economy (ss2 ) in contrast with a more competitive regime (ss1 ).
         Departing from the initial baseline scenario, an increase in the bargaining power of workers will initially
raise the nominal wage growth rate at a faster pace than the inflation rate and as the spike in real wage growth is well
above labour productivity reaction to output growth in the short run, the wage share increases (figure 4e). As the wage
share increases it stimulates consumption out of after-tax wages and leads to an expansion of the level of activity,
represented by the capacity utilization rate increase over the normal level. The higher capacity utilization will trigger
firms’ reaction, which revise their propensity to invest upwards and, therefore, the capital accumulation rate (figures
4b and 4f).
         The initial expansion fostered by an income redistribution towards wages contains the elements that precip-
itate the downturn: (i) on the one hand, there is the conflict process already described by the previous experiments:
the gap between actual and normal capacity utilization will decrease (increase) firms’ wage (profit) share target and
the higher effective wage share will contribute to raise firms aspirational gap and, thus, the inflation rate (besides the
  12
       (1 − φ1 )ss2 > (1 − φ1 )ss1


                                                            12
lagged effect of a higher wage inflation); (ii) on the other hand, the initial fall of the profit share will have a larger
negative impact on household wealth accumulation than the increase in the wage share (since we assume that house-
holds save a larger fraction of profits than wages). This will have, in turn, a negative effect on consumption out of
household wealth and will lead the fall in capacity utilization and, accordingly, firms will reduce their propensity to
invest and the capital accumulation rate.
          In what follows, the slowdown in activity will have a negative impact on the employment rate, since firms
mitigate the pace of labour demand as output growth is hit harder than productivity growth (figure 4a). Accordingly,
this will reduce the pace of growth of nominal wages. Besides that, as capacity utilization declines, firms’ will also
reduce their aspirational gap and so the inflation rate falls. However, since nominal wages decelerate more than the
inflation rate and that labour productivity growth is less impacted than real wages, the wage share declines in relation
to the initial positive shock. In the long run, even as the wage share recovers, the demand expansion will not be enough
to make firms react through a higher propensity to invest. Even though the supermultiplier is higher in comparison to
the baseline (the wage share increases more than the propensity to invest falls), the predominant effect over the long
run growth rate is that of the lower autonomous consumption ratio.
         We observe that the redistribution of income towards workers, brought about by a higher bargaining power
of this group, may unfold competing effects on aggregate demand and on growth in the long run. If the increase in
consumption out of wages is not enough to compensate for the slowdown in consumption out of household wealth
due to the lower ratio of distributed profits – and if there is no other source of demand stimuli –, the effect on growth
in the long run will likely be negative.
         In this scenario, an improvement in labour market conditions for workers is associated with a higher employ-
ment rate in the short run, but with a slightly lower employment rate in the long run. We notice that, on average, labour
productivity growth will present a faster rhythm than output growth (and more regular), mostly due to the oscillation
in output growth. If we reduced workers bargaining power, the results would be the opposite: as the positive effect
on consumption out of wealth would be higher than the negative effect of a lower wage share on consumption out
of wages, despite the short run negative effect, the long run growth trend would be higher. That is also to say, that a
reduction in workers bargaining power might have a short run negative impact on the employment rate, but a (weak)
positive effect in the long run.
          This result is in line with the results found by Storm and Naastepad (2017), however the mechanism is
different. In their case, the restraint in real wage growth might have a positive effect on the employment rate since it
negatively impacts output growth, but it negatively impacts labour productivity twice – through the direct impact of a
lower level of activity and through the rate of Marxian labour saving technical progress, namely, the direct negative
impact of real wage growth on productivity. In our case, it is the income distribution impact on aggregate demand
that might increase the growth of output at a faster pace than productivity growth in the long run, depending on the
relative trade-off between consumption out of wages and consumption out of household wealth.
          But are these results obtained in another institutional setting? Suppose that the same increase in the bargaining
power of workers now happens in an economy that has a larger initial gap between workers and firms bargaining
power (ss2 ). In that case, firms’ reaction to higher unit labour costs will have a smaller magnitude in comparison with
workers’ reaction to changes in the employment rate, leading to a higher growth rate of nominal wages and lower
inflation rate in the short run. Consequently, the rise in the wage share will be larger, leading to a higher capacity
utilization and to a stronger reaction of firms through the propensity to invest. The slowdown in household wealth is
mitigated due to the faster pace of capital accumulation and output growth in comparison to the previous scenario.
Now as consumption out of wages increases at a larger extent in relation to the previous scenario and more than
compensates the short run deceleration of consumption out of household wealth, the long run growth rate (weakly)
expands. This happens since both the wage share and the propensity to invest (as a result of the higher level of activity
in comparison to the previous scenario) stabilize at higher level in the long run, increasing the economy’s multiplier
enough to change the growth trend upwards. Besides that, since output growth accelerates more than productivity
growth during the transition, firms’ pace of labour demand will build up until labour supply growth catches up,
permanently increasing the employment rate.
        For both baseline scenarios, an increase in firms’ bargaining power will have a negative effect on capital
accumulation and employment rates. In the short run, the higher bargaining power will raise firms aspirational gap
and thus inflation rate at a faster pace than nominal wages growth. As a result real wages growth falls below labour


                                                            13
productivity growth, reducing the wage share and consumption. The lower consumption path will feedback into
capacity utilization which will plunge below the normal rate. Accordingly, firms react, diminishing the propensity to
invest, and the capital accumulation decelerates. As output growth shifts down, firms also reduce the pace of labour
demand, which translates into a lower employment rate. In the long run, the negative effects of a lower wage share
and propensity to invest on the supermultiplier explain the lower growth path in both scenarios. The autonomous
consumption ratio works as a floor to demand, household wealth will also growth at a slower pace, but since output
falls to a larger extent, the ratio increases – as would be expected in supermultiplier models.



5     Final Remarks
          From the existing literature on Supermultiplier models, we have that an increase in the exogenous growth
rate of autonomous expenditures will positively impact the employment rate and the labour productivity growth rate
(Nah and Lavoie, 2016; Fazzari et al., 2017; Palley, 2018). We also have that an increase in the bargaining power of
workers will translate into a temporary positive effect on the capital accumulation rate (Nah and Lavoie, 2017). We
also know that in most of these models changes in income distribution and aggregate demand stimuli arising from the
propensities to spend will have only transitory effects on the trajectory of the economy. However, we do not know
what the outcomes would be in terms of growth, income distribution and employment in a supermultiplier model that
allows for the interactions of wage and inflation dynamics, labour productivity and autonomous demand. The model
built in this paper is a very first step in that direction. The main results obtained through the simulation experiments
are summarized in the next paragraphs.
          An increase in the propensity to consume out of after-tax wages (or in the propensity to consume out of
household wealth) leads to an increase in the capital accumulation rate in the long run, so that we can say the paradox
of thrift holds in terms of growth effects. A higher capital accumulation rate can be associated with either higher
or lower profit rates since the effect on income distribution is ambiguous – depending on how the conflict between
workers and firms unfolds following the initial shock. It is interesting to note that when income distribution is partially
endogenous even if we are departing from a wage-led growth regime, a higher long run growth rate can be connected
to higher profit rates.
         The higher growth rate that follows the increase in the propensity to consume will be accompanied by higher
inflation and employment rates for all scenarios. Since the aggregate demand shock does not generate an ever increas-
ing inflation rate (for the initial parameter values), there is a trade-off between unemployment and inflation in the long
run. In what concerns the impact on the employment rate, the result is different from other Supermultiplier models, in
which a reduction in the propensity to save would have only a temporary effect on the employment rate, for it depends
on the exogenous growth rate of autonomous expenditures in the long run.
         The experiments also indicate that the higher workers’ wage share target sensitivity to changes in the em-
ployment rate in comparison to firms’ profit share target sensitivity to the level of activity, the higher the likelihood
of an aggregate demand expansion originated from a rise of the propensities to spend will be associated with a higher
wage share, due to the higher growth rate of real wages in relation to labour productivity in the short run. In that case,
the secondary effect of income distribution on aggregate demand also contributes to raise the long run growth of the
economy and, as a result, the employment rate. The downside of a higher sensitivity of workers’ wage share target is
the larger inflation rate in the long run that emerges from the exacerbation of the conflict between workers and firms,
as they try to appropriate a larger income share following the expansion.
          If an increase in the propensity to consume happens in a framework where the wage and price dynamics is
mitigated – through lower sensitivity parameters for both workers and firms income targets –, the short run impact of
the demand shock will be stronger and will be carried over to the long run. The boost to consumption due to the higher
propensity to spend will be amplified by a larger wage share – since the gap between real wage and labour productivity
is larger in the short run – and this will translate into a higher capacity utilization rate, triggering a stronger response
of firms, that permanently increase their propensity to invest and, therefore, the growth path of the economy shifts
upwards in the long run. We notice that the intensity of conflicting-claims between workers and firms will affect the
supermultiplier not only through the wage share but through the propensity to invest. This makes it clearer that the
same initial expansion of the propensity to consume might have a larger impact in the long run growth rate, even


                                                            14
if the wage share stabilizes at a lower path in the long run, if the short run expansion has a larger impact on firms’
expectation of demand as represented by the propensity to invest. This result also illustrates how the long run can be
seen as sequence of short-period equilibria in a dynamic model (Macedo e Silva and Dos Santos, 2011).
         An increase in the bargaining power of workers raises the wage share and has a positive effect on capital
accumulation and employment rates in the short run. Yet in the long run it might have a positive or negative effect
on capital accumulation and employment rates depending on the “regime” of the economy. If the economy at stake
is a more unionised one (the gap between workers and firms bargaining power is larger), the more likely the demand
effects will be predominantly positive also in the long run; if the economy is more competitive (the gap between
workers and firms bargaining power is smaller), the more likely the effects of an increase in the bargaining power of
workers will be (even if slightly) negative in the long run.
         This happens since the redistribution of income towards wages might have conflicting impacts on aggregate
demand. In a more competitive economy, the stimulus arising from the acceleration of consumption out of wages may
not be enough to compensate the following deceleration of consumption out of accumulated wealth – due to the lower
amount of distributed profits (given that the households save a smaller share of wages than distributed profits). If that
is the case, both the growth trend and the employment rate will be lower, even as the wage share slightly increases.
On the other hand, the odds are that in a more unionised economy, the wage share will increase to a higher extent in
the short run, expanding consumption out of wages enough to trigger firms’ reaction, increasing the supermultiplier
of the economy and compensating for the initial slowdown of consumption out of household wealth.
         The experiments concerning workers’ bargaining power illustrate how a wage moderation policy could have
a positive effect on the employment rate through demand channels: by means of a small positive effect on the au-
tonomous consumption component that work as a floor when demand arising elsewhere is fragile. Regarding the
bargaining power of firms, it is worth to mention that it has no ambiguous effect on demand and growth for both the
competitive and the unionised economy regimes: an increase in firms’ bargaining power will have a negative effect
on capital accumulation and employment rates.
         As a general assessment, we can say that what matters the most for raising the growth rate of the economy in
the long run is whether the short run effects of the aggregate demand shocks are carried over to the long run through
the supermultiplier. In a framework of conflicting-claims between workers and firms, a stimulus to demand that comes
from a higher bargaining power of workers can be very limited and the more competitive the economy lower is the
inducement it generates. Yet this does not means a higher path of sustained growth can not be achieved in a more
egalitarian economy. The latter will depend on whether the institutional setting of the economy allows for a higher
sensitivity of workers to changes in the employment rate and for a higher bargaining power of workers or not.
        At last, the results presented here should be seen for what they are: they provide some insights on how stimuli
to demand could be fostered or mitigated due the conflicting nature of income distribution and the institutional setting
for income groups bargaining power. Besides that, the model can be further explored in several directions, one of
which is a more thorough research of the supply-side constraints and the channels through which these constraints
could affect demand as the economy approaches full employment. We leave that as a matter for future research.



References
Allain, O. (2015). Tackling the instability of growth: a Kaleckian-Harrodian model with an autonomous expenditure
  component. Cambridge Journal of Economics, 39(5):1351–1371.

Allain, O. (2018). Demographic growth, Harrodian (in)stability and the supermultiplier. Cambridge Journal of
  Economics, pages 106–112.

Angeriz, A., McCombie, J. S. L., and Roberts, M. (2008). New estimates of returns to scale and spatial spillovers of
  EU regional manufacturing, 1986-2002. International Regional Science Review, 31(1).

Ball, L. M. (2014). The long term damage of the Great Recession in OECD countries.



                                                           15
Bivens, J. (2017). A ’high-pressure economy’ can help boost productivity and provide even more ’room to run’ for
  the recovery.

Blanchard, O. J. and Leigh, D. (2013). Growth Forecast Errors and Fiscal Multipliers. American Economic Review,
  103(3):117–120.

Blanchflower, D. and Oswald, A. (1994). The Wage Curve. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Boyer, R. and Petit, P. (1991). Kaldor’s growth theories: past, present and prospects for the future. In Nell, E. J. and
  Semmler, W., editors, Nicholas Kaldor and Mainstream Economics: Confrontation or Convergence?, chapter 27,
  pages 485–517. St. Martin’s Press, New York.

Brochier, L. and Macedo e Silva, A. C. (2018). A supermultiplier Stock-Flow Consistent model: the “ return ” of the
  paradoxes of thrift and costs in the long run ? Cambridge Journal of Economics, (Advanced access):1–30.

Caminati, M. and Sordi, S. (2017). Demand-led growth with endogenous innovation.

Cassetti, M. (2003). Bargaining power, effective demand and technical progress: a Kaleckian model of growth.
  Cambridge Journal of Economics, 27(3):449–464.

Cassetti, M. (2012). Macroeconomic outcomes of changing social bargains. The feasibility of a wage-led open econ-
  omy reconsidered. Metroeconomica, 63(1):64–91.

Cassetti, M. (2017). Fiscal policy as a long-run Simulations with a stock-flow consistent model.

Cesaratto, S., Serrano, F., and Stirati, A. (2003). Technical Change, Effective Demand and Employment. Review of
  Political Economy, 15(1):33–52.

Ciarli, T., Lorentz, A., Valente, M., and Savona, M. (2018). Structural changes and growth regimes. Journal of
  Evolutionary Economics, pages 1–58.

Deleidi, M., Stirati, A., and Meloni, W. P. (2018). Structural change , labour productivity and the Kaldor-Verdoorn
  law : evidence from European countries.

Dixon, R. and Thirlwall, A. P. (1975). A Model of Regional Growth Rate Differences on Kaldorian Lines. Oxford
  Economic Papers1, 27(2):201–214.

Dos Santos, C. H. and Zezza, G. (2008). A simplified benchmark stock flow consistent Keynesian growth model.
  Metroeconomica, 59(3):441–478.

Dosi, G., Pereira, M. C., Roventini, A., and Virgillito, M. E. (2017). When more Flexibility Yields more Fragility: the
  Microfoundations of Keynesian Aggregate Unemployment. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, (April).

Dutt, A. K. (1992). Conflict inflation, distribution, cyclical accumulation and crises. European Journal of Political
  Economy, 8(4):579–597.

Dutt, A. K. (2002). Thirlwall ’ s Law and Uneven Development. Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, 24(3):367–
  390.

Dutt, A. K. (2011). Growth and income distribution: a post-Keynesian perspective. In Hein, E. and Stockhammer, E.,
  editors, A modern guide to Keynesian macroeconomics and Economic Policies, pages 61–87. E. Elgar, Cheltenham,
  UK and Northampton, MA, USA.

Fatas, A. and Summers, L. (2016). The Permanent Effects of Fiscal Consolidations.

Fazzari, S., Ferri, P., and Variato, A. M. (2017). Demand-Led Growth and Accomodating Suppl. 21st FMM Confer-
  ence, The Crisis of Globalisation, (August):1–29.

Flaschel, P., Kauermann, G., and Semmler, W. (2007). TESTING WAGE AND PRICE PHILLIPS CURVES FOR
   THE UNITED STATES. Metroeconomica, 58(4):550–581.

                                                          16
Freitas, F. and Serrano, F. (2015). Growth Rate and Level Effects , the Stability of the Adjustment of Capacity to
  Demand and the Sraffian Supermultiplier. Review of Political Economy, 27(3):258–281.

Girardi, D., Meloni, P. W., and Stirati, A. (2017). Persistent Effects of Autonomous Demand Expansions. In The XXI
  FMM Conference: The Crisis of Globalisation, Berlin.

Girardi, D. and Pariboni, R. (2016). Long-run Effective Demand in the US Economy: An Empirical Test of the
  Sraffian Supermultiplier Model. Review of Political Economy, 28(4):523–544.

Godley, W. and Lavoie, M. (2007). Monetary Economics An Integrated Approach to Credit, Money, Income, Produc-
  tion and Wealth, volume 12.

Haltmaier, J. (2012). Do Recessions Affect Potential Output?

Hartwig, J. (2013). Distribution and growth in demand and productivity in Switzerland (1950-2010). Applied Eco-
  nomics Letters, 20(10):938–944.

Hein, E., Lavoie, M., and VanTreeck, T. (2012). Harrodian Instability and the ’Normal Rate’ of Capacity Utilization
  in Kaleckian Models of Distribution and Growth - a survey. Metroeconomica, 63(1):139–169.

Hein, E. and Tarassow, A. (2009). Distribution, aggregate demand and productivity growth: Theory and empirical
  results for six OECD countries based on a post-Kaleckian model. Cambridge Journal of Economics, 34(4):727–
  754.

Kaldor, N. (1957). A model of economic growth. Economic Journal, 67(268):591–624.

Kaldor, N. (1966). Causes of the slow growth in the United Kingdom. In Targetti, F. and Thirlwall, A. P., editors, The
  Essential Kaldor (1989), London. Duckworth.

Karabarbounis, L. and Neiman, B. (2013). The Global Decline of the Labour Share. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  129(1):61–103.

Lavoie, M. (2014). Post-Keynesian Economics: New Foundations. Edward Elgar Publishing Limited.

Lavoie, M. (2016). Convergence towards the normal rate of capacity utilization in neo-kaleckian models: The role of
  non-capacity creating autonomous expenditures. Metroeconomica, 67(1):172–201.

Lazonick, W. (2014). Profits without prosperity: stock buybacks manipulate the market and leave most Americans
  worse off. Harvard Business Review, (September):3–11.

Lima, G. T. (2005). Functional distribution, capital accumulation and growth in a non-linear macrodynamic model.

Macedo e Silva, A. C. and Dos Santos, C. H. (2011). Peering over the edge of the short period? The Keynesian roots
 of stock-flow consistent macroeconomic models. Cambridge Journal of Economics, 35(1):105–124.

Magacho, G. R. and McCombie, J. S. L. (2017). A sectoral explanation of per capita income convergence and
 divergence: estimating Verdoorn’s law for countries at different stages of development. Cambridge Journal of
 Economics, (June):1–18.

Martin, R., Munyan, T., and Wilson, B. A. (2015). Potential Output and Recessions: Are We Fooling Ourselves?

McCombie, J. S. and Spreafico, M. R. (2016). Kaldor’s ’technical progress function’ and Verdoorn’s law revisited.
 Cambridge Journal of Economics, 40(4):1117–1136.

McCombie, J. S. L., Pugno, M., and Soro, B., editors (2002). Productivity growth and economic performance: Essays
 on Verdoorn’s law. Macmillan, London.

Naastepad, C. W. (2006). Technology, demand and distribution: A cumulative growth model with an application to
  the Dutch productivity growth slowdown. Cambridge Journal of Economics, 30(3):403–434.

                                                         17
Nah, W. J. and Lavoie, M. (2016). Convergence in a neo-Kaleckian model with endogenous technical progress and
  autonomous demand growth.

Nah, W. J. and Lavoie, M. (2017). The role of autonomous demand growth in a neo-Kaleckian conflicting-claims
  framework.

Palley, T. (2018). The economics of the super-multiplier: a comprehensive treatment with labor markets. Metroeco-
  nomica, (August):1–16.

Pedrosa, Í. and Macedo e Silva, A. C. (2014). A Minskyan-Fisherian SFC model for analyzing the linkages of private
  financial behavior and public debt. In 18th FMM conference on the inequality and the future of capitalism, Berlin.

Reifschneider, D., Wascher, W., and Wilcox, D. (2015). Aggregate supply in the United States: Recent developments
  and implications for the conduct of monetary policy. IMF Economic Review, 63(1):71–109.

Rowthorn, R. (1995). Capital formation and unemployment. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 11(1):26–39.

Rowthorn, R. E. (1977). Conflict, inflation and money. Cambridge Journal of Economics, 1(3):215–39.

Ryoo, S. and Skott, P. (2008). Financialization in Kaleckian Economies with and without Labor Constraints. Inter-
  vention: European Journal of Economics and Economic Policies, 5(February):357–386.

Ryoo, S. and Skott, P. (2013a). Public Debt and Full Employment in a Stock-Flow Consistent Model of a Corporate
  Economy. Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, 35(4):511–528.

Ryoo, S. and Skott, P. (2013b). Public debt and full employment in a stock-flow consistent model of a corporate
  economy. Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, 35(4):511–527.

Skott, P. (2010). Growth, instability and cycles: Harrodian and Kaleckian models of accumulation and income
  distribution. In Setter, editor, Handbook of Alternative Theories of Economic Growth2, pages 108–31. E. Elgar,
  Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA, USA.

Skott, P. (2017). Weaknesses of ‘wage-led growth’. Review of Keynesian Economics, 5(3):336–359.

Stirati, A. (2016). Real wages in the business cycle and the theory of income distribution: An unresolved conflict
   between theory and facts in mainstream macroeconomics. Cambridge Journal of Economics, 40(2):639–661.

Stirati, A. and Meloni, W. P. (2018). A short story of the Phillips curve : from Phillips to Friedman . . . and back ?
   Review of Keynesian Economics, 6(4):493–516.

Storm, S. and Naastepad, C. W. (2012). Macroeconomics beyond the NAIRU. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
  Massachusetts, and London, England.

Storm, S. and Naastepad, C. W. M. (2017). Bhaduri – Marglin meet Kaldor – Marx : wages , productivity and
  investment. 5(1):4–24.

Tridico, P. and Pariboni, R. (2018). Inequality, financialization, and economic decline. Journal of Post Keynesian
   Economics, 41(2):236–259.

Wen, Y. (2007). Granger Causality and Equilibrium Business Cycle Theory. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
 Review, 89(3):195–206.




                                                         18
       Figure 1: Effects of an increase in the propensity to consume out of after-tax wages (α1 )
                       (a) Capital accumulation
                       and household wealth(b) Capacity                                                                                                 utilization(c) Firms’ propensity to in-
                       growth rates            rate                                                                                                                vest

                                                                                                                                                                                           0.183
                       0.03                                                                          0.90




                                                                                                                                                                                           0.182


                       0.02                                                                          0.85

                                                                                                                                                                                           0.181




                       0.01                                                                          0.80                                                                                  0.180
                                     2000             2050                 2100                                      2000                  2050                       2100                              2000                    2100                      2200                  2300
                                                   baseline   gk   gvh                                                                baseline    scenario 1                                                                          baseline   scenario 1




                                                                                                                                            (e) Real wages and labour
                                                                   (d) Employment rate                                                      productivity growth rates
                                                                                                                                             0.04
                                                         1.000



                                                                                                                                             0.03
                                                         0.975


                                                                                                                                             0.02

                                                         0.950


                                                                                                                                             0.01

                                                         0.925

                                                                                                                                             0.00



                                                                    2000     2100              2200           2300          2400          2500                 2000                      2050                       2100
                                                                                            baseline    scenario 1                                                                   baseline   gpr   gwp




                                       (f) Wage share                                                                (g) Inflation rate                                                                          (h) Profit rates
                                                                                                                                                                                           1.11



                       0.61

                                                                                                                                                                                           1.08
                                                                                                     0.03

                       0.60

                                                                                                                                                                                           1.05

                       0.59
                                                                                                     0.02

                                                                                                                                                                                           1.02
                       0.58


                                                                                                     0.01                                                                                  0.99
                              2000          2100                   2200             2300                      2000                 2100                2200                  2300                      2000                    2100                       2200                  2300
                                               baseline       scenario 1                                                              baseline    scenario 1                                                    net of interest profit rate to baseline     profit rate to baseline




                                                        (i) Financial assets to capi-
                                                        tal ratio                     (j) Public debt to GDP
                                                                                                                                                 1.5
                                                         1.00




                                                                                                                                                 1.0

                                                         0.95


                                                                                                                                                 0.5


                                                         0.90

                                                                                                                                                 0.0




                                                         0.85
                                                                                                                                             −0.5
                                                                   2000     2100              2200            2300          2400          2500          2000                  2100                    2200                   2300
                                                                                           Bills   Loans    Wealth                                             nominal govt deficit to baseline    pure govt deficit to baseline




Legend: gk is for capital accumulation rate, gvh ,for household wealth growth rate, gpr for labour productivity growth rate and gw p for real wage growth
rate.




                                                                                                                                          19
Figure 2: Effects of aggregate demand expansion:
for a higher sensitivity of workers’(firms’) wage
(profit) share target to changes in economic activity
                  (a) Wage share                                                                   (b) Employment rate
                                                                                           1.00




   0.60
                                                                                           0.96




   0.58
                                                                                           0.92




   0.56                                                                                    0.88

           2000               2100                  2200                  2300                      2000                     2100                2200                  2300
                   baseline    scenario 1    scenario 1a    scenario 1b                                          baseline     scenario 1   scenario 1a   scenario 1b
                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 4: Effects of a higher bargaining power of
   (c) Capital accumulation                                                                                                                                                    workers
   rate                                                                                                      (d) Inflation rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (b) Capital accumulation
   0.035
                                                                                                                                                                                            (a) Employment rate                          rate
                                                                                           0.04

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.027
                                                                                                                                                                                   0.935
   0.030
                                                                                           0.03



   0.025                                                                                                                                                                           0.930
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.026
                                                                                           0.02


   0.020                                                                                                                                                                           0.925

                                                                                           0.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.025
           2000               2100                   2200                 2300                      2000                     2100                2200                  2300
                                                                                                                                                                                   0.920
                   baseline    scenario 1     scenario 1a   scenario 1b                                          baseline     scenario 1   scenario 1a   scenario 1b




                                                                                                                                                                                            2000        2100               2200   2300            2000   2100                    2200     2300

   Scenario 1a: positive shock to α1 and ξ; Scenario 1b: positive shock to                                                                                                                                     ss1   ss2                                        baseline   ss1   ss2



   α1 and ψ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (d) Household                                  wealth
                                                                                                                                                                                                   (c) Inflation rate                    growth rate
Figure 3: Effects of aggregate demand expansion:
                                                                                                                                                                                   0.016

for a lower (higher) sensitivity of both income targets                                                                                                                                                                                  0.026




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.025
                                                                                                                                                                                   0.014

                  (a) Wage share                                                                   (b) Employment rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.024

                                                                                                                                                                                   0.012
                                                                                           1.00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.023
   0.61


                                                                                                                                                                                   0.010
                                                                                           0.95
                                                                                                                                                                                            2000        2100               2200   2300            2000   2100                    2200     2300
   0.59                                                                                                                                                                                                        ss1   ss2                                        baseline   ss1   ss2




                                                                                           0.90
   0.57                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (f) Firms’ proensity to in-
                                                                                           0.85
                                                                                                                                                                                                   (e) Wage share                        vest
           2000               2100                  2200                  2300                      2000                     2100                2200                  2300
                   baseline    scenario 1     scenario 1c   scenario 1d                                          baseline     scenario 1   scenario 1c   scenario 1d




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.1806

   (c) Capital accumulation(d) Firms’ propensity to in-                                                                                                                            0.6075




   rate                    vest                                                                                                                                                    0.6050
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.1804




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.1802
   0.035                                                                                   0.184
                                                                                                                                                                                   0.6025

                                                                                           0.183
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.1800
   0.030

                                                                                                                                                                                            2000        2100               2200   2300            2000   2100                    2200     2300
                                                                                           0.182
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ss1   ss2                                             ss1   ss2
   0.025

                                                                                           0.181


   0.020
                                                                                           0.180                                                                                   In baseline scenario 1 (ss1), we assume an initial gap between workers
   0.015
                                                                                           0.179
                                                                                                                                                                                   and firms bargaining power (1 − φ1 ) of 0.25; In baseline scenario 2
           2000
                   baseline
                              2100
                               scenario 1
                                                     2200
                                              scenario 1c   scenario 1d
                                                                          2300                        2000
                                                                                                                  baseline
                                                                                                                             2100
                                                                                                                              scenario 1
                                                                                                                                                  2200
                                                                                                                                           scenario 1c   scenario 1d
                                                                                                                                                                       2300
                                                                                                                                                                                   (ss2), we assume an initial gap of 0.45.

                                                             (e) Inflation rate

                                            0.04




                                            0.02




                                            0.00


                                                     2000                    2100                  2200                  2300
                                                                  baseline    scenario 1     scenario 1c   scenario 1d




   Scenario 1c: positive shock to α1 and a negative shock to ξ and ψ; Sce-
   nario 1d: positive shock to α1 , ξ and ψ



                                                                                                                                                                              20
F=Y-WB




         21
