        Impacts of microeconomic uncertainty shocks on the
            aggregate economy: an analysis for Brazil
                           Angelo Salton*                 Wilson da Cruz Vieira† .

                   Área 4 - Macroeconomia, Economia Monetária e Finanças



                                                   Resumo
      O objetivo deste trabalho é estimar um modelo de equilíbrio geral dinâmico estocástico (DSGE) para
      avaliar o impacto de choques de incerteza de ordem microeconômica no Brasil. Estes choques se ca-
      racterizam pela interação de um grande número de agentes empreendedores com o setor financeiro.
      Calibrando o modelo com dados trimestrais da economia brasileira de 2003 à 2017, os resultados apon-
      tam que custos de agência nessa relação impactam o crescimento econômico, a formação de capital e o
      bem-estar das famílias.
      Palavras-chave: Incerteza, volatilidade, crescimento, desenvolvimento. Códigos JEL: O16, O33, E32.


                                                   Abstract
      This work aims to estimate a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model (DSGE) to evaluate the
      impact of microeconomic uncertainty shocks in the Brazilian economy. The microeconomic shocks
      emerge from the interaction with a continuum of entrepreneur agents and the financial sector. Calibrating
      the model using quarterly data from 2003 to 2017, we find that agency costs in the entrepreneurial and
      financial sector impact economic growth, capital accumulation and household’s welfare.
      Keywords: Uncertainty, volatility, growth, development. JEL Codes: O16, O33, E32.


1     Introduction
       This is a research in the field of macroeconomics that aims to provide a deeper understanding of
economic uncertainty in Brazil. This work addresses the question of the importance of microeconomic
uncertainty shocks in the Brazilian economy. Macroeconomists gained interest and acquired a deeper
understanding of the role of firms and individuals in the performance of economies, and nowadays mi-
croeconomic elements are increasingly ubiquitous in structural and dynamic macroeconomic models. In
example, microeconomic elements can be inserted in such models in form of a large number of firms or
agents (instead of a single, representative agent) that need not be homogeneous, interacting in competitive
or monopolistic markets. The result of the aggregate economy will emerge from market clearing and other
equilibrium conditions. This strategy turns possible to answer more intricate questions in economic policy,
without leaving the general equilibrium framework.
       More than investigating the impacts of microeconomic shocks itself, we turn our attention to microe-
conomic uncertainty shocks. In this work, following the existing literature, we interpret such shocks as
perturbations to the firms’ expectation about the return of their investments. In other terms, think of a statis-
tical distribution of firm outputs: rather than shocks to the mean, this work focuses on shocks to the standard
deviation of the distribution. In reality, the production decision of firms can be affected by a multitude of
    * Doutorando em Economia Aplicada pelo PPGEA/UFV. E-mail: angelo.salton@ufv.br.
    † Professor Titular do PPGEA/UFV. E-mail: wvieira@hotmail.com



                                                         1
factors: economic, administrative, political. In our model economy, firms respond to fluctuations in own
idiosyncratic shocks, macroeconomic policy shocks, input prices and loan interest rates.
       Recent work in the real business cycle theory (JUSTINIANO; PRIMICERI, 2008; BORN; PFEIFER,
2014) focuses on time-varying dispersion effects in aggregate variables, and findings from Christiano, Motto
and Rostagno (2014) suggest that microeconomic uncertainty shocks are as important as the traditional
technology and policy shocks as a source of business cycle fluctuations, meaning that such elements must
be incorporated in dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models used by policy makers. In this
work, we will focus on microeconomic shocks as a source of economic growth uncertainty. This research
departs from the view that evaluate how the standard economic policy shocks affect business cycles. In the
context of DSGE models, microeconomic uncertainty shocks are introduced by adding agents or firms that
face uncertainty about their output, and such uncertainty need not show strong correlation with the usual
aggregate total factor productivity (TFP) shocks, and we follow this definition.
       Empirical evidence on the subject is largely devoted to the United States economy. The matter of
economic uncertainty received greater attention since the work of Lucas (1988). Beginning in the mid
1980’s, the U.S. economy began to experience a phenomenon called the Great Moderation, which was an
abrupt decline in the volatility of gross domestic product growth. The causes of the Great Moderation were
at the center of a long debate, and Stock and Watson (2003) argue that while efficient monetary policy
helped diminish output volatility, about half of the reduction in volatility remained unexplained. One of the
purposes of this work is to bring this knowledge to discuss symptoms and causes of economic uncertainty
in Brazil.
       Figure 1 presents the Economic Policy Uncertainty 1 monthly index, proposed by Baker, Bloom and
Davis (2013), from January 1990 to October 2017. Moving averages were calculated to smooth out the
series, using a 12-month window. Data shows the effects of 2008 financial crisis, political turmoils and
a recent comparison between Brazil, U.S. and European countries. The index is based on political news
coverage, stock market fluctuations and disagreements among forecasters about future economic growth.
While the index is not a direct proxy for microeconomic uncertainty, it gives an overview of instabilities
faced by the economies. Data shows the effects of the 2008 financial crisis and recent political turmoils, in
all sets of countries examined (impeachment and economic recession in Brazil, the latest elections in the
U.S., Brexit in Europe).

                             Figure 1 – Moving averages of EPU Index, 1990 - 2017.


                                                        300
                                     EPU Index (b.p.)




                                                                                       BRA
                                                                                       USA
                                                        200
                                                                                       EUR




                                                        100




                                                              2005   2010       2015
                                                                      Time



              Source: The authors, based on methodology from Baker, Bloom and Davis (2013).


      The matter of economic uncertainty gained momentum on the macroeconomics research agenda, in
the last ten years, due to the latest financial crisis. As noted by Castro (2016, p. 4), in the aftermath of
the crisis, Brazil “adopted a new regime, with public banks stepping in strongly in the credit markets to
offset the retraction in private banks’ credit origination”. Some of the findings in the literature and lessons
learned from recent financial crises materialized in the form of macroprudential policies and regulations,
1   Available at: <http://www.policyuncertainty.com/>. Accessed in Nov. 21, 2017.


                                                                            2
such as capital controls, corporate governance in firms and restrictions on banking instruments such as
credit default swaps (i.e., the Dodd-Frank Act in the United States)2 . Recently, the literature on economic
uncertainty advanced when studies turned their attentions to two facts. First, beyond many analyses on
aggregate GDP growth volatility, researchers started looking at the microeconomic level. This includes
sector and firm-level data.



2     Theoretical reference
       The real business cycles literature emphasizes the role of fluctuations in key macroeconomic variables
for economic growth and development, such as government spending, taxation, interest and inflation rates.
Also, the role of technological progress and human capital have been widely discussed. Since the seminal
work of Kydland and Prescott (1982), the framework has been refined, with the addition of consumption
habits, investment adjustment costs, different fiscal and monetary policy rules.
       Recently, the role of uncertainty in economic activity has received greater attention (BLOOM, 2014;
BAKER; BLOOM; DAVIS, 2013). The development of more sophisticated estimation techniques (such as
Bayesian methods) made it possible to study the dynamic behavior of economic variables not only in its
first but also second moments. Despite the mixed evidence on the issue of volatility-growth correlation, one
of the goals of policy makers is to smooth out deviations from long-term, sustainable economic growth (i.e.
monetary policy rules). This research agenda is especially relevant for emerging economies such as Brazil,
because the business cycles are more volatile.
       In the baseline real business cycles models, financial markets are set aside, with the underlying as-
sumption that financial fluctuations do not affect real economic aggregates. However, Bernanke, Gertler
and Gilchrist (1999) point out that, in fact, credit market shocks are not only a consequence but can also
cause stress in the real economy. Evidence coming from the financial crises in the 1990’s (Southeast Asian
Tigers, Russia, Latin American countries) helped popularize this element in small and medium-sized mod-
els. Hence, our theoretical approach embodies the strand of the macroeconomic literature of dynamic
stochastic general equilibrium models including financial sector as a source (or amplifier) of business cy-
cles.
       While there is, to the best of our knowledge, no evidence with respect to microeconomic uncertainty
shocks, as we specified, for the Brazilian economy, there is evidence for the impact of financial frictions
on Brazil’s business cycles, which is the key transmission mechanism of entrepreneurial uncertainty. With
a model based on Gerali et al. (2010), Aranha (2012) finds important evidence for Brazil: (i) a reduction
in credit market frictions (measured by bank spreads and adjustment costs) results in an increase in in-
vestment, consumption and GDP; and (ii) while those frictions help keeping banking spreads high, they
have a negative impact on inflation rates. Kanczuk (2013) extends the Smets and Wouters (2007) model,
incorporating credit markets for households and firms, to show how macroprudential policies can affect the
Brazilian economy. Castro (2016) also focused on the topic, with a model that combines financial frictions
and foreign capital flows, that is, direct investment as dependent of sovereign risk, to establish if fiscal pol-
icy should react to credit cycles. The authors suggest that this is only the case if macroprudential policies
are independent and counter-cyclical.
       Now, we discuss microeconomic shocks as a source of business cycles. This hypothesis states that
shocks in productivity or sales, at firm or sector level, lead to aggregate output fluctuations, providing a
microeconomic foundation to the real business cycles. However, this argument departs from the assumption
that aggregate shocks are the result of an average of identical firms or sectors. In fact, empirical evidence
from Gabaix and Society (2011), studying the U.S. economy, shows that the distribution of firm sizes
is skewed. Hence, exogenous shocks to large firms should account for a non-negligible amount of the
business cycles. The author calls it the “granular hypothesis”. This is a potential evidence for developing

2   Available at: <https://www.sec.gov/about/laws/wallstreetreform-cpa.pdf>. Accessed in Apr 15, 2018.


                                                             3
countries, as anecdotal evidence suggests that such economies have greater sectoral concentration, so one
could expect this hypothesis to have greater explanatory power.
       Acemoglu et al. (2012) refine the previous argument. The authors argue that microeconomic shocks
lead to aggregate fluctuations through input-output relationships. This happens because productivity gains
propagate along supply chains and generate spillovers to the whole economy. We call it the “network
hypothesis”. The hypothesis, corroborated by the authors using U.S. input-output data, also states that
microeconomic shocks translate into aggregate volatility “if there are significant asymmetries in the roles
that sectors play as direct or indirect suppliers to others” (ACEMOGLU et al., 2012, p. 2004). Both the
granular and the network hypotheses interact in the sense that large firms and markets have an important
contribution to the business cycles. More papers emphasize the network characteristic of modern economies
as a transmitter of economic fluctuations. Carvalho (2014) study the production networks using U.S. input-
output data and shows that indeed the productivity in central sectors of the economy and GDP growth are
strongly correlated. These “central” sectors act like hubs: they provide simple inputs (e.g.: raw materials)
that firms from other sectors can resort to, in the event of a break in supply chains.


2.1    The role of finance
       Bernanke and Gertler (1995) summarize how credit markets can amplify effects of monetary policy.
The external finance premium is the difference between raising capital from internal (reinvesting profits)
and external (i.e; equity markets) sources.
       This premium, which is counter-cyclical, can be affected via two channels. First, the balance sheet
channel: if entrepreneurs have greater net worth, they can self-finance investment projects partially or com-
pletely, or offer a higher amount of collateral as a guarantee, diminishing the external finance premium.
Thus, the financial position of borrowers should affect the premium. Also, consider the position of borrow-
ers after loan contracts are celebrated. If loans are negotiated at current, post-fixed interest rates, monetary
policy shocks affect the firms balance sheets in the short term. Now, firms reconsider taking new loans,
expanding the external finance premium and depressing investment. Via this mechanism, policy shocks
may have long-term effects.
       Second, the bank lending channel predicts that banks will also experience a balance sheet effect in
response to interest rate adjustments. According to Bernanke and Gertler (1995), while the plausibility of
the balance sheet channel is well understood, the bank lending channel is controversial, because financial
liberalization can diminish bank lending channel effects, as banks can offer new, less insured products.
       Economic policy uncertainty can also influence business cycles. Chi and Li (2017) analyze the impact
of swings in economic policy uncertainty on banks loans in China. They regress loan amounts on an
economic policy uncertainty index and banking sector controls, concluding that greater policy uncertainty
causes a reduction in quantity and size of loans, as they perceive increased risk, and this result is more
pronounced in financially less-developed areas. Moreover, the effect is, as expected, different if banks
are private, state-owned or have mixed ownership. As a policy recommendation, they advocate for better
coordination between commercial banks and the monetary policy authority as a means of smoothing credit
supply. Valencia (2017) also shows that, in moments of greater uncertainty, banks adjust their capital-
to-assets ratio, which varies according to the bank size, presenting a mechanism of self-insurance. This
suggests that, in aggregate terms, the impact of this channel, depends on the relevance of small and big
banks. And how does the structure of the banking sector affect economic fluctuations? Larrain (2006) finds
that greater access to banks contributes to a reduction in the volatility of industrial production: firms incur
short-term loans to smooth output, in response to demand and inventory shocks. Thus, banks have a counter-
cyclical effect on uncertainty shocks. Huang, Fang and Miller (2014) show that a highly concentrated
banking market correlates with greater industrial growth volatility. However, a more concentrated banking
sector can be beneficial to sectors highly dependent on external liquidity. Furthermore, Fendoğlu and Fendo
(2017) finds that in emerging countries monetary policy tools based on domestic reserve requirements are
helpful to counterbalance foreign capital inflows, and therefore preferred by the economic policy authorities.

                                                       4
       In the context of DSGE models, examples of uncertainty/risk as discussed by Pindyck (1991) are
explicit in time-to-build models (KYDLAND; PRESCOTT, 1982; JUNG, 2013). In this class of models, a
representative agent commits to an investment project that matures many periods ahead. A result supported
by the literature is that the longer the “time to build” an investment project, the more uncertain it is, and
larger spreads of the investment rate of return with respect to the risk-free rates are required. This is
aggravated if there are costs to stop and restart projects. Also, as pointed out by the author, a decrease in
interest rates need not benefit long-term investments, because it also reduces capital costs for other projects.
       In turn, Aiyagari (1994) focus on a precautionary savings motive, combined with borrowing con-
straints. The author presents an example model where a continuum of agents are subject to random labor
endowment shocks. In this case, uncertainty emerges from the productive process. Because markets are
incomplete and agents try to smooth consumption, they accumulate capital. Thus, in face of greater uncer-
tainty agents increase aggregate savings (which we interpret as investment, because of the macroeconomic
identity). The author points that earlier studies relied on the pure bequest motive as an explanation to
inter-generational capital accumulation, but precautionary savings presents as a relevant explanation, with
emphasis on lower income households.
       In a survey of U.S. and German firms, Elstner et al. (2012) find that uncertainty proxies based on
survey data account for a greater share of output volatility than stock market based proxies. Also, they
present interesting evidence: both countries exhibit slightly different output dynamics in response to an
uncertainty shock. While in the U.S. shocks have high persistence, in Germany shocks have a pattern of
decline followed by quick recovery, called by the authors a “bust-boom cycle”. According to the Elstner
et al. (2012) and Bachmann and Bayer (2013), this provides evidence of slightly higher cost of factor
adjustments, that is, in moments of greater uncertainty firms prefer to postpone investments and observe the
behavior of their competitors. Overall, the works of Bachmann suggests that in these countries the effects of
“wait-and-see” dynamics on firm-level risk are small. However, the presence of labor regulations and capital
constraints in Brazil result in greater factor adjustment costs (in comparison to developed economies). This
suggests that investment dynamics and “wait-and-see” behavior could provide a sound theoretical argument
to explain some of the effects of microeconomic uncertainty shocks in the Brazilian economy.
       The microeconomic uncertainty shocks we will discuss in this work are closely related to the ability
of entrepreneurs to thrive. Therefore, we must discuss the ease of doing business in Brazil. In general,
while Brazil supports a free enterprise economy, there is extensive government intervention and regulation,
which manifests in the form of: (i) permits and obligations with federal, state and municipality entities; (ii)
an extensive tax code that firms must comply with. According to the World Bank’s 2017 Ease of Doing
Business index, Brazil is ranked at 123rd place, among 190 countries in the sample. Brazil is poorly ranked
especially when it comes to starting a business, paying taxes and dealing with foreign trade. We expect that
these difficulties affect both the expected rate of survival of small business ventures and their variability,
because entrepreneurs must evaluate both the macroeconomic expectations and immediate obligations when
starting a business.


2.2    Discussion of microeconomic uncertainty shocks
      In this section we will discuss the origins of microeconomic uncertainty shocks. First, we will discuss
what are the conditions that favour the emergence of such shocks. microeconomic uncertainty shocks are
commonly attributed to heterogeneities in firms’ productive processes and outcomes, that are subject to
fluctuations. It is known that credit market imperfections exist, and they can amplify the effect of the un-
certainty shocks in the aggregate economy (GERTLER; KIYOTAKI, 2010) due to an information problem,
because lenders do not observe the realized shock from borrowers. This phenomenon is called the “costly
state verification problem” (TOWNSEND, 1979). This is an essential theoretical element, because in the
absence of credit constraints, there is no wedge in banks’ zero profit condition, providing us evidence that
any proxy variable for microeconomic uncertainty shocks must be correlated with financial markets (and
not exogenously in production, in example).

                                                       5
       The proxy for microeconomic uncertainty shocks should contain a few important properties. First,
is must be counter-cyclical, according to empirical evidence (BAKER; BLOOM; DAVIS, 2013). Second,
according to Cesa-Bianchi and Fernandez-Corugedo (2014), the proxy should be able to indirectly generate
fluctuations aggregate in output, consumption, investment and labor, based on evidence from Christiano,
Motto and Rostagno (2014). Having all that said, it is admittedly difficult to obtain a definitive measure
of economic uncertainty: firstly because it derives from a multitude of factors, such as economic condi-
tions, agents’ perception and behavior, and secondly because it is necessary to adopt some definition of
uncertainty, and any choice may lead to different strands of literature and empirical results. Also, there
are empirical limitations. According to Ludvigson, Ma and Ng (2015, p. 16), “common uncertainty prox-
ies contain economically large components of their variability that do not appear to be generated by a
movement in genuine uncertainty across the broader economy”. We stick to the knightian definition of un-
certainty, namely the difficulty of agents to forecast the probability of occurrence of all possible outcomes
from a set of events (and histories).
       The works of Nicholas Bloom investigate the relationship between uncertainty and economic per-
formance in greater detail. An important remark of the author is that “(...) uncertainty also appears to
endogenously increase during recessions, as lower economic growth induces greater micro and macro un-
certainty” (BLOOM, 2014, p. 153). Studying the U.S. economy, Bloom (2014) defines stylized facts for
economic uncertainty: (i) macroeconomic uncertainty rises in recessions. That is, the volatility of almost
all key economic indicators rises in recessions; (ii) microeconomic uncertainty also rises in recessions. The
author states this fact based on data from firms and industrial production. Volatility rises in the sense that
– in more uncertain times – some sectors go better than others. Bloom (2014) also points out that this facts
are not restricted to the U.S. economy, as the same economic rationale is also found in global economies,
and impacts are even more intense in developing countries such as Brazil.
       Now, we present each of the proposed measures of microeconomic uncertainty, drawing from the
literature, to a posterior comparison. All time series are seasonally adjusted, and first differences are taken
at any sign of unit roots.
       Uncertainty evaluation based on the productivity of firms is the most commonly found in the literature
(ELSTNER et al., 2012; CHUGH, 2013; CHRISTIANO; IKEDA, 2013; CHRISTIANO; MOTTO; ROS-
TAGNO, 2014). It is a known fact that the distribution of firm sales changes from times of economic growth
to recessions, as the average goes down and the dispersion goes up (BLOOM, 2014). Publicly available
firm-level data of private companies in Brazil are scarce. As a proxy variable, we use the moving standard
deviation of monthly industry sales in the state of São Paulo, produced by FIESP (Federação das Indústrias
do Estado de São Paulo).
       Since economic uncertainty is understood as a result of multiple factors, some authors and entities
proposed composite indices that can be used as a proxy for microeconomic uncertainty shocks. First, we
consider the Economic Policy Uncertainty3 (EPU) monthly index, proposed by Baker, Bloom and Davis
(2013). The index is based on political news coverage, stock market fluctuations and disagreements among
forecasters about future economic growth. The index have interesting properties: first, the selection of news
coverage is statistically resistant to “media political bias”. This was tested by comparing two subsamples
of newspapers segregated by political orientation. While the EPU index is primarily oriented to measure
economic policy uncertainty (that is, shifts in fiscal and monetary policy) that refers to macroeconomic
uncertainty, it contains useful elements for the study of microeconomic uncertainty shocks.
       In Brazil, there is a similar effort, namely the IIE-Br (Índice de Incerteza Econômica) index, devel-
oped by IBRE/FGV. In a similar manner to Baker, Bloom and Davis (2013), the IIE-Br index is a weighted
average of three components:


                            IIEt = 0.7 ∗ IIEmedia + 0.2 ∗ IIEexpectations + 0.1 ∗ IIEmarket                (1)

3   Available at: <http://www.policyuncertainty.com/>.


                                                          6
IIEmedia is based on the frequency of news mentioning keywords such as “uncertainty”, “crisis”, “risk”
in Brazilian main newspapers4 ; IIEexpectations is built upon measures of disagreement among forecasters
with respect to exchange and inflation rates (data available in Brazilian Central Bank FOCUS reports) and
IIEmarket is based on the volatility of Ibovespa, the Brazilian stock market index. The IIE-Br index is
standardized such that it has mean 100 and standard deviation 10 in the last ten years.


3     Analytical model
       To evaluate the role of microeconomic uncertainty shocks in business cycles in Brazil, we present
a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model based on Dorofeenko, Lee and Salyer (2008). This is a
model of a closed economy with a financial sector based on Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997). The key actors
of the model are the entrepreneurs, which produce finished capital goods and are subject to production
uncertainty and interact with banks to finance their activities. This interaction between entrepreneurs and
banks will be the source of shocks that emerge from the financial sector and affect the real economy.
Equity markets are absent from the modeled financial sector, hence debt is the only source of external
finance. We enhance the model by adding fiscal and monetary policy, in order to evaluate the impacts
of economic policy shocks in our model economy. The main variable of interest is St , the time-varying
standard deviation of microeconomic uncertainty shocks. Innovations to St allow for the dispersion of the
shocks to change over time. The fundamentals of this model resemble a standard real business cycles (RBC)
model, with the addition of financial market imperfections. The model incorporates the idea of the “financial
accelerator”, which brings the external finance premium to investment dynamics. The relationship between
entrepreneurs and banks are the key aspect behind microeconomic uncertainty shocks. Also, the financial
accelerator described above depends on costly state verification, that introduces information asymmetries
between financial parties.
       An overview of the model follows. Figure 2 shows all the interactions between agents, in terms of the
flows of inputs, outputs and goods. In the center of the diagram are the agents directly involved in the finan-
cial frictions, that according to the theoretical framework amplify the microeconomic uncertainty shocks
throughout the economy. There is a continuum of agents distributed in the (0, 1) interval, divided between
households and entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs represent a fraction η of the economy, while households rep-
resent a fraction 1 − η. To finance their activities, they interact with financial intermediaries called capital
mutual funds (CMF) in Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997), which in here we simply refer as banks. In addition,
there are firms that employ capital, household and entrepreneurial labor to produce a final, homogeneous
good, and their productivity is subject to exogenous shocks.
       Here, we define the financial contract and its optimal conditions. We follow the specification of the
contract in Dorofeenko, Lee and Salyer (2008). Financial contracts are one-period loans celebrated by two
parties:

     • Entrepreneurs: Risk-neutral agents that finance investment project combining internal (their own net
       worth) and external (loans from banks) resources.

     • Banks: Risk-neutral financial intermediaries that operate in perfect competition. Banks collect re-
       sources from entrepreneurs when they: (i) go bankrupt; (ii) repay loans and (iii) buy capital from
       entrepreneurs willing to increase consumption.

      In every period, entrepreneurial productivity is subject to an exogenous shock ωt . The realization of
this shock at time t is known only by entrepreneurs – banks must pay a fraction µ of the investment to
observe the entrepreneurs’ productivity. That is, they invest an amount it in capital goods with an expected
return of ωt it . This productivity shock follows a log-normal distribution with mean one: ωt ∼ log N (1, St ).
4   The full text in Folha de São Paulo and Valor Econômico is analyzed. In the other selected newspapers (O Globo, Estado de
    São Paulo, Correio Braziliense and Zero Hora), data is collected in the publications’ Twitter accounts.


                                                              7
                                     Figure 2 – Diagram of flows in the model
                                                                                                                  Gt
                                                      Tt
                                                                          Government
                                            ct
                                                                                                    wt lt , rt kt

                                                                                                                                  Firms
                                                                                                     lt , qt it


                                             Households                                               Banks



                                                           (1 + rk )(it − nt )         (it − nt )



                                                                                                                        rt kt
                                                                         Entrepreneurs

                                                                                                                       cte , kt



                                                                   Source: The author.


Following the literature, we define the time-varying dispersion of entrepreneurial productivity St as a first-
order autoregressive process:

                                                                                       1−ζ ζ
                                                                       St = S̄t           St−1 εtS                                        (2)

where εtS ∼ N(0, 1) is the microeconomic uncertainty shock.
       Figure 3 provides intuition on the microeconomic uncertainty shock. The solid line is the initial
cumulative distribution function (c.d.f.) of ωt , while the dashed line is the c.d.f after a positive shock in ut .
Shocks to the dispersion of entrepreneurial productivity, although mean-preserving, increase uncertainty
about entrepreneurs’ productivity, thus increasing the probability of bankruptcy Φ(ω, St ) (which will be
later defined) and changing the conditions of the financial contract:

                           Figure 3 – Effect of a microeconomic uncertainty shock
                                  Φ(ω̄t , St )




                                                                                 ω̄       E(ω)

                                                                   Source: The author.


      An entrepreneur has one unit of labor that is always supplied and zt units of capital at time t. Capital
can be rented to firms at a rate of return rt . Hence, entrepreneurial income is nt + rt zt . Also accounting for
capital depreciation, net worth at time t is defined by the equation:

                                                           nt = wt + zt (rt + qt (1 − δ ))                                                (3)

                                                                                           8
      A solvent (i.e., nt > 0) entrepreneur borrows it −nt consumption goods from banks, with an obligation
to pay back (1 + rtk )(it − nt ), where rtk > rt ∀t is the loan rate. According to their production, there will be
a threshold shock ω̄t that separates bankrupt from non-bankrupt entrepreneurs:

                                                            (1 + rk )(it − nt )
                                                    ωt <                        ≡ ω̄t                            (4)
                                                                    it
      This leads us to two possible scenarios:

   1. ωt ≥ ω̄t : The entrepreneur produces ωt it units of capital and pays back (1 + rk )(it − nt ) to banks.
   2. ωt < ω̄t : The entrepreneur goes bankrupt and the bank will take all assets, upon facing monitoring
      costs µ.

      We should now define the shared of capital production to be distributed to entrepreneurs and banks:

                                          Z ∞
                        f (ω̄t , St ) =           ωφ (ω̄t , St )dω − [1 − Φ(ω̄t , St )]ω̄t                       (5)
                                           ω̄t
                                          Z ω̄t
                       m(ω̄t , St ) =             ωφ (ω̄t , St )dω + [1 − Φ(ω̄t , St )]ω̄t − µΦ(ω̄t , St )       (6)
                                           −∞

where f (ω̄t , St ) is the share of capital output obtained by the entrepreneur and m(ω̄t , St ) is the share re-
ceived by banks. Note the integrands: while f (ω̄t , St ) is calculated above the threshold shock, m(ω̄t , St ) is
calculated below the shock. We also have the property that f (ω̄t , St ) + m(ω̄t , St ) = 1 − µΦ(ω̄t , St ).
       The optimal financial contract is a choice of investment and a threshold productivity shock that gives
the entrepreneur maximum return, once banks are willing to offer such resources (an incentive compatibility
constraint). Defining Φ(ω̄t , St ) as the cumulative distribution function of ωt and φ (ω̄t , St ) as its probability
distribution function, the optimal contract is the solution to the optimization problem:


                                                           max qt it f (ω̄t , St )                               (7)
                                                          {it ,ω̄t }
                                                   s.t. qt it m(ω̄t , St ) ≥ it − nt       ∀t                    (8)

      Solution of the problem above leads to the following first order conditions:

                                      ∂L           ∂ f (ω̄t , St )             ∂ m(ω̄t , St )
                                           : qt it                 = −λt qt it                                   (9)
                                      ∂ ω̄             ∂ ω̄                       ∂ ω̄
                                      ∂L
                                           : qt f (ω̄t , St ) = −λt [1 − qt m(ω̄t , St )]                       (10)
                                      ∂ it
      The first condition can be rewritten as:

                                                            1      φ (ω̄t , St )
                                                       1−      =                                                (11)
                                                            λt   1 − Φ(ω̄t , St )
      Solving for λt and plugging into the second condition, we can find an expression for qt :

                                     "                                                                #
                              1                                        φ (ω̄t , St )µ f (ω̄t , St )
                                 = ( f (ω̄t , St ) + m(ω̄t , St )) +             ∂ f (ω̄t ,St )
                              qt
                                                                                     ∂ ω̄
                                  "                                                         #
                                                           φ (ω̄t , St )µ f (ω̄t , St )
                                 = 1 − µΦ(ω̄t , St ) +              ∂ f (ω̄ ,S )
                                                                                                                (12)
                                                                                 t     t
                                                                               ∂ ω̄


                                                                       9
      The second equilibrium condition can also be rewritten as:

                                                                1
                                                 it =                       nt                                 (13)
                                                        1 − qt m(ω̄t , St )
       Let’s examine the properties of this investment model. We can interpret Equation 13 as the aggregate
investment supply function, decreasing in the price of capital qt and increasing in net worth nt , while ω̄t
is uniquely defined by Equation 12, once we set ω̄t and St as fixed in our comparative statics exercise.
Since Equation 13 is linear in its arguments, simple aggregation is possible. To answer how microeconomic
uncertainty shocks affect investment demand, note that in Equation 13 a rise in ω̄t implies a rise in m(ω̄t , St ),
leading to a fall in it , ceteris paribus.
       Now, we move on to a detailed description of the agents of the model. Households are risk-neutral and
have infinite life. They interact with firms by selling labor (in exchange of wages wt ) and renting capital (at
a rate rt ). Following Dorofeenko, Lee and Salyer (2008), we choose a simple quasi-linear functional form
for household utility. Households maximize the discounted sum of lifetime expected utility, by choosing the
sequence of allocations of the final consumption good and leisure {ct , lt }t=0
                                                                             ∞ starting from the information

set at time t = 0, according to the problem:

                                                        ∞
                                         max∞ E0 ∑ β t [ln(ct ) + ν(1 − lt )]                                  (14)
                                       {ct ,lt }t=0     t=0
                                       s.t. wt lt + rt kt ≥ ct + qt it + Tt ∀t                                 (15)
                                                   kt+1 = (1 − δ )kt + it ∀t                                   (16)

where β ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor, ν is the elasticity of labor, wt is the real wage, rt is the capital rental
rate and kt is the capital stock, qt is the price of capital goods, it is the flow of new capital goods and Tt
are lump-sum transfers to the government. The price of the final consumption good is normalized to unity.
The second constraint is a standard law of motion for the households’ capital stock, with a depreciation rate
δ ∈ (0, 1). To solve the constrained optimization problem above, we plug the second constraint into the first
and form a Lagrangian. The first order conditions are:


                                        νct = wt                                                               (17)
                                                                         
                                         qt          qt+1 (1 − δ ) + rt+1
                                            = β Et                                                             (18)
                                         ct                  ct+1

       The resulting equilibrium gives relationships that are standard in the literature of RBC models: the
first condition states that the marginal rate of substitution between leisure and consumption equals real
wages, while the second is the Euler equation, that describes household consumption dynamics.
       Firms combine capital, household and entrepreneurial labor to produce the final consumption good,
using a constant returns-to-scale Cobb-Douglas technology according to the equation:

                               Yt = At F(Kt , Ht , Hte ) = At KtαK HtαH (Hte )1−αK −αH                         (19)
      Total factor productivity (TFP) evolves according to a first-order autoregressive process in logarithms:

                                                                 A ρ
                                                      At+1 = At εt+1                                           (20)
                                                A is an i.i.d shock that follows a standard normal distri-
where ρt is the persistence of TFP shocks, and εt+1
bution. Equilibrium conditions of firms are found by maximizing production subject to households’ input
supply:

                                                              10
                                                                        Yt
                                                                wt = αH                                                        (21)
                                                                        Ht
                                                                        Yt
                                                                rt = αK                                                        (22)
                                                                        Kt
                                                                               Yt
                                                      wte = (1 − αK − αH )                                                     (23)
                                                                               Hte
where At is total factor productivity, Kt is the capital stock, Ht 5 is aggregate household labor supply and Hte
is entrepreneurial labor supply at time t. According to equations above, wages and the capital rental rate
should equal their marginal rates of transformation in equilibrium.
       Entrepreneurs maximize the discounted sum of their lifetime utility, according to the problem below:

                                                        ∞
                                            max
                                             e ∞
                                                 E0 ∑ (β γ)t cte                                                               (24)
                                           {ct }t=0    t=0
                                                                                ce
                                                                            
                                                              f (ω̄t , St )
                                         s.t. zt+1 = nt                        − t ∀t                                          (25)
                                                         1 − qt m(ω̄t , St )    qt
                                                nt = wt + zt (rt + qt (1 − δ )) ∀t                                               (3)
where γ ∈ (0, 1) is an additional discount factor, implying that entrepreneurs are more impatient than house-
holds. Entrepreneurs’ choice is constrained by the law of motion of capital and definition of net worth, and
their consumption is defined after the returns from investment are realized. This is necessary in order to
prevent a scenario where entrepreneurs accumulate enough capital to finance their projects entirely with
internal resources 6 .
      Solution of the problem above leads to the following equilibrium condition:
                                                                                    
                                                                  qt+1 f (ω̄t , St )
                           qt = β γEt (qt+1 (1 − δ ) + rt+1 )                                            (26)
                                                                1 − qt+1 m(ω̄t , St )
      We introduce economic policy in the model, starting with fiscal policy. There is a government that
consumes final goods and finance expenditures via lump-sum transfers from households. Hence, ricardian
equivalence holds every period. Government consumption follows a first-order autoregressive process:
                                                                    g     ρg
                                                      Gt = Ḡ1−ρ Gt−1 + εtG                                                    (27)
       We introduce the definition of equilibrium with the market clearing conditions. First, the clearing
conditions in labor markets, recalling that η is the share of entrepreneurs in the economy, and labor supply
(1 − lt ) is normalized to unity:

                                                            Ht = (1 − η)lt                                                     (28)
                                                               He = η                                                          (29)
     Next, the market clearing conditions in the final goods market. The first condition simply states that
output equals the sum of aggregate household consumption, invest and government consumption.

                                                         Ct + It + Gt = Yt                                                     (30)
                                                       Ct = (1 − η)ct + ηcte                                                   (31)
                                                             It = ηit                                                          (32)
5   Household labor Ht is linked to the definition of leisure lt by equation Ht = (1 − η)lt .
6   The other way to turn this issue tractable is to assume that a small fraction of entrepreneurs consume all their assets and leave
    the market in every period. This is observed in Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999)


                                                                   11
       Now, the equilibrium law of motion of capital stock:

                                           Kt+1 = (1 − δ )Kt + It [1 − µΦ(ω̄t , St )]                                             (33)
       A competitive equilibrium is defined by the optimal policy rules from the sequence of variables
{Kt+1 , Zt+1 , Ht , Hte , qt , nt , it , ω̄t , ct , cte } and states {Kt , Zt , At , St , gt } that satisfy the equations discussed ear-
lier. Substitutions that derived from the firms’ equilibrium conditions are made when possible. First, the
equilibrium conditions that derive from the households’ optimization problem:

                                                    Yt
                                       νct = αH                                                                                   (17)
                                                    Ht
                                                                                     
                                        qt                 1                      Yt+1
                                           = β Et              qt+1 (1 − δ ) + αK                                                 (18)
                                        ct               ct+1                     Kt+1

       The conditions at the optimal financial contract:


                                                                 φ (ω̄t , St )µ f (ω̄t , St ) −1
                                                                                            
                                     qt = 1 − µΦ(ω̄t , St ) +                                                                     (12)
                                                                           f 0 (ω̄t )
                                                  1
                                     it =                     nt                                                                  (13)
                                          1 − qt m(ω̄t , St )

       The conditions associated with the entrepreneurs’ optimization problem:

                                                                                         
                                                                Yt+1      qt+1 f (ω̄t , St )
                              qt = β γEt qt+1 (1 − δ ) + αK                                                                       (26)
                                                                Kt+1     1 − qt m(ω̄t , St )
                                                                     
                                       Yt                          Yt
                              nt = αH e e + Zt qt (1 − δ ) + αK                                                                     (3)
                                       H                           Kt
                                       t                       e
                                           f (ω̄t , St )        c
                            Zt+1 = ηnt                        −η t                                                                (25)
                                        1 − qt m(ω̄t , St )     qt

     The equilibrium defined by the processes that govern TFP, microeconomic uncertainty and govern-
ment spending:


                                                               Aρ
                                                    At+1 = At εt+1                                                                (20)
                                                         St = S̄1−ζ St−1 + εtS
                                                                         ζ
                                                                                                                                    (2)
                                                                1−ρ g        ρg
                                                         Gt = Ḡ         Gt−1 + εtG                                               (27)

       Finally, a definition of household welfare that will be used in further analyses:


                                                 Wt = U(ct , lt ) + β Et [U(ct+1 , lt+1 )],                                       (34)
                                      with U(ct , lt ) = ln(ct ) + ν(1 − lt )


4     Data and procedures
     In summary, the model has 10 real variables, 16 parameters, 10 equilibrium equations and 4 ex-
ogenous shocks. The time unit of the model is a quarter. In this work, we perform simulations with the

                                                                    12
aim to approximate actual data, to ensure the robustness of our findings. We used quarterly data from the
Brazilian central bank (Time Series Management System, SGS) for macroeconomic aggregates, namely
ct , cte , it , gt , kt , ht . Consistent, seasonally adjusted quarterly data for the aggregates span from the third quar-
ter of 1993 to present dates. Data on credit market variables are available at the Relatório de Estabilidade
Financeira7 reports from the Brazilian central bank, available every semester since 2002. In conformity
with other data sources, our period of analysis spans from the first quarter of 2003 to the last quarter of
2017. In the spirit of Baker, Bloom and Davis (2013), we considered and discussed several variables as
proxies for economic uncertainty in Section 2, to finally choose a proxy that is based on stock returns.
           To perform the simulations, we input the steady state equilibrium equations into Dynare, a tool-
box for DSGE models available for MATLAB and Octave. Table 1 provides the list of parameters of
the model to be specified and data sources for calibration. To calibrate the model, we used empirical
data for our period of interest using the data sources noted above, whenever feasible. Otherwise, we re-
sorted to our main references of analytical models with financial frictions (CARLSTROM; FUERST, 1997;
DOROFEENKO; LEE; SALYER, 2008; CHRISTIANO; MOTTO; ROSTAGNO, 2014; CESA-BIANCHI;
FERNANDEZ-CORUGEDO, 2014) and the existing literature for DSGE models with financial frictions
that study the Brazilian economy (CASTRO et al., 2011; CAVALCANTI; VEREDA, 2011; ARANHA,
2012; KANCZUK, 2013; AREOSA; COELHO, 2015; DIVINO; KORNELIUS, 2015).
           We should comment in detail how parameters were retrieved. The discount factor β was calculated as
follows: first, we calculated average inflation π and interest rates Rn (annualized SELIC) using data from
BACEN, then we applied a relationship found in the canonical real business cycle model:

                                                                  π̄
                                                         β=          ¯                                               (35)
                                                               (1 + Rn)
      The value found closely matches Carvalho and Castro (2017). For the capital share of production αK ,
we follow the literature that sets a value of 0.3 for Brazil (ARANHA, 2012). For the household labor share
of production αH , we set a value of 0.699 to leave a share of 0.001 for the entrepreneurial labor production
(defined in the model as 1 − αK − αH ).

             Table 1 – Calibration of model parameters
              Param.    Value      Description                      Reference
              β         0.890      Discount factor                  Relative to real interest rates (BACEN)
              αK        0.300      Capital share                    Aranha (2012)
              αH        0.699      Household labor share            Relative to α K
              γ         0.870      Entr. discount factor            Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997)
              δ         0.005      Depreciation rate                Annual rate of 2%
              η         0.100      Share of entrepreneurs           Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997)
              ν         2.520      Elast. of household labor        Dorofeenko, Lee and Salyer (2008)
              µ         0.300      Monitoring costs                 Cesa-Bianchi and Fernandez-Corugedo (2014)
              ρA        0.996      Persistence of TFP               AR(1) on output gap (BACEN)
              σA        0.072      Std. dev. of TFP shock           AR(1) residuals on output gap (BACEN)
              σN        0.100      Std. dev. of net worth shock     Dorofeenko, Lee and Salyer (2008)
              ρG        0.995      Persistence of govt. spending    AR(1) on govt. consumption (BACEN)
              ζ         0.950      Persistence of unc. shock        AR(1) on scaled uncertainty index
              S̄        0.207      S.s. micro uncertainty           Christiano, Motto and Rostagno (2014)
              Ḡ        0.250      S.s. govt. spending              Average GYtt ratio (BACEN)

             Source: The author.


     To set the entrepreneurial discount factor γ, we follow Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997). They set this
parameter to ensure a rate of return to capital such that entrepreneurs are willing to accumulate capital
7   Available at: <http://www.bcb.gov.br/publicacoes/ref>.


                                                               13
– considering that they are more impatient than households. The capital depreciation rate δ follows the
literature (an annual rate of 2%). Next, we draw some parameters that are specific from this class of models
from the literature (η, ν, µ). Here, we draw special attention to the monitoring costs parameter µ: this
controls the weight of costly state verification in the optimal contract setting. The values chosen in the
literature span from 0.15 to 0.30, when studying developed economies. We opt for higher values to reflect
imperfections in developing credit markets.
       To calibrate the productivity shocks ρA and σA , we fit a first-order autoregressive process on GDP
deviations from its long-term trend, a common measure of total factor productivity8 . We also employ this
strategy to determine the persistences of fiscal policy and uncertainty shocks. Finally, we get the steady
state microeconomic uncertainty S̄ from Cesa-Bianchi and Fernandez-Corugedo (2014), while the steady
state government spending Ḡ is obtained by calculating the average government consumption to GDP ratio,
using BACEN data.


5     Results
     In this Section we will present the outputs of the model simulations. First, we introduce plots of
impulse-response functions of the model. The impulse-response analysis describe how our model variables
behave upon our exogenous shocks (microeconomic uncertainty shocks, fiscal and monetary policies) in
terms of deviations from their steady-state values, up to 40 quarters (10 years) after the shock9 . Next,
we further diagnose the correlation between aggregates to find if they conform to existing literature and
empirical data. Finally, we perform a welfare analysis of the household in response to the exogenous
shocks to determine possible welfare losses due to microeconomic uncertainty shock.


5.1     Impulse response analysis
      For the impulse response analysis, we employ a second-order approximation of policy functions
around the non-stochastic steady state, as in Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2004). This is necessary as we
expect that the effects of microeconomic uncertainty shocks are limited in a first-order approximation as
(i) uncertainty shock are mean-preserving; (ii) only one of the possible states of the model economy is
considered and (iii) evaluation of welfare functions under first-order approximations are imprecise. This
also implies that we require a different treatment of impulse response functions, because in a higher-order
approximation we have a multitude of optimal policy functions, according to each of the possible states
generated by microeconomic uncertainty shocks at any given time (histories). We also apply the pruning
procedure implemented by Andreasen, Fernández-Villaverde and Rubio-Ramírez (2018) to treat impulse
response functions that exhibit explosive behavior, a problem commonly found in higher-order approxi-
mations. The pruning procedure consists of discarding terms with order greater than the required when
computing the approximated solution of the system.
      Figure 4 shows the response of the main model variables to a TFP shock. First, we find that impacts to
output and household consumption are but long-lasting. Shocks to investment, labor inputs, entrepreneurs’
net worth and price of capital exhibit a quicker speed of correction to the steady state. Note the rise in
both investment and the price of capital: in the partial equilibrium of capital markets, this indicates a rise in
the demand for capital. Variables PHI, rpBANK and rpENT are, respectively, the steady-state probability of
default for entrepreneurs Φ(ω̄t , St ), the risk premiums for banks and entrepreneurs.
      In Figure 5 we plot responses to a positive shock to entrepreneurial net worth shock. We observe
that all variables quickly return to their steady-state values. As expected, interest rates fall, because en-
8   An alternative measurement for TFP can be found by extracting the residuals from a least-squares fit of GDP on gross fixed
    capital formation and labor force.
9   Plots for government consumption appear only in the impulse responses to fiscal policy shocks, because fiscal expenditures
    are exogenously determined (according to Equation 27).


                                                             14
                                        Figure 4 – Responses to a TFP shock

                                             Y                               C                               i
                                0.05                         0.035                             0.2
                                0.04                          0.03                            0.15
                                                             0.025
                                0.03                          0.02                             0.1
                                0.02                         0.015                            0.05
                                                              0.01
                                0.01                         0.005                               0
                                   0                             0                           -0.05
                                        10   20    30   40            10    20   30   40              10    20     30   40


                                             H                               n                               r
                               0.005                           0.06                          0.015
                                    0                          0.05
                              -0.005                           0.04                           0.01
                                -0.01                          0.03
                                                                                             0.005
                              -0.015                           0.02
                                -0.02                          0.01                              0
                              -0.025                              0
                                -0.03                         -0.01                         -0.005
                                        10   20    30   40            10    20   30   40              10    20     30   40


                                             PHI                           rpBANK                          rpENT
                                0.02                          0.012                          0.025
                               0.015                           0.01                           0.02
                                                              0.008                          0.015
                                0.01                          0.006
                                                                                              0.01
                               0.005                          0.004
                                                              0.002                          0.005
                                   0                              0                              0
                              -0.005                         -0.002                         -0.005
                                        10   20    30   40            10    20   30   40              10    20     30   40




                                                        Source: The author.


trepreneurs can finance a greater deal of their projects internally. The demand for external finance falls,
causing a fall in the price of capital.

                                   Figure 5 – Responses to a net worth shock

                                             Y                               C                               i
                                0.05                           0.01                             0.5
                                0.04                          0.008                             0.4
                                0.03                          0.006                             0.3
                                                                                                0.2
                                0.02                          0.004
                                                                                                0.1
                                0.01                          0.002                               0
                                   0                              0                            -0.1
                               -0.01                         -0.002                            -0.2
                                        10   20    30   40            10    20   30   40              10    20     30   40


                                             H                               n                               r
                                0.04                          0.15                          0.0015
                                0.03                            0.1                           0.001
                                0.02                                                        0.0005
                                                              0.05
                                0.01                                                              0
                                   0                             0                         -0.0005
                               -0.01                          -0.05                          -0.001
                                        10   20    30   40            10    20   30   40              10    20     30   40


                                             PHI                           rpBANK                          rpENT
                               0.002                          0.002                          0.002
                                                                                             0.001
                                   0                              0                              0
                              -0.002                         -0.002                         -0.001
                                                                                            -0.002
                              -0.004                         -0.004                         -0.003
                              -0.006                         -0.006                         -0.004
                                                                                            -0.005
                              -0.008                         -0.008                         -0.006
                                        10   20    30   40            10    20   30   40              10    20     30   40




                                                        Source: The author.

      Figure 6 presents the responses to a positive fiscal policy shock. We observe that a fiscal policy shock
induces a rise in output, investment and labor aggregates. This is straightforward as the government is
increasing the demand for final goods, hence firms must increase production to clear markets. This increases
the demand for capital, explaining the increase in interest rates. Consequently, household consumption
decreases following a fiscal policy shock because a larger fraction of final goods are being directed to the
government. An interesting result emerges: fiscal stimulus reduces the bankruptcy hazard rate, although the
impact is small.

5.2   The role of microeconomic uncertainty shocks
      Figure 7 shows the responses of the model variables to a positive (increasing) shock in microeconomic
uncertainty, our main exogenous shock of interest. The plots reveal that greater uncertainty diminishes

                                                                           15
                                Figure 6 – Responses to a fiscal policy shock

                                              Y                               C                              i
                                    2                            0.1                             8
                                  1.5                          0.05                              6
                                                                   0                             4
                                    1
                                                              -0.05                              2
                                  0.5                           -0.1                             0
                                    0                         -0.15                             -2
                                         10   20    30   40            10    20    30   40            10    20     30   40


                                              g                               H                              n
                                  1.4                           2.5                            0.4
                                  1.2                             2                            0.3
                                    1                                                          0.2
                                  0.8                           1.5                            0.1
                                  0.6                             1                              0
                                  0.4                                                         -0.1
                                  0.2                           0.5                           -0.2
                                    0                             0                           -0.3
                                         10   20    30   40            10    20    30   40            10    20     30   40


                                               r                             PHI                           rpBANK
                                  0.5                           1.4                            0.5
                                  0.4                           1.2                            0.4
                                  0.3                             1
                                                                0.8                            0.3
                                  0.2
                                                                0.6                            0.2
                                  0.1                           0.4
                                    0                                                          0.1
                                                                0.2
                                 -0.1                             0                              0
                                 -0.2                          -0.2                           -0.1
                                         10   20    30   40            10    20    30   40            10    20     30   40




                                                         Source: The author.


output and especially investment. Also, we learn that final goods consumption increases: entrepreneurs
are more impatient than households, so as investment decreases their optimal decision is to prefer present
consumption.
      In addition, note that entrepreneurial net worth increases following a microeconomic uncertainty
shock, revealing that in times of greater uncertainty entrepreneurs prefer to finance their projects internally
in a greater scale. This happens because greater microeconomic uncertainty raises the external finance
premium, as predicted by the literature of financial accelerator models.
      We also find that aggregate investment decreases, and the price of capital initially responds to uncer-
tainty shocks with a fall, followed by a persistence rise. In the partial equilibrium of capital markets, this is
similar to what happens after a TFP shock, but here there is a decline in capital supply.

                        Figure 7 – Responses to a microeconomic uncertainty shock

                                              Y                               C                              i
                                  0.3                          0.03                            2.5
                                                               0.02                              2
                                  0.2                                                          1.5
                                                               0.01                              1
                                  0.1
                                                                  0                            0.5
                                    0                                                            0
                                                              -0.01                           -0.5
                                 -0.1                         -0.02                             -1
                                         10   20    30   40            10    20    30   40            10    20     30   40


                                              H                               n                              r
                                  0.4                           0.2                           0.06
                                  0.3                             0                           0.04
                                  0.2                          -0.2
                                  0.1                                                         0.02
                                                               -0.4
                                    0                                                            0
                                 -0.1                          -0.6
                                 -0.2                          -0.8                          -0.02
                                 -0.3                            -1                          -0.04
                                         10   20    30   40            10    20    30   40            10    20     30   40


                                              PHI                           rpBANK                         rpENT
                                     0                          0.1                               0
                                -0.05                                                        -0.05
                                  -0.1                        0.05
                                                                                               -0.1
                                -0.15
                                                                  0                          -0.15
                                  -0.2
                                -0.25                                                          -0.2
                                                              -0.05
                                  -0.3                                                       -0.25
                                -0.35                          -0.1                            -0.3
                                         10   20    30   40            10    20    30   40            10    20     30   40




                                                         Source: The author.


      Now, we follow the insight from Cesa-Bianchi and Fernandez-Corugedo (2014) and analyze how
steady state values of macroeconomic aggregates change according to the steady state levels of microeco-
nomic uncertainty. Results are plotted in Figure 8, where the steady state levels of aggregates are in the

                                                                            16
vertical axes, and steady state levels of microeconomic uncertainty in the horizontal axes, ranging from 0.15
to 0.25 (a reasonable set of values around the steady-state calibrated value S̄).
       We have found that steady state levels are decreasing in uncertainty, in most economic aggregates.
Consumption, investment and labor supply are decreasing, a fact that is predicted by the literature as a
precautionary savings mechanism. Entrepreneurial net worth is increasing in uncertainty because of the
increasing cost of external finance. Because investment is decreasing, we conclude that entrepreneurs are
less leveraged when economic uncertainty is higher. The model also predict that steady state interest rates
are lower when steady state levels of microeconomic uncertainty. This result should not be confused with
the impacts of microeconomic uncertainty shocks on interest rates, where in fact interest rates go up and
then oscillate back to the steady state. Otherwise, we combine this with the evidence that investment levels
are decreasing to conclude that in greater steady states of uncertainty, the supply of capital decreases.

                      Figure 8 – Steady states and microeconomic uncertainty shocks

                                  -425.4                                        -10.45                                      -140.2
                                  -425.6                                          -10.5                                     -140.4
                                  -425.8                                        -10.55
                                                                                                                            -140.6
                                                                          C
                              Y




                                    -426                                          -10.6




                                                                                                                        I
                                                                                                                            -140.8
                                  -426.2                                        -10.65
                                  -426.4                                          -10.7                                          -141
                                  -426.6                                        -10.75                                      -141.2
                                          0 .14
                                       0.12       0 .180.20.22
                                              0 .16              0 .26
                                                             0 .24                       0 .14
                                                                                      0.12   0 .16
                                                                                                 0 .180.20.22
                                                                                                            0 .24
                                                                                                                0 .26               0 .14
                                                                                                                                 0.12       0 .180.20.22
                                                                                                                                        0 .16              0 .26
                                                                                                                                                       0 .24


                                  0.115                                         -155.8                                              -6
                                   0.11                                           -156                                              -7
                                  0.105                                                                                             -8
                                                                                -156.2
                                                                          H
                              g




                                                                                                                            n
                                     0.1                                                                                            -9
                                                                                -156.4
                                  0.095                                                                                           -10
                                   0.09                                         -156.6                                            -11
                                  0.085                                         -156.8                                            -12
                                          0 .14
                                       0.12       0 .180.20.22
                                              0 .16              0 .26
                                                             0 .24                      0 .14
                                                                                     0.12   0 .16
                                                                                                0 .180.20.22
                                                                                                           0 .24
                                                                                                               0 .26                    0 .14
                                                                                                                                     0.12       0 .180.20.22
                                                                                                                                            0 .16              0 .26
                                                                                                                                                           0 .24


                                    -11.9                                       -21.54                                           -170
                                  -11.95                                        -21.55                                           -180
                                      -12
                                                                                                                        rpBANK




                                                                                -21.56
                                                                                                                                 -190
                                                                          PHI




                                  -12.05
                                                                                -21.57
                              r




                                    -12.1                                                                                        -200
                                  -12.15                                        -21.58
                                    -12.2                                       -21.59                                           -210
                                  -12.25                                          -21.6                                          -220
                                           0 .14
                                        0.12       0 .180.20.22
                                               0 .16              0 .26
                                                              0 .24                      0 .14
                                                                                      0.12   0 .16
                                                                                                 0 .180.20.22
                                                                                                            0 .24
                                                                                                                0 .26                  0 .14
                                                                                                                                    0.12       0 .180.20.22
                                                                                                                                           0 .16              0 .26
                                                                                                                                                          0 .24




                                                                    Source: The author.



5.3    Welfare analysis
       Now, we will comment the effects of agency costs in the welfare of agents, by evaluating Equation 34.
In Figure 9 we plot household welfare as a function of agency costs by performing simulations of our model,
using different calibrations for the monitoring cost parameter µ, ranging from 0.1 to 0.4 in steps of 0.05, and
for the steady state microeconomic uncertainty S̄, ranging from 0.15 to 0.25 in steps of 0.05, ceteris paribus.
Simulations show that, as expected, our model economy face welfare losses emerging from our costly state
verification problem. While the fall in welfare due to monitoring costs is exponentially smoothed, the fall
due to average uncertainty is approximately linear.


6     Conclusion
      The aim of this work was to analyze the impact of microeconomic uncertainty shocks in the Brazilian
economy, with the use of a real business cycle model with financial frictions, calibrated for the 2003-
2017 period. Our work explored the underlying investment model in our general equilibrium framework to
investigate the effects of economic uncertainty – emerging from a large number of competitive agents – in
capital accumulation.
      We draw a number of conclusions from our research: First, agency costs strongly impact our model
economy. As in other general equilibrium models, they work like capital adjustment costs: asymmetric

                                                                                                17
                 Figure 9 – Welfare, agency costs and microeconomic uncertainty shocks

                                            2.495                                               -3490




                                             2.49

                                                                                                -3500


                                            2.485



                                                                                                -3510
                                             2.48




                                  Welfare




                                                                                      Welfare
                                            2.475
                                                                                                -3520



                                             2.47


                                                                                                -3530

                                            2.465




                                             2.46                                               -3540
                                                0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4                 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18 0.2 0.22 0.24 0.26
                                                            Agency costs                                              S




                                                                Source: The author.


information between lenders and borrowers increase the cost of external finance, with uncertainty shocks
affecting bankruptcy rates and the supply of capital. Second, microeconomic uncertainty shocks impacts
intertemporal choice and capital accumulation. Analyzing the responses from uncertainty shocks impulses,
we found that uncertainty negatively impacts investment, as expected from the literature discussion. A broad
literature points out that this effect would be amplified in economies with greater credit constraints. Also,
in more uncertain times agents cease to invest and engage in present consumption. Third, microeconomic
uncertainty shocks are welfare reducing, as the steady state levels of household consumption of final goods
are decreasing in uncertainty.
       The key findings of this work suggest that authorities should pursue policies that minimize agency
costs in the capital market. As an example, a further development of credit scores by financial intermedi-
aries.


                                                                 Bibliography


ACEMOGLU, D.; CARVALHO, V.; OZDAGLAR, A.; TAHBAZ-SALEHI, A.; SOCIETY, T. E. The
Network Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations. Econometrica, v. 80, n. 5, p. 1977–2016, 2012.

AIYAGARI, S. R. Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, v. 109, n. 3, p. 659–684, 1994.

ANDREASEN, M. M.; FERNÁNDEZ-VILLAVERDE, J.; RUBIO-RAMÍREZ, J. F. The pruned
state-space system for non-linear DSGE models: Theory and empirical applications. Review of Economic
Studies, 2018.

ARANHA, M. Z. Um modelo DSGE com fricções financeiras aplicado ao Brasil. 98 p. Tese
(Doutorado) — USP,

AREOSA, W. D.; COELHO, C. A. Utilizando um modelo DSGE para avaliar os efeitos macroeconômicos
dos recolhimentos compulsórios no Brasil. Pesquisa e Planejamento Econômico, v. 45, n. 3,

BACHMANN, R.; BAYER, C. ’Wait-and-See’ business cycles? Journal of Monetary Economics,
Elsevier, v. 60, n. 6, p. 704–719, 2013.

BAKER, S.; BLOOM, N.; DAVIS, S. Measuring economic policy uncertainty.

                                                                                      18
BERNANKE, B.; GERTLER, M.; GILCHRIST, S. The financial accelerator in a quantitative business
cycle framework. In: TAYLOR, J.; WOODFORD, M. (Ed.). Handbook of Macroeconomics. 1. ed. [S.l.]:
Elsevier B.V., 1999.
BERNANKE, B. S.; GERTLER, M. Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of Monetary Policy
Transmission. Journal of Economic Perspectives, v. 9, n. 4, p. 27–48, 1995.
BLOOM, N. Fluctuations in Uncertainty. Journal of Economic Perspectives, v. 28, n. 2, p. 153–176,
2014.
BORN, B.; PFEIFER, J. Risk matters: The real effects of volatility shocks: Comment. American
Economic Review, v. 104, n. 12, p. 4147–4183, 2014.
CARLSTROM, C. T.; FUERST, T. S. Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations: A Computable
General Equilibrium Analysis. American Economic Review, v. 87, n. 5, p. 893–910, 1997.
CARVALHO, F. A.; CASTRO, M. R. Macroprudential policy transmission and interaction with fiscal and
monetary policy in an emerging economy: a DSGE model for Brazil. Macroeconomics and Finance in
Emerging Market Economies, v. 10, n. 3, p. 1–45, 2017.
CARVALHO, V. M. From Micro to Macro via Production Networks. Journal of Economic Perspectives,
v. 28, n. 4, p. 23–48, 2014.
CASTRO, M. R. Macroprudential Policy Transmission and Interaction with Fiscal and Monetary Policy in
an Emerging Economy: a DSGE model for Brazil.
CASTRO, M. R. de; GOUVEIA, S. N.; MINELLA, A.; SANTOS, R. C.; SOUZA-SOBRINHO, N. F.
SAMBA: Stochastic Analytical Model with a Bayesian Approach.
CAVALCANTI, M. A. F. H.; VEREDA, L. Propriedades dinâmicas de um modelo DSGE com
parametrizações alternativas para o Brasil. [S.l.], 2011. 1–108 p.
CESA-BIANCHI, A.; FERNANDEZ-CORUGEDO, E. Uncertainty in a model with credit frictions.
CHI, Q.; LI, W. Economic policy uncertainty, credit risks and banks’ lending decisions: Evidence from
Chinese commercial banks. China Journal of Accounting Research, Sun Yat-sen University, v. 10, n. 1,
p. 33–50, 2017.
CHRISTIANO, L. J.; IKEDA, D. Leverage restrictions in a business cycle model.
CHRISTIANO, L. J.; MOTTO, R.; ROSTAGNO, M. Risk shocks. American Economic Review, v. 104,
n. 1, p. 27–65, jan 2014.
CHUGH, S. K. Firm Risk and Leverage Based Business Cycles. p. 1–39, 2013.
DIVINO, J. A.; KORNELIUS, A. Política monetária e compulsório em um modelo DSGE com fricções
financeiras. Economia Aplicada, v. 19, n. 4, p. 579–610,
DOROFEENKO, V.; LEE, G. S.; SALYER, K. D. Time-varying uncertainty and the credit channel.
Bulletin of Economic Research, v. 60, n. 4, p. 375–403, 2008.
ELSTNER, S.; BACHMANN, R.; ELSTNER, S.; SIMS, E. R. Uncertainty and Economic Activity:
Evidence From Business Survey Data.
FENDOğLU, S.; FENDO, S. Credit cycles and capital flows: Effectiveness of the macroprudential policy
framework in emerging market economies. Journal of Banking and Finance, Elsevier B.V., v. 79, p.
110–128, 2017.

                                                 19
GABAIX, X.; SOCIETY, T. E. The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations. Econometrica, v. 79,
n. 3, p. 733–772, 2011.

GERALI, A.; NERI, S.; SESSA, L.; SIGNORETTI, F. M. Credit and Banking in a DGSE Model of the
Euro Area. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, v. 42, n. 6, p. 107–141, 2010.

GERTLER, M.; KIYOTAKI, N. Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in Business Cycle Analysis.
In: Handbook of Monetary Economics. [s.n.], 2010. v. 3, n. 3, p. 547–599.

HUANG, H. C. R.; FANG, W. S.; MILLER, S. M. Banking market structure, liquidity needs, and industrial
growth volatility. Journal of Empirical Finance, Elsevier B.V., v. 26, p. 1–12, 2014.

JUNG, Y. G. An inference about the length of the time-to-build period. Economic Modelling, v. 33, p.
42–54, 2013.

JUSTINIANO, A.; PRIMICERI, G. E. The time-varying volatility of macroeconomic fluctuations.
American Economic Review, v. 98, n. 3, p. 604–641, 2008.

KANCZUK, F. Um Termômetro para as Macro-Prudenciais. Revista Brasileira de Economia, v. 67, n. 4,
p. 497–512,

KYDLAND, F. E.; PRESCOTT, E. C. Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations. Econometrica, v. 50,
n. 6, p. 1345–1370, nov 1982.

LARRAIN, B. Do Banks Affect the Level and Composition of Industrial Volatility? The Journal of
Finance, v. 61, n. 4, p. 1897–1925, 2006.

LUCAS, R. E. On the mechanics of economic development. Journal of Monetary Economics, v. 22, n. 1,
p. 3–42, 1988.

LUDVIGSON, S. C.; MA, S.; NG, S. Uncertainty and Business Cycles: Exogenous impulse or endogenous
response?

PINDYCK, R. S. Irreversibility, uncertainty, and investment. Journal of Economic Literature, v. 29, n. 3,
p. 1110–1148, 1991.

SCHMITT-GROHÉ, S.; URIBE, M. Solving dynamic general equilibrium models using a second-order
approximation to the policy function. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 2004.

SMETS, F.; WOUTERS, R. Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian DSGE Approach.
The American Economic Review, v. 97, n. 3, p. 586–606,

STOCK, J. H.; WATSON, M. W. Has the Business Cycle Changed and Why? In: NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 2002. MIT Press, 2003. v. 17, n. January, p. 159–230.

TOWNSEND, R. M. Optimal contracts and competitive markets with costly state verification. Journal of
Economic Theory, v. 21, n. 2, p. 265–293, 1979.

VALENCIA, F. Aggregate uncertainty and the supply of credit. Journal of Banking and Finance, v. 81,
p. 150–165, 2017.




                                                   20
