Page 1 of 20



                                         Development Theory:
                Convergence, Catch-up or Leapfrogging and Finance?

                              Leonardo Burlamaqui1 and Rainer Kattel2


                                     Abstract
The paper offers four propositions for discussion. First, it argues that instead
of the often-assumed convergence among nations, history shows us that
divergence is a more appropriate way to conceptualize development
trajectories; and that this is especially visible in the last century. Secondly, the
paper suggests that “convergence” and “catch-up” are, from a Schumpeterian
perspective, theoretically inadequate concepts as they frame development
narratives similarly to the Rostovian idea of a linear path towards some sort of
“development equilibrium”. Thirdly, we outline this Schumpeterian framework,
centered on the concept of leapfrogging through innovation. The paper
concludes by pointing out that macrofinancial coherence and “robust” financial
governance are essential dimensions of such alternative framework –
although under researched -for understanding development trajectories.


                                  Resumo
O trabalho sugere quatro pontos para discussão. O primeiro é que
divergência e não convergência – tecnológica ou de trajetórias de
desenvolvimento – é a norma na história do desenvolvimento, e um
fenômeno especialmente visível no último século. O segundo é que
convergência e “catch-up” são, de uma perspectiva calcada na concorrência
Schumpeteriana, conceitos teoricamente inadequados para explicar as
referidas trajetórias na medida em que ambos implicam uma espécie de
“equilíbrio imposto à história”. Em terceiro lugar, propomos de forma
compacta os contornos de uma abordagem analítica centrada no conceito de
leapfrogging (ultrapassagem) pela via das inovações. Por fim, o trabalho
salienta a importância da Macrofinança – em particular a estrutura do sistema
financeiro, sua relação com os processos de financiamento e com a
governança financeira – como elemento tão importante, ainda que pouco
pesquisado, quanto as variáveis tecnológicas nas teorias do
desenvolvimento, quando se trata de explicar trajetórias bem sucedidas.

Área: Crescimento, Desenvolvimento Econômico e Instituições
Códigos JEL: 01, 033,038.




1
    Professor of Economics at the State University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
2
    Professor of Innovation Policy, Tallinn University of Technology, Estonia.
Page 2 of 20




               1. Introduction
        Mainstream development theories differ in many ways.3 However, they
share two key assumptions, which are adopted by most policy makers and
embed the “governance” of trade, knowledge and finance under the WTO
treaties and its multiple descendants. The first assumption is that all economic
activities (or all innovations) have inherently the same growth inducing
potential and, secondly, that free trade is the best regime for enabling all
countries to scale up their comparative advantages and develop. The
implication of those assumptions is clear: In essence, under a free trade
regime, eventually all countries should converge around a certain level of
development, provided that they have “law and order”, and “save” in order to
be able to invest. Yet, there is growing evidence both from heterodox and
(discontent) neoclassical economists that at least the convergence corollary –
that however long it make take, eventually all development is toward a shared
equilibrium – is in fact not what the data shows us. (See, e.g., Ocampo,
Kregel and Griffith-Jones 2007, Reinert 2007, and Rodrik 2007). There are
some well-known examples: measured in 1990 international dollars, South
Korea had in 1950 almost exactly the same GDP per capita as an average
African country (around 860 GK dollars); by 2012, the difference was twelve-
fold.4 However, diverging fortunes between regions (such as Africa vs. East
Asia) and within regions (such as Sweden vs. Greece) seem to be rather the
norm in the international economy.
       This paper aims to show that, if we use a Schumpeterian approach to
understand and analyze development processes, divergence, not
convergence should be the expected outcome. In other words, differentiation,
not homogenization, is the result of Schumpeterian competition and is in fact
an essential dimension of capitalist evolution. It is easy to translate that
perspective into a Hirschmanian parlance labeling it as development as an
un-balanced growth process (Hirschman 1958; Adelman 2012). In fact, the
policy take away we offer is that promoting economic development requires
very distinctive policy tools as well as continuous, evolutionary, institutional
reforms. A key point of the paper is that the theoretical backing for this policy
perspective is that successful economic development involves a leapfrogging
process – a straightforward dimension of Schumpeterian competition – rather
than a path towards of convergence or catching up. In other words,
development, both successful or not, is not a continuous but rather an abrupt
and conflict-prone process.
       More precisely, the paper offers four propositions for discussion in this
context. First, it argues that instead of the often-assumed convergence among
nations, history shows us that divergence is a more appropriate way to
conceptualize development trajectories; and that this is especially visible in
the last half a century. Second, the paper suggests that “convergence” and

3
  The authors are grateful to Erik S. Reinert and L. Randall Wray for their comments on an earlier draft
of this paper.
4
  The Conference Board and Groningen Growth and Development Centre, Total Economy Database,
extracted March 2012, http://www.conference-board.org/economics/.
Page 3 of 20



“catch-up” are, from a Schumpeterian perspective, theoretically inadequate
concepts as they frame development narratives similarly to the Rostovian idea
of a linear path towards some sort of “development equilibrium” (the
technological frontier). We call this “equilibrium imposed on history”. Third, the
paper outlines this Schumpeterian framework, centered on the concept of
leapfrogging through innovation, as a more promising way to address both
development theory and the historical trajectories observed since the
industrial revolution in Britain. Finally, the paper points out that macrofinancial
coherence and “robust” State-led financial governance are essential – but
underdeveloped – dimensions of such an alternative framework for
understanding development trajectories.
       In that regard, we submit that while finance was already a core element
in Schumpeter’s analysis, a more refined elaboration of its role came with
Keynes, Hyman Minsky and Jan Kregel. Keynes introduced money and
financial market’s expectations as central features of the system’s dynamics
(Keynes: 1936, Kregel: 1999). Minsky extended that view through the “Wall
Street Paradigm” where capitalism is conceived as essentially a financial
system, and prone to waves of financial fragility and economic vulnerability
(Minsky: 1982, 1986). Kregel broadened Minsky’s theories by linking them to
development as well as introducing exchange rate instability, derivatives and
the “international dimension” to our understanding of how the financial
structure of an economy is, always, a key element of its development path
(Kregel: 1998, 2001a, 2001b, 2010, Kregel and Burlamaqui: 2005).
       The novelty here is not “financing for development”, but macrofinance:
the way the financial system works and how it should be structured and
governed to effectively foster innovation and development. We use this body
of work to attempt a bridging process and propose that successful
development as leapfrogging processes are coupled with financial structures
and financial governance that enable particular countries and their
technological and innovation capabilities to engage in a strategy of following
as a prelude for surpassing.
        A core point we are making here is to suggest, following Minsky, that
capitalism is essentially a financial system (which may deteriorate into a
collection of ‘Ponzi Nations’, as it did in 2008). But we are also adding the
Schumpeterian dimension, by pointing out that under certain institutional and
financial arrangements, not fully understood yet, it may also become an
innovation system creating wealth and a positive sum game for the economy.
       This framework might help us to rethink how both domestic and
international policymaking bodies should think about development processes
and in particular how domestic growth and competitiveness policies could be
re-shaped.
       Before we proceed, let us be clear about what we want to propose. In
one sense, what we are arguing runs close to what Hikino and Amsden have
submitted as a “new learning paradigm” to assess late industrialization. (Cf.
Hikino and Amsden 1994). However, our claim is either broader or narrower,
depending on the perspective one adopts. It is broader in the sense that we
are indicating that there is nothing intrinsically new about late industrialization.
An appropriate analytical framework for analyzing development processes –
Page 4 of 20



“late or early” – is what is missing. It is narrower in the sense we are not
claiming to have invented this analytical framework, we are just borrowing
from Schumpeter, Keynes, Minsky and Kregel and, maybe, doing – at most –
some creative adaptation.5
               2. Converging policies, diverging trajectories
       Since the advent of WTO agreements in 1990s, we witness, globally, a
growing homogeneity among economic policies used for development. While
emulation of successful policies is historically nothing new (E. Reinert 2009a,
S. Reinert 2011), WTO and its descendants (e.g., bilateral agreements)
assume universal rules and institutions that should be more or less precisely
copied by the developing countries. All these agreements internationally
regulate areas that were previously typically left to countries themselves to
govern. 6 Consequently, what we witness during past 20 years is a strong
convergence in formal policies – from patent policies to financial regulation.
(See also Karo and Kattel 2010) However, this increasing policy convergence
leads, not surprisingly if looked from the perspective we are suggesting, to
diverging economic fortunes. In what follows, we do not intend to give an
exhaustive empirical overview of divergence; rather we offer only snapshots
of development trajectories, but hope this extremely condensed discussion
suffices to query the idea that successful development trajectories should be
understood as processes of convergence and catching up at work in the
global economy.
       As Figure 1 shows, if we take US GDP per capita as the goal all
development processes should convergence and catch up towards, we see
that during the last 60 years there is no clear trend of catching up or
convergence globally. Indeed, judging from this figure, one can even argue
that with the onset of WTO, divergence between regions and between
countries has in fact become much more pronounced.


       Figure 1. GDP per capita as a % of US GDP per capita, 1950-2010, regional simple
averages, in 1990 GK$.




5
  Furthermore, Schumpeter had important predecessors (such as Marx, Sombart and Veblen, among
others) and successors (such as Freeman, Rosenberg, Nelson, and Winter among others), in what
follows we use Schumpeter as our departing point because in our understanding he provides the best
combination between a bird’s eye view of capitalist dynamics – combining economics, sociology,
politics and culture – with a permanent quest for theoretical and analytical deepness.
6
 Many heterodox economists have discussed the impact of WTO on development; thus, e.g., Wade
2003, Gallagher 2005, Shadlen 2003 and 2005, Correa 2000, Li and Correa 2009, and Thrasher and
Gallagher 2008 offer useful summaries of these discussions.
Page 5 of 20



               80,00

               70,00

               60,00
                                                                                    Africa
               50,00
                                                                                    Europe
               40,00                                                                Latin America
               30,00                                                                China
                                                                                    South Korea
               20,00
                                                                                    Former USSR
               10,00

                  -
                       1950
                       1953
                       1956
                       1959
                       1962
                       1965
                       1968
                       1971
                       1974
                       1977
                       1980
                       1983
                       1986
                       1989
                       1992
                       1995
                       1998
                       2001
                       2004
                       2007
                       2010
        Source: The Conference Board and Groningen Growth and Development Centre,
Total    Economy     Database,      extracted      March 2012, http://www.conference-
board.org/economics/; calculations by the authors.
        Indeed, we see impressive success stories such as Japan, South
Korea, Taiwan and Singapore, that have not only caught up with Western
Europe and US but, in the process, changed both the technological and
business organization frontiers, leapfrogged “Western” best practices and
completely left behind Latin America and what used to be called Soviet Union.
In particular the latter region, Eastern Europe and former Soviet republics,
experienced massive changes in 1990s and fell rapidly behind East Asian
economies that were substantially less developed and poorer only a few
decades earlier. As Guerrieri argued already in 1998 – less than a decade
after the fall of the Berlin Wall –, the East Asian economies “have surpassed
Eastern Europe in many industries, not only in traditional product groups, but
also in more technologically sophisticated sectors” and this is particularly so in
“R&D-intensive (science based) sectors”. (1998, 20) While Eastern European
share in world trade grew from 0.73% in 1980 to 0.95% in 1995, East Asia’s
share grew in the same period from 3.80% to 10.83%. (Guerrieri 1998, 29)
This trend is particularly pronounced for science-based industries: Eastern
Europe’s share grew from 0.29% to 0.39% in the period from 1980 to 1995;
East Asia’s share grew from 4.83% to staggering 17.82%. (1998, 38) One can
argue that the transition of Soviet Union was particularly badly managed
process were looting and theft were the norm. Furthermore, if we look at
Eastern European countries, such as Hungary, early transition success story
with high levels of FDI and high technology exports, we still see a surprisingly
similar picture. Figure 2 depicts South Korea’s and Hungary’s highly diverging
fortunes during 25 years since 1980. While South Korea’s GDP per capita
more than quadrupled during this period, Hungary rapidly deindustrializes and
her GDP per capita barely raises above the 1980 level by 2005.
       Figure 2. East Asia (Korea) vs Eastern Europe (Hungary): GDP per person
employed, index (1980 = 100) (left axis) and industry value added as % of GDP (right axis).
Page 6 of 20



               470,                                                                    50,


               420,
                                                                                       45,
               370,


               320,
                                                                                       40,

               270,

                                                                                       35,
               220,


               170,
                                                                                       30,
               120,


                70,                                                                    25,




                                 Hungary GDP per person employed, index (1980 = 100)
                                 Korea GDP per person employed, index (1980 = 100)
                                 Hungary industry value added % of GDP
                                 Korea industry value added % of GDP

         Source: World Bank WDI Online database.


       Today, China is doing – on steroids – precisely the same as South
Korea and other Asian tigers did during the previous decades. If we take, for
instance, the development paths followed by Russia and China since the late
1980s, it is clear that there is no convergence whatsoever, but accumulating
divergence. As Nee states: “While in 1990 China’s gross domestic product
(GDP) was 60 percent that of Russia, by the end of the decade the numbers
had been reversed. While Russia saw an unprecedented increase in poverty,
China saw an unprecedented decrease”. (2007, 6) According to the World
Bank (2004), transformative economic growth in China resulted in a
population of 170 million moving out of absolute poverty, accounting for more
than 75 percent of poverty reduction in the developing world from 1990 to
2000. China’s explosive economic growth has shown to have self-sustaining
momentum. By 2040, The Economist (16 September 2006, 10) predicts China
will emerge as the largest economy in the world. Not surprisingly, international
economic institutions now view China as the latest entry in the pantheon of
successful developmental trajectories, along with South Korea, Taiwan and
Japan.
       A comparison of Asia and Latin America leads us to similar results: no
convergence or catching up, but another case of continuous divergence. In a
recently published book on the subject, Kevin Gallagher and Roberto
Page 7 of 20



Porzecanski, using China as a proxy for East Asia, succinctly illustrates the
point:
                    China and the Latin American-Caribbean region (LAC) began to implement
         economic reforms within a few years of each other; China in 1978, much of Latin
         America in 1982. In 1980, the collective economic output of Latin America and the
         Caribbean was seven times that of China – 14 times greater on a per-capita basis.
         Nearly 30 years later, China had pulled ahead, with gross domestic product of $2.7
         trillion in 2009 versus pan-regional GDP of $2.6 trillion in Latin America. Over the
         three decades, China registered a robust annual economic growth rate of eight
         percent. The average annual rate in Latin America has been a more modest 3.8
         percent. Between 1980 and 2009, GDP per capita increased by 6.6 percent annually
         in China, while in Latin America, per-capita GDP edged up by a mere 1.7 percent
         annually during years that were marked by crises and volatility. (2011, chapter 1)
       Table 1 exemplifies divergence between China and Latin America as
measured in their respective shares in world’s manufacturing exports: China’s
share keep climbing, while most of Latin American countries see their shares
diminish.
        Table 1. Climbing up and down the ladder: country shares in world manufacturing
exports, 1990-2009, listed as positions among top 50 exporting countries.

                1980    1985      1990       1995       2000       2005
               0
                                                                          2      1
               5                                             5
                                                   8
           10
                                       12                    11                  12
           15                                      15                     14
                            16
                                                                                         China
           20                          20
                                                                                         Argentina
           25                          25          24                            25      Brazil
                   27       27                               27           27
           30                                                                            Mexico
                            33
           35
                                       36
                                                   38                            38
           40
                                                             42
           45
                                                                          47
           50

         Source: Data drawn from Gallagher 2011.
       Furthermore, if we look within Asia and Latin America individually,
divergence shows up once more. In Asia, China is the country clearly forging
ahead from all others; in Latin America, Brazil performs partially the same
role. Also within Eastern Europe we do not see convergence, thus for
instance Poland did not experience any recession during the recent economic
and financial crisis, while the Baltic economies saw their GDP drop in 2009
more than 15%. (Kattel 2010)
      However, convergence does not describe development trajectories
among highly developed nations either. If we look at dynamics of income
growth among European nations since 1950s we see that some nations such
Page 8 of 20



as Ireland have enjoyed rapid growth and in fact have forged ahead of most
developed countries in Europe while others such as Italy and other Southern
European economies are falling behind, in particular since the single market
came to force in Europe in mid-1980s.
         Figure 3. GDP per capita of selected European countries as a % of German GDP per
capita, 1950-2010, regional simple averages, in 1990 GK$.
          150,



          130,



          110,

                                                                                                   Greece
           90,                                                                                     Finland
                                                                                                   Ireland
                                                                                                   Italy

           70,



           50,



           30,
                 1950 1954 1958 1962 1966 1970 1974 1978 1982 1986 1990 1994 1998 2002 2006 2010

        Source: The Conference Board and Groningen Growth and Development Centre,
Total    Economy     Database,      extracted      March 2012, http://www.conference-
board.org/economics/; calculations by the authors.
        Consequently, it is safe to assume that there are different dynamics
going on among nations rather than convergence or catching up. Here, a
more skeptical, and historically minded, reader might ask: even if that is true
for the last three or four decades, what if we go back to the “classical” period
of convergence and catch-up stories, the “Gerschenkronian” 19th and early
20th centuries? The answer to that question is the same: in fact what
happened in the comparative histories of industrialization in Britain, USA,
Continental Europe (especially Germany) and Japan was creative destruction
and leapfrogging, not catching up or convergence: a succession of episodes
of corporations, industries and countries – but especially corporations and
industries – overtaking others and becoming leaders. Thus, for instance, by
introducing new methods of production, organization, financing as well as new
institutional arrangements, Germany managed – around the turn to the 20th
century – to surpass Britain in steel, chemistry, electricity, big pharma,
investment banking and corporate-based research (Landes 1969, Watson
2011).
       Similarly, what Japan did, in fact, was to introduce, along with industry
specific innovations, a new set of institutional innovations to foster
development by means of a very coherent industrial policy (building on
Germany, and the US, as we know). As a result, Japan did not “converge”
with the West. It leapfrogged Europe and became “number two”, threatening
to displace the US as number one by 1980s. Its 1990’s financial bubble buried
Page 9 of 20



this goal – at least for now – but the “Governing the Market” development
strategy perfected by Japan, adopted later by its neighbors and now being re-
invented by China, enabled it to at least for some time leapfrog and surpass
technologically, rather than converge with, most of the developed world
(Vogel 1979, Johnson 1982, Dore 1987, Fruin 1992, Studwell: 2013).
       Conceptually speaking, this is precisely what Britain, Germany, and the
US had done before. Leapfrogging through powerful paradigm and/or frontier
changing innovations, not convergence or catching up. (Perez 2002) The
theoretical framework best suited to understand these processes is, we argue,
Schumpeterian: Schumpeterian competition and creative destruction
performed with borrowed money, embedded into the wider institutional
framework and leading to differentiation, stumbling back, sneaking up and
soaring ahead. Before we show the broad contours of that framework, we
must take a brief detour and critically appraise the concepts of convergence
and catch-up processes.
      3. Convergence and Catch-up: Equilibrium in Development
Trajectories?
        There are many theories that try to explain convergence and catching
up. In essence, almost all economic development theories that deal with long-
term economic growth, one way or the other, touch upon convergence. What
follows is again but a snapshot of theories dealing with convergence and
catch-up, and is not meant to be an exhaustive treatment. Largely, these
theories can be divided into two large schools of thought: first, theories that
explicitly or implicitly assume that nations will eventually convergence towards
an equilibrium; second, theories that understand international economic
development through stages.
         Convergence theories tend to assume that technology and innovation
are exogenous to development and more or less freely available to all, and
that countries are similar to each other but for the productive structures.
Essentially, for these theories, development is a matter of copying best
practice solutions and about getting the institutions right for such copying.
(See also Boyer 1993) Convergence theories assume, in sum, that there is
one best way of capitalism (in terms of technological, organizational, financial
etc capabilities exhibited by leading firms) in any given point in time and that
countries will converge towards this best way and equilibrium. Policy and
institutions, including international trade agreements, foster movement of all
countries towards such equilibrium, or are hindrance to expected
convergence.
       Stage theories of development,7 on the other hand, assume a variety of
economies, but the same “route”. They fall into two large categories: first,
static theories that are mostly interested in how various stages of
development differ from each other drawing on history (institutional
underpinnings, social and political features, etc) and, second, technologically
rooted stage theories that are mostly interested how and why countries pass
from one stage to another – and, importantly, may also fall back. In particular

7
    Reinert 2009b is an invaluable discussion of economic stage theories.
Page 10 of 20



within this latter group of theories, we find concepts and frameworks that help
to understand how countries tend to follow similar “techno-economic
paradigms” but not necessarily end up converging towards a frontier.8
       As for catch-up, it seems to be one of those “general purpose
concepts”, given the multiple uses it allows. In a recent book, Nelson, Odagiri,
Goto and and Sunami 9 provides the following definition: “Catch-up may be
defined as the process in which a late-developing country narrows its gap in
income (as one may specify by the word ‘economic catch-up’) and in
technological capability (equally ‘technological catch-up’) vis-à-vis a leading
country”. In addition: “This fact has been evident since, say, the Industrial
Revolution of the 18th Century and is now even more so as many industries
became technology-intensive” (2011, 2-3). 10 One cannot say that this is a
particularly precise definition. It is more like a reference to a multidimensional
process that some countries go through and others do not. The authors
acknowledge that point even before introducing the concept: “To be sure,
some countries did catch-up and some even forged ahead. Some, however,
actually fell behind” (2011, 2).
      This imprecision seems to create a conceptual problem: is catch-up a
tendency (an “evident fact”) or a possibility (some achieve it, some do not) for
late developers? Furthermore, catching–up seems to imply “convergence”
(narrowing the income gap) and, apparently, some kind of alignment at the
technological frontier, in which case that frontier must be seen as a well
defined object that moves incrementally, as in a Solow-Swan growth model.
However, if some late developers actually “forge ahead”, then neither
convergence nor alignment are sure to happen.
       Before we conclude this brief discussion, a mandatory mention to
Alexander Gerschenkron is due. Gerschenkron, the doyen of economic
history in the United States during the fifties and sixties, was a product of the
same milieu Schumpeter has lived, and, like Schumpeter himself, influenced a
whole generation of Harvard economists through his required graduate course
in economic history (Fishlow: 2001). Although often associated with catch-up
narratives, his thesis on the “advantages of backwardness” (Gerschenkron:

8
  Varieties of capitalism literature could be seen as a sub-form of stage theories, only in this particular
framework multiple forms of capitalism are not following each other but rather co-exist as multiple
“best practices” in parallel.
9
    Who have worked extensively on the subject (Nelson in particular).
10By “narrowing the income gap”, should we understood total GDP, in which case, according to the
World Bank Fact Book, Brazil and China are ahead of Sweden and Switzerland, Taiwan comes in as
number 24th and Denmark as 31st? Or GDP per capita, in which case (also according to the WB) Qatar,
Bermuda, Brunei and Kuwait would have surpassed the US, Germany and Japan comes in as 31st and
32nd respectively and China and Brazil are way behind the United Arab Emirates and Greece? As for
“technological catch-up”, how do you measure it? How far are China, India and Brazil from the
“frontier”? How close is the UK (which produces and exports services, especially financial services)?
Productivity and changes in productivity might be a better way to look at the dynamics of development
trajectories among industries and nations’, keeping in mind the nation is a very problematic unit of
analysis anyway. Furthermore, narrowing the income gap is a possible result, not a given, but
divergence, not convergence, a more likely outcome.
Page 11 of 20



1962: chapter 1) puts him far away from stages theories a la Rostow, and
brings him very close to our proposed “leapfrogging hypothesis”. In his 2001
review of the classic book, Fishlow provides a well-balanced perspective
pointing towards that conclusion:
         Gerschenkron’s analysis is conspicuously anti-Marxian. It rejected the
         English Industrial Revolution as the normal pattern of industrial
         development and deprived the original accumulation of capital of its
         central force in determining subsequent expansion. It is likewise anti-
         Rostovian. There were no equivalent stages of economic growth in all
         participants. Elements of modernity and backwardness could survive
         side by side, and did, in a systematic fashion. Apparently,
         disadvantageous initial conditions of access to capital could be
         overcome through new institutional arrangements. Success was
         indicated by proportionally more rapid growth in later developers,
         signaled by a decisive spurt in industrial expansion (2001: p 1).
       We cannot delve into a comprehensive discussion of that controversial
matter here but would like to suggest that his thesis, more historically than
theoretically crafted, sides more with Schumpeterian leapfrogging processes
than with the other development theories just discussed.
        Let us conclude this section by re-stating one of our initial points:
“convergence” and “catch-up” are rather loose ways (or concepts) to frame
development narratives and more akin to the idea of a tendency towards
equilibrium imposed on history. After all, what it really says is that once a
nation manages to “develop” by reaching the existing, given technological
frontier (a process that may or may not happen), it tends to “stay there”, or
that development once achieved is self-sustaining, but maybe not even that,
since nations can also “forge ahead or fall behind”. In order to get a firmer
grasp of these processes of structural change where catching-up is
temporary, and just a prelude for forging ahead or falling behind, let’s move to
the Schumpeterian terrain, and to an alternative framework.
      4. Development Theory as                Schumpeterian       Competition:
Leapfrogging by means of Innovation
       Economics as a scientific discipline starts with development-oriented
questions, such as why some cities, like Venice, surged ahead while others,
like Naples, fell behind. In that regard, Antonio Serra’s 1613 highly significant
treatise, titled as A short treatise on the causes that make kingdoms abound
in gold and silver even in the absence of mines, with particular reference to
the Kingdom of Naples should be taken as a well-argued starting point. It is no
coincidence that Schumpeter greatly praised Serra since he defined
capitalism as a process grounded on wealth creation (of new things
‘competing old things out of existence’ – 1939, 228). To that matter, his,
perhaps, oversimplified reflection of Sombart and Weber is telling:
Schumpeter argues that it makes no sense to look for a new spirit or new
rationalism in order to “decode” capitalism, it is rather the process by which
capitalism incessantly moves forward – innovations and their impact on
Page 12 of 20



competition – that economists should try to understand.11 (Schumpeter 1939,
227)
      Furthermore, Schumpeter’s theory of innovation is an application to
economics and business of his wider theory of how evolutionary change takes
place in societies (see Andersen 2009). In his 1939 Business Cycles,
Schumpeter states, in a footnote, that he “believes, although …cannot stay to
show, that theory [of innovation] here expounded is but a special case,
adapted to the economic sphere, of a much larger theory which applies to
change in all spheres of social life, science and art included.” (1939, 97)
         His 1912 Theorie der wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung / The Theory of
Economic Development12 assumes apparently a similar theory, without going
into details either. We can infer that what Schumpeter meant by this larger
theory of change in social life is that change is driven by entrepreneurial,
creative entities. Persons, or “new men” as he called them in 1939, or
organizations which became his focus in 1942, that look for “new
combinations”, innovative solutions and bring forth evolutionary changes:
entirely new ways of doing things (in business, politics, art, science, etc) that
will spread, in some cases more than others, throughout the given sphere of
life. 13 Some of these changes will change value systems and disrupt
incumbent hierarchies.14
     In the seventh and last chapter of this book 15 , summarizing his
argument, Schumpeter argues that innovations as new combinations (“neue


11
     Here it is worth mentioning that Schumpeter was probably not familiar with Weber’s mature
assessment of Capitalism’s origins, his ‘last theory of Capitalism’. This approach, developed in his book
Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft, published in 1922, is far more sophisticated and institutionally complex
than the better-known version delivered in “The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism”.
Schumpeter’s criticism would not fit the 1922’s version. See Collins 1986 for a brilliant discussion of
Weber’s “last theory”. As for Sombart, a proper analysis of his theory is still needed (see H. Reinert
and E. Reinert 2006 for an important discussion of the idea of creative discussion in Nietzsche,
Sombart and Schumpeter).

12
   We use here the German original first edition as in later editions (that served as the basis for English
translation as well), these discussions were cut by Schumpeter; so, e.g., the second chapter of the
original edition runs to almost 100 pages, the English translation carries only half as many. In this
chapter, Schumpeter discusses his theory of innovation.
13
     “Das erste Moment, die Freude am Neugestalten, am Schaffen neuer Formen der wirtschaftlichen
Dinge ruht auf ganz denselben Grundlagen wie das schöpferische Tun des Künstlers, des Denkers oder
des Staatsmannes.” (1912, 142)
14
     “Sie werden Neues schaffen und Altes zerstören, kühne Pläne irgendwelcher Art konzipieren und
durchführen, deren Originalität aller Erfassung zu spotten scheint, ihre Mitbürger ihrer Herrschaft
unterwerfen, vielleicht die nationale Politik und Organisation beinflussen, den ‘natürlichen’ Gang der
Wirtschaft durch gesetzliche und ungesetzliche Mittel und jedenfalls anders als durch ‘Tausch’
abändern uws.” (1912, 157)
15
     Translated into English only in 2002 in a special issue of Industry and Innovation.
Page 13 of 20



Kombinationen”) form the internal dynamics of an economy that break the
economy away from existing paths into new directions and force thus firms,
individuals, and eventually institutions to adapt; for Schumpeter, such
dynamics define the form of the economy (“Wirtschaftsform”). The key point is
that in both passages what emerges, as fundamental outcomes are
disruptions and dislocations, not convergence.
        Furthermore, in Schumpeter’s framework the core of the ‘process of
economic development’ is not restricted to technology. It springs from virtuous
interaction among finance (credit), entrepreneurship and competition by
means of innovation, which builds up as a struggle for survival and growth in a
structurally uncertain environment (Schumpeter 1942 [1992], part 2). Profits
that result from dominant market positions are always under threat from
imitative strategies or other firms’ innovative behaviors; they can only be
maintained by continuous product differentiation and productivity
enhancement. Very importantly though, neither the process nor the outcome –
successful innovations and structural change – are granted. For each Thomas
Edison, Henry Ford or Steve Jobs, there are hundreds of failed attempts that
end up in bankruptcy courts. Divergence again. It is important to note that
such Schumpeterian divergence is a powerful force of changing economic
behavior of individuals and firms. In one sentence: Schumpeterian divergence
which enforces diversity, and diversity – not convergence – is at the heart of
leapfrogging processes.
        In any event, firms that survive invariably innovate – that is, they exploit
opportunities for change by applying new ideas, methods, or combinations of
resources. Further, the innovation process is ceaseless – but not success.
The very success of firms’ reactions to competitive challenges acts to
reinforce uncertainty, instability, and diversity calling forth new reactions and
innovations and leading to continuous economic change. Many of these
innovation processes are in effect firms trying to imitate other successful
companies (think how today almost every serious IT and/or electronics
company tries to enter iPad market). However, success is not achieved
through a one size fits all formula. It, rather, engenders massive asymmetries
as it generates positive feedback from markets to producers, which translates
in different competitive strategies for some and bankruptcy for many.
        Firms thus compete continuously for market niches, with asymmetric
results: success for some, with strengthened technological, organizational, or
legal 16 capabilities, and above-average (their own) past profits; failure for
other firms, which either disappear or are reduced to marginal activities – or
move into other business segments. Schumpeter put it as follows: “to escape
being undersold, every firm is compelled to follow suit, to invest, and to
accumulate” (Schumpeter 1942 [1992], chapter 3, 32). However, the key point
here is that the pressure of imitation via competition does not lead to one best
business practice in a given sector – that is, to convergence of business
practices – but rather to continuous technological, organizational and legal
change, financial innovation and differentiation; and temporary monopolization
of market opportunities.

16
     Such as patents, copyrights, trademarks and a whole host of intellectual property-based monopolies.
Page 14 of 20



       For instance, while in 1920s radio industry was one of the most
dynamic industries, nobody would consider radios a dynamic sector in 2013.
Yet, creative destruction processes (evolution of technological, organizational,
financial, institutional capabilities) started by RCA in 1920s – leading radio
manufacturer of the time – created, in succession, black-and-white and color
TV industry, that in turn revolutionized news and entertainment businesses,
and were instrumental in development of VCR and computer businesses, that
in turn led to internet, mobile phone, and social networking. Along the way,
US lost almost all capabilities to produce any consumer electronics, but of
course, it gained leading positions in today’s dynamic industries, such as
internet search and social networking. (See Chandler 2001)
        In other words, creative destruction processes bring forth not only
 technological changes at company level, and are not restricted to a sectorial
 level. These processes generate entire new industries based on
 technological, organizational, spatial and cultural restructuring. Electricity
 made radios possible, but also home appliances that transformed how food
 is stored that in turn made suburban living and mass consumption possible
 (Landes 1969, Chandler 2001, Perez 2002). In one sentence: electricity
 provided open-ended possibilities for developing new technologies in a whole
 host of sectors. Corporations used that to re-design, over and over, the
 ‘technological frontier’… and leapfrog.
         Google, Apple17 and Amazon provide us with clear examples of our
 main proposition. Those companies have changed the way we organize our
 daily activities as trough successful “gales of creative destruction”.
 Technological, organizational, spatial, legal, financial and strategic. The full
 Schumpeter catalog. Most importantly, however, they didn’t “catch-up. They
 leapfrogged their competitors and redesigned the “frontier”. They have
 revolutionized entire industries and became dominant players on a global
 scale in a very short period of time (Levy:2011 , Issacson:2012, Stone:2013)
 Obviously, these socio-economic changes are not bound by national borders.
 However, the nature of trade regulations and agreements makes a huge
 difference on how creative destruction works out in a given country, and this
 should be perhaps a key theme in a development agenda for the twenty first
 century. To conclude the section, let’s state the following: leapfrogging
 processes not necessarily depend on, or spring from, groundbreaking
 scientific advances. Their kernel is the strategic use of both old and new
 technologies in creative ways. That requires finance and ‘productivity-
 oriented’ financial governance.
     5. Leapfrogging and Finance in Schumpeterian Development
Processes
       Schumpeter’s theory of economic development stands on two pillars:
innovations that increases productivity in production and finance that supports
these innovations. Briefly summarized, for Schumpeter finance plays the role
of the handmaiden of creative destruction that allows industry to produce
technological advance and economic development. However, Schumpeter did

17
     Or Baidu, Google’s main rival – and monopolist – in China.
Page 15 of 20



not deal in detail with finance; in particular, he did not look at the financial
system as a system that is, similarly to production system, based on
innovations. Here, enters Minsky. Bankers as much as industry captains are
innovators, and both sides of the economy, finance and production, are
intimately linked through corporation’s balance sheets. The inherent
uncertainty (liabilities to set up or upgrade production and/or innovate) faced
by firms in a competitive environment is reflected in their financial asset’s
prices, in the way their cash flows and cash commitments evolve over time
and, in particular, in the way financial markets evaluate them. (Minsky 1982,
1986)
       According to Minsky, modern capitalism has to be understood through
what he called “The Wall Street Paradigm”: “Looking at the economy from a
Wall Street board room, we see a paper world – a world of commitments to
pay cash today and in the future. These cash flows are a legacy of past
contracts in which money today was exchanged for money in the future. In
addition, we see deals being made in which commitments to pay cash in the
future are exchanged for cash today. The viability of this paper world rests
upon the cash flows (or gross profits after out-of-pocket costs and taxes) that
business organizations, households, and governmental bodies receive as a
result of the income-generating process” (Minsky 1982, 63).
       According to Minsky, financial institutions are profit–seekers, and
driven - in the same way that the industrial structure is - by competition and
innovation. Profits arise from the exploitation and protection of their
acquired/developed competitive and knowledge-based advantages. In
finance, as in the production, successful innovation produces dominant
competitive positions, which can only be challenged by firms that are capable
of reproducing the innovation, or perfecting another technique that is more
profitable and more attractive to the market. Innovations are inherent to the
financial system. However, government regulations play a prominent role in
which direction financial sector innovates.
       As Minsky and Kregel have shown, over the past decades what was
once a bank’s most important source of earnings, the net interest margin
between borrowing and lending rates and the size of its deposit multiplier, has
been declining dramatically. To meet this shortfall in earnings commercial
banks have been forced, by competition, to innovate. To enter into other
areas of activity, such as the provision of financial services in order to
generate fee and commission income, by “over-leveraging” their proprietary
trading in financial assets , and towards “reckless” innovations such as credit
default swaps and all sorts of betting techniques with no relationship with
productivity increases whatsoever (Kregel 1998, 2001).
       This – bad finance – is a potential outcome essentially missing from
Schumpeter’s framework. It is here where both Minsky and Kregel made their
mark. Moreover, it is here, that the concept of “robust financial governance”
finds meaning. Robust financial governance is pivotal in determining whether
the given financial system is oriented more towards funding the productive
sector and sustaining innovation and development, or biased towards
gambling, financial arbitrage and betting against its clients. Jan Kregel’ s
Page 16 of 20



contribution in that realm was to show that the way financial sector is
organized and governed is a core dimension of any development process.
       Kregel provided us with robust analyses of the dysfunctional impact
that unsound financial governance has on development, innovation and on
leapfrogging processes. Demonstrating that a Minsky crisis happened in East
Asia, describing the role of derivatives in amplifying it and by analyzing the
US sub-prime crisis as a Ponzi scheme from the very beginning (with no
evolution from hedge and speculative phases), he linked finance to regressive
development .
       Furthermore, his work shows that financial systems’ organization, and
their impact on the productive sectors, does not only depend on domestic
financial governance, but, especially in the case of developing nations, also
on global processes and international institutional arrangements. Exchange
rate regimes capital account management, trade openness, and international
treaties play a key role in shaping development trajectories (Kregel 2004).
       Thus, while Minsky showed that the structure of an economy consists
of units with different balance sheets (hedge, speculative and Ponzi) that
mirror the macro-financial evolution; Kregel has analyzed the international
dimension of financial governance and how the interplay between domestic
and global forces and institutions can produce hedge, speculative or Ponzi
countries (or regions). Furthermore, Kregel has also underlined how reliance
on foreign financial flows, in particular in form of short-term financial flows,
tends to drag countries into Ponzi schemes (Kregel 2001, 2004).
       Summing up, what Minsky and Kregel have shown is that
Schumpeterian competition has to be supplemented by an evolutionary theory
of the workings of the financial system. In other words, leapfrogging as
described above is not only a technological and institutional issue, but also a
financial governance matter. A policy issue of building a financial structure
that leads to productive investments and helps to manage creative destruction
(See Studwell: 2013 for evidence – not theory – on this issue).
          5. Conclusion
        Schumpeterian competition – creative destruction by means of
innovation – is a permanent leapfrogging process where forging ahead and
falling behind are expected (predictable) results. Moreover, leapfrogging
processes are not technology-driven neither techno-institutional constructs.
They are outcomes of virtuous feedbacks among financial structure, financial
governance and competition by means of innovations that lead to diverse
technology trajectories and paradigms, and to open-ended institutional
changes. Divergence, once again, is the norm. Furthermore, there is no fixed
technological (or “financial”) frontier; competition itself is a process of
permanently redefining and reinventing it. Moreover, this is valid for firms,
industries and countries. Development in itself is thus an open-ended and
highly uncertain process where there are hardly any “best practices”, since
they are continually challenged by innovations and where imitation is often
“creative”. Financial structures and financial governance are still largely
absent of that framework, but we hope to have indicated how the contributions
Page 17 of 20



of Keynes, Minsky and Kregel allow us to dig deeper in that bridging exercise.
However, this is a task for another paper.
      To conclude, we leave the reader with our title question: convergence,
catch-up or leapfrogging and finance, which is the best way to approach
development history in general and, especially, the trajectories of “late
developers in the last three-four decades? By now, you know our answer.
         Bibliography
      Adelman, J. 2013. Wordily Philosopher – The Odyssey of Albert O
Hirschman. Princeton University Press.
      Andersen, E. A. (2009) Schumpeter's Evolutionary Economics. A
Theoretical, Historical and Statistical Analysis of the Engine of Capitalism.
London: Anthem.
      Block, F and Keller, M: 2011. State of Innovation: The U.S.
Government's Role in Technology Development. Paradigm Publishers.
        Boyer, Robert. 1993. “The Convergence Hypothesis Revisited:
Globalization but still the Century of Nations?”, available at
http://www.cepremap.ens.fr/depot/couv_orange/co9403.pdf.
      Burlamaqui, L and Kregel, J. 2005. Innovation, Competition and
Financial Vulnerability” in Brazilian Journal of Political Economy, vol 25 , 2, pp
5-23.
      Chandler, Alfred (1990): Scale and Scope, Cambridge, Mass. The
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
         Chandler, Alfred. 2001. Inventing the Electronic Century.
     Collins, Randall. (1986). Weberian Sociological Theory. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
      Correa, Carlos M. 2000. Intellectual Property Rights, the WTO and
Developing Countries: The TRIPS Agreement and Policy Options. London
and New York: Zed books.
         Dore, R: 1987. Taking Japan Seriously. Stanford University Press.
      Fishlow, A. 2001. “Alexander Gerschenkron: A Latecomer Who
Emerged Victorious”. Review of Economic Backwardness in Historical
Perspective. Project 2001: Significant Works in Economic History.
        Fruin, M. 1992. The Japanese Enterprise System: Competitive
Strategies, Cooperative Structures. Oxford University Press.
        Gallagher, Kevin P. (ed.). 2005. Putting Development First: The
Importance of Policy Space in the WTO and International Financial
Institutions. London and New York: Zed books.
      Gallagher, Kevin and Porzecanski, Roberto. 2011. The Dragon in the
Room: China and the Future of Latin American Industrialization. Stanford
University Press.
      Gerschenkron, A. 1962. Economic Backwardness in Historical
Perspective. Harvard University Press.
Page 18 of 20



      Guerrieri, Paolo (1998). “Trade Patterns, FDI, and Industrial
Restructuring of Central and Eastern Europe”, BRIE Working Paper Series,
no 124, available at http://brie.berkeley.edu/publications/WP124.pdf.
      Hirschman, A. O. 1958. The Strategy of Economic Development. Yale
University Press.
         Isaacson, W. 2011. Steve Jobs. Simon & Schuster.
      Johnson, Chalmers. 1982. MITI and the Japanese Miracle, Stanford
University Press.
      Karo, Erkki and Rainer Kattel. 2010. “The Copying Paradox: Why
Converging Policies but Diverging Capacities for Development in Eastern
European Innovation Systems?” International Journal of Institutions and
Economies 2 (2).
      Kattel, Rainer (2010). “Financial and Economic Crisis in Eastern
Europe.” Journal of Post Keynesian Economics 33 (1), 41-60.
     Kregel, Jan A. (1998). The Past and Future of Banks, Ente per gli Studi
Monetari, Bancari e Finanziari Luigi Einaudi, Quaderni di Ricerche, No. 21,
Rome, Bank of Italy.
       Kregel, Jan A. (2001 a). “Yes, ‘it’ did happen again – the Minsky crisis
in Asia. In Bellofiori, R and Ferri, P eds: Financial Keynesianism and Market
Instability – The Economic Legacy of Hyman Minsky. Elgar.
       Kregel, Jan A. (2001 b). “Derivatives and Global Capital Flows:
Applications to Asia” in Chang, H J, Palma, G and Whitaker, H eds: Financial
Liberalization and the Asian Crisis. Palgrave.
       Kregel, Jan A. (2004) “External Financing for Development and
International Financial Instability,” G-24 Discussion Paper No. 32. October
2004.
      Kregel, Jan A. (2010). “What would Minsky have thought of the
mortgage crisis? In Papadimitriou, D and Wray, R eds: The Elgar Companion
to Hyman Minsky. Elgar.
         Landes, D: 1969. The Unbound Prometheus. Cambridge University
Press.
       Levy, S. 2011. In The Plex – How Google Thinks, Works and Shapes
Our Lives. Simon & Schuster.
      Li, Xuan and Carlos M. Correa (eds). 2009. Intellectual Property
Enforcement: International Perspectives. Cheltenham: Elgar.
      Minsky, Hyman (1982). Can “IT” Happen Again: Essays on Instability
and Finance. Armonk, M. E. Sharpe.
 Minsky, Hyman (1986). Stabilizing an Unstable Economy.
     Nee, V: 2007. “Russia and China: The Reversal of Fortunes”.
Unpublished manuscript.
         Nelson, R et alii: 2011. Intellectual Property Rights, Development, and
         Catch
Page 19 of 20



Up: An International Comparative Study. Oxford University Press.
         Perez, C: 2002. Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital.
Elgar.
       Ocampo, J A, Kregel, J A and Griffith- Jones, S. 2007 eds.
International Finance and Development. Zed Books.
         Reinert, E: 2007. How Rich Countries Got Rich … and Why Poor Stay
Poor.
       Reinert, Erik S. 2009a. “Emulation versus Comparative Advantage:
Competing and Complementary Principles in the History of Economic Policy.”
Cimoli, Dosi and Stiglitz 2009, 79-106.
      Reinert, Erik S. 2009b. “Production-Based Economic Theory and the
Stages of Economic Development: From Tacitus to Carlota Perez”. In
Drechsler, Kattel and Reinert (eds). Techno-Economic Paradigms – Essays in
Honour of Carlota Perez. Anthem. Press.
       Reinert. Hugo and Erik S. Reinert (2006). “Creative Destruction in
Economics: Nietzsche, Sombart, Schumpeter”, in Backhaus and Drechsler
(eds.), Friedrich Nietzsche (1844-1900). Economy and Society, New York:
Springer, 55-85.
       Reinert, Sophus A. (2011). Translating Empire. Emulation and the
Origins of Political Economy, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
         Rodrik, D: 2007. One Economics, Many Recepies.
        Schumpeter, J. A. (1912), Theorie der wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung,
Berlin: Duncker&Humblot.
      Schumpeter, J.A. (1939) Business Cycles. A Theoretical, Historical,
and Statistical Analysis of the Capitalist Process, Volume 1, London and New
York: McGraw-Hill.
      Schumpeter, J: 1942 [1992]. Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy.
Harper
      Shadlen, Kenneth. 2005. “Policy Space for Development in the WTO
and Beyond: The Case of Intellectual Property Rights.” Global Development
and Environment Institute Working Papers 05-06.
        Shadlen, Kenneth. 2003. “Patents and Pills, Power and Procedure: The
North-South Politics of Public Health in the WTO.” Development Studies
Institute, Working Papers 03-42.
     Stone, B. The Everything Store. 2013 Jeff Bezos and the Age of
Amazon.
         Studwell, J. 2013. How Asia Works. Grove Press.
      Thrasher, Rachel Denae and. Gallagher, K. 2008. “21st Century Trade
Agreements: Implications for Long-Run Development Policy.” The Pardee
Papers 2.
         Vogel, E: 1979. Japan as Number One. Harvard University Press
Page 20 of 20



      Wade, Robert. 2003. “What Strategies Are Viable for Developing
Countries today? The World Trade Organization and the Shrinking of
‘Development Space’.” Review of International Political Economy 10 (4), 621-
644.
      Watson, P: 2011. The German Genius: Europe's Third Renaissance,
the Second Scientific Revolution, and the Twentieth Century. Harper.
