    Financial Flows to Emerging Economies and Policy Alternatives in
                               Post-2008
                 Luiz Fernando de Paula* and Daniela Magalhães Prates**


Abstract: Cross-border capital flows have been intensified last decades with the greater
international financial integration. Along with their greater size, gross flows have
become more volatile and pro-cyclical, exacerbating economic fluctuations in
Emerging-markets economies (EMEs). After the 2008 global crisis, “emerging-market”
assets and currencies became objects of desire on the part of global investors, resuming
policy dilemmas to EMEs stemming from the combination of high growth rates,
accelerating inflation, excessive currency appreciation and/or asset price overshooting.
Yet, some EMEs chose to regulate capital inflows in order to deal with these policy
dilemmas. This paper aims at analyzing some macroeconomic problems related to the
recent wave of capital flows to EMEs and discussing some policies alternatives to deal
with such issues, with special focus on capital account regulation.

Key-words: capital flows; emerging economies; capital account regulation

Resumo: Os fluxos de capitais entre países se intensificaram nas últimas décadas, com
a maior integração financeira internacional. Além de seu tamanho maior, fluxos de
capitais se tornaram mais voláteis e pró-cíclicos, exacerbando as flutuações econômicas
em economias de mercado emergente (em inglês - EMEs). Após a crise global de 2008,
os ativos e moedas "emergentes" tornaram-se objetos de desejo por parte dos
investidores globais, retomando dilemas de política para EMEs decorrentes da
combinação de altas taxas de crescimento, aceleração da inflação, valorização excessiva
da moeda doméstica e/ou overshooting dos preços dos ativos. No entanto, alguns EMEs
optaram por regular o fluxo de entrada de capitais a fim de lidar com esses dilemas de
política. Este paper tem por objetivo analisar alguns problemas macroeconômicos
relacionados com a recente onda de fluxos de capitais para economias emergentes e
discutir algumas políticas alternativas para lidar com tais questões, com especial atenção
sobre a regulação da conta capital.

Palavras-chave: fluxos de capitais; economias emergentes; regulação da conta capital

JEL Classification: F31; F32: F38

Área 7 - Economia Internacional




*
   Professor of Economics at University of the State of Rio de Janeiro (UERJ) and CNPq researcher.
Email: luizfpaula@terra.com.br
**
    Professor of Economics at University of Campinas (UNICAMP) and CNPq researcher. Email:
daniprates@eco.unicamp.br
                                                                                                1
1. Introduction

        Cross-border capital flows have been intensified over the last decades with the
greater integration among domestic financial markets and the consequent increase in the
volume and speed of financial resources in the international financial market. Along
with their greater size, gross flows have become more volatile everywhere mainly in the
case of their share oriented to Emerging-Market Economies (EMEs), which have been
pro-cyclical, exacerbating economic fluctuations.
        Concerned with the amount and volatility of capital flows to EMEs after the
contagion of the 2008 global crisis and the potential risks and costs related to
international financial integration, IMF has revised its former official position against
capital controls, which it considers now as a ‘measure of last resort’. Indeed, the issue
of the regulation of financial flows garnered greater attention in the years following this
crisis, which brought a new wave (or boom) of capital inflows to EMEs from the second
quarter of 2009. This wave has been boosted by the post-crisis circumstances, among
which the Federal Reserve (FED) quantitative easing policy, low interest rates in
advanced economies (AEs) and better prospects for economic growth EMEs in the
aftermath of the crisis (Canuto and Leipziger, 2012; Akyüz, 2011). The recent boom has
been featured by short periods of fall in capital inflows followed by new surges.
       Especially during the zenith of the recent wave (mid-2009 to mid-2011),
“emerging-market” assets and currencies became objects of desire on the part of global
investors, resuming policy dilemmas to emerging countries stemming from the
combination of high growth rates, accelerating inflation (associated with the new
commodity prices boom), excessive currency appreciation and/or asset price
overshooting. Yet, some EMEs chose to regulate capital inflows in order to deal with
these policy dilemmas, on the contrary of the pre-crisis context when prevailed a hands-
off approach to capital inflows.
        This paper aims at analyzing some macroeconomic issues related to the recent
waves of capital flows to EMEs and discussing some policies alternatives post-2008 to
deal with them, with special focus on capital account regulation (CAR) and official
intervention in foreign exchange market. For this purpose, firstly (section 2) the recent
features of cross-border capital flows and some consequences to EMEs are analyzed.
Secondly (section 3), the relationship between capital flows and exchange rate regime in
EMEs under conditions of an international monetary hierarchy are discussed. In section
4, some economic policy approaches to deal with capital flows, with emphasis on
capital account regulation, are examined. Finally, section 5 concludes the paper.

2. Recent features of cross-border capital flows and some consequences to EMEs

2.1. Some features of cross-border capital flows

        Private capital flows have increased sharply to and from both developed and
EMEs over the last decades (Cardarrelli et al, 2009; Bluedorn et al, 2013). In the case
of EMEs, capital flows have boosted since the beginning of the 1990s due to a set of
factors both structural (international portfolio diversification, capital account
liberalization, trade openness and high emerging economies potential growth) and
                                                                                         2
cyclical ones (low US interest rates, low global risk aversion, high domestic interest
rates). Consequently, international financial integration of a diversified group of EMEs
has swelled rapidly, in particular over 1991-2006 (Figure 1), according to the index of
international financial integration (Lane and Milesi-Ferretti, 2007).

Figure 1 International Financial Integration – major emerging economies (% of GDP)




Note: The index corresponds to international assets plus liabilities over GDP.
(*) For Russian Federation data in 1996-2011 only.
Source: Authors’ elaboration based on Lane and Milesi-Ferretti database,
http://www.philiplane.org/EWN.html

        Along with their greater size, gross flows have become more volatile
everywhere. Advanced economies (AEs) experiment greater substitutability across the
various types of capital flows (direct investment, portfolio and bank credit) and greater
complementarity of gross inflows and outflows, resulting in a relatively small and
smoother movements in net capital flows. While in AEs capital outflows increase in line
with capital inflows, in EMEs capital inflows increase more than outflows (Figure 2) -
as a result net inflows tend to be greater compared to AEs1. Indeed, in EMEs both gross
and net capital flows have been sizable, while net flows has been much volatile: capital
inflows and outflows tend to rise when global financing condition are easy, and to fall
when these conditions tighten (Bluedorn et al, 2013; Claessens and Ghosh, 2013).



1
  The values of net private capital inflows (IIF) differ from financial account balance (IMF) due to the use
of different definitions and classifications of EMEs (e.g., Korea is part of IIF sample, but is not part of
the IMF’s group). Moreover, IIF capital inflows include all the flows related to non-residents, while
outflows include all the flows related to residents. Therefore, “net capital inflows” is the sum of all net
purchases of EMEs assets by private foreign investors.
                                                                                                          3
Figure 2 Capital inflows and outflows - emerging economies (US$ million)




Note: Capital inflows: sum of all private capital inflows (equity and debt) by non-residents
plus official inflows (international financial institutions and bilateral creditors); capital
outflows: sum of all private capital outflows (equity and debt) by residents plus error and
omissions (excludes reserves variations); net capital flows: see footnote 1.
Source: Institute for International Finance (2015) and IMF (2015)


        As for the regional distribution of capital flows, over 2011-2014, emerging Asia
was the region that received the greatest amount of capital inflows to EMEs (52.8% of
total capital inflows in 2013), followed by Latin America (23.5%) and emerging Eastern
Europe (17.1%), while Africa and Middle East got a more modest amount (6.6%)
(Figure 3). In emerging Asia, China, the biggest emerging economy, received records of
capital inflows, mainly in the form of foreign direct investment (FDI). In Latin
America, Brazil and Mexico, the major economies of the region, and more recently
Peru, were the biggest recipient of capital flows, while in Emerging Europe, Russia and
Turkey stood out as the main recipient of capital flows.
        Regarding the composition of net capital inflows according to IIF data (see note
1), historically FDI has been the main type of capital flows to EMEs, followed by
portfolio flows (mainly bonds). Other investments (bank loans and official financing),
that were prominent in the 1970s, have become a secondary class of capital flows. As
Figure 4 shows, over 2011-2014 FDI was the predominant type of capital inflows to
emerging Asia (mainly due to China). In the case of Latin America, the main types were
portfolio and FDI, while in emerging Europe debt portfolio was the main modality (with
exception of 2014 when a withdrawal of portfolio from Russia and Ukraine took place).
As for Africa and Middle East, FDI were the main sort of capital flows of non-residents.


                                                                                                4
Figure 3 Capital inflows by region (US$ billion)




Source: Institute for International Finance (2015)

Figure 4 Capital inflows by region and modality (US$ million)
800                                                                                            350
                                                                      Emerging Asia
                                                                                                                    Latin America
700    Portfolio (bonds)   Banks' loans   Portfolio(equities)   FDI                            300



600
                                                                                               250


500
                                                                                               200

400

                                                                                               150

300


                                                                                               100
200


                                                                                               50
100



  0                                                                                             0
             2011                          2012                            2013       2014           2011   2012                            2013       2014

300                                                                                            110

                                                        Emerging Europe                                            Africa and Middle East

250
                                                                                                90


200


                                                                                                70
150




100                                                                                             50




 50
                                                                                                30


  0
              2011                           2012                           2013        2014

                                                                                                10
 -50


                                                                                                     2011   2012                        2013       2014

-100                                                                                           -10




                                                                                                                                                   5
Source: Institute for International Finance (2015)
Note: Emerging Asia: China, India, Indonesia, Philippines, South Korea, and Thailand; Latin
America: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico, Peru, and Venezuela: Emerging
Europe (Eastern): Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Poland, Romania, Russia, Turkey, and Ukraine;
Africa and Middle East: Egypt, Lebanon, Morocco, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, and
UEA.

2.2. Waves of capital flows to emerging economies

        Capital inflows to EMEs have increased sharply since the beginning of the
1990s from 1.4% of GDP on average in 1989-1994 to 4.7% of GDP in 1995-2014
(Figure 5). From the 1990s on, it is possible to identify, broadly speaking, three waves
of episodes of capital inflows to EMEs2: a first one from early 1990 until 1997-98 Asian
and Russian crises; a second wave from mid-2004 until the global contagious that
followed the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy (September 2008); and, finally, a third wave
has begun in mid-2009, with a strong recovery in 2010-2013 and a fall in 2014.

Figure 5 Private capital inflows to emerging economies




Note: Private capital inflows includes all the capital flows (both equity and debt) involving non-
residents (foreign private sector and lenders). Included foreign investors’ withdrawals of
capitals and not included outward investments of residents and inflows from official sector
sources.
Source: Institute for International Finance (2015)




2
 The recent literature has referred to such episodes as “surges” of capital inflows that are periods of large
capital inflows (Ghosh et al., 2012).
                                                                                                           6
        Concerning the determinants of capital flows, the literature distinguishes
between push factors (global ones) and pull factors (country-specific). Most empirical
works show that exogenous factors are the main determinants of large upward swings in
capital flows to EMEs. Ghosh et al. (2012) found that surges of capital inflows to
EMEs over 1980-2009 were synchronized among countries and that global factors – US
interest rates and risk aversion – were key to determine whether a surge would occur,
while domestic factors (economic performance, country’s external financing needs,
financial openness, etc.) seems to explain the magnitude of the surge. On the same
stride, Ahmed and Zlate (2013) identified a number of factors, including growth,
interest rate differentials, and global risk aversion as important determinants of net
private capital flows to EMEs in 2002-2012. Moreover, they found that the sensitivity
of portfolio flows to interest rate differentials and risk aversion increased during the
post-crisis period.
        The trigger to the first wave of capital inflows (1991-1998) was the U.S.
expansionary monetary policy in the beginning of the 1990s, along with the search of
risk diversification of global institutional investors and the process of capital account
liberalization of EMEs. During this period, emerging Asia and Latin America were the
main recipients. Regarding the composition of capital flows, portfolio flows were the
main type, favored by interest rate differentials, and increasingly FDI. Most EMEs
adopted some sort of managed exchange rate regime (semi-pegged exchange rate).
Capital inflows financed large current account deficit and consequently, external
vulnerability climbed in most economies that witnessed speculative attack on domestic
currencies. As a result, this regime collapsed almost generally in Asia and Latin
America EMEs (Paula et al., 2013).
        The second wave of capital inflows to EMEs (2003-2008) was related to either
push factors - low U.S. interest rates due to the loosing Fed monetary policy and the
reduction in the global risk aversion - and pull factors, including higher EMEs potential
growth. During this boom, net FDI flows predominated in all EMEs regions (Figure 6),
involving a larger set of countries, including emerging Europe. New features of the
international financial integration of the EMEs during this wave were: (i) the surge in
capital inflows was accompanied by sharp increase in outflows due to the increasing
diversification of portfolios; (ii) much stronger current account positions for most EMEs
with surplus or reduction of the deficit due to the commodity boom; (iii) acceleration in
the accumulation of foreign reserves that, along with the adoption of floating exchange
rate regimes, contributed to the reduction in the external vulnerability but did not avoid
the currency appreciation trend (Figure 7). The contagion-effect following the Lehman
Brothers bankruptcy curtailed the surge of capital flows.




                                                                                        7
Figure 6 Emerging economies – types of net capital inflows (US$ million)




Source: Institute for International Finance (2015).


Figure 7 Real effective exchange rate (2010=100)
 120




 110




 100




  90




  80



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Emerging Asia
  70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Latin America

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Emerging Eastern Europe (+Turkey)
  60




  50
                                                                                                                                                                                           01-2003




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             07-2005




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               01-2008
       01-1994
                 07-1994
                           01-1995
                                     07-1995
                                               01-1996
                                                         07-1996
                                                                   01-1997
                                                                             07-1997
                                                                                       01-1998
                                                                                                 07-1998
                                                                                                           01-1999
                                                                                                                     07-1999
                                                                                                                               01-2000
                                                                                                                                         07-2000
                                                                                                                                                   01-2001
                                                                                                                                                             07-2001
                                                                                                                                                                       01-2002
                                                                                                                                                                                 07-2002


                                                                                                                                                                                                     07-2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                               01-2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         07-2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   01-2005


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       01-2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 07-2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           01-2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     07-2007


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         07-2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   01-2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             07-2009
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       01-2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 07-2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           01-2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     07-2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               01-2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         07-2012
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   01-2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             07-2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       01-2014
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 07-2014
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           01-2015




Note: Emerging Asia: China, India, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, and Thailand;
Latin America: Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Peru and Mexico; Eastern Europe (+ Turkey): Croatia,
Hungary, Poland, Romania, Turkey and Russia.
Source: BIS (2015)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              8
        The third wave of capital flows to EMEs (from 2009) has begun in the middle
of 2009, with a strong recovery of capital inflows (Figure 2). The main drivers behind
of this wave are: (i) loosening monetary policy in AEs (including Fed “quantitative
easing” - QE), interest rate differentials widening and increased risk appetite of global
investors; (ii) better economic performance of the EMEs; and (iii) the quick recovery of
the commodity prices. Capital inflows were driven primarily by portfolio flows
(excluding China and FDI (Figure 3). This episode was characterized by a greater share
of volatile portfolio inflows compared to the previous wave. According to Sahay et al.
(2014), during 2010-13 EMEs received nearly a half of all global flows (mainly Latin
America and emerging Asia) and total inflows were larger than their fundamentals
would suggest. In May 2013, when the Fed indicated that it might begin tapering its
monetary policy toward the end of the calendar year, global investors set into motion a
portfolio adjustment that caused a temporary but significant reversal in capital flows to
U.S., putting upward pressures on the exchange rates of many EMEs (Figure 7) (BIS,
2014). In this period, appreciated currencies and boosting domestic demand resulted in
a gradual widening of current account deficits or narrowing of surpluses in most
countries. Since mid-2013, capital inflows (portfolio and other investments) have
somehow reduced and becoming more volatile. The combination between tighter
financial conditions with weaker terms of trade for commodities exporters has led to
less favorable external conditions that have contributed for a synchronized slowdown in
EMEs (Sahay et al., 2014, p.15).

2.3. Summing up of the main characteristics and some consequences of capital flows to
EMEs

       Based on our previous analysis and other recent empirical studies, some of the
main features and consequences of capital flows to EMEs have been:
a) Volatility of capital flows has increased over time and fluctuations in net flows are
much sharper for EMEs compared with AEs – in the latter, gross outflows largely offset
gross inflows, generating smoother movements in net flows. By contrast, in EMEs gross
inflows and net flows have fallen dramatically during the crisis and have rebounded
sharply afterward (IMF, 2011a, p.125; Bluedorn et al., 2013).
b) Exogenous (push) factors have been the main determinants of large upward swings to
EMEs, while surges of capital inflows have been synchronized among countries and
determined mainly by global factors - US interest rates and risk aversion (Ghosh et al.,
2012).
 c) Portfolio flows and banking flows have been very volatile compared to FDI and such
volatility has recently risen. FDI has been slightly more stable than other types of flows,
and its volatility has increased due to the rise of direct borrowing by subsidiary firms
(IMF, 2011a).
d) EMEs tend to receive capital flows (gross and net ones) that are large compared to
their domestic economies and absorptive capacity, in particular relative to the size and




                                                                                         9
depth of their financial systems, so that such economies face problems related to an
asymmetric financial integration3.
e) Episodes of large capital inflows have been associated with GDP growth
acceleration, but afterwards growth often drops significantly: over one third of the
completed episodes ended with a sudden stop or a currency crisis (Cardarelli et al.,
2009, p.5). Thus, an inverted V-shaped pattern of net capital flows to EMEs around
outside the policymakers control has taken place (IMF, 2011a).
f) Fluctuations in GDP growth have been accompanied by large swings in aggregate
demand and in the current account balance, with strong deterioration of the current
account during the inflow period, and sharp reversal at the end (Cardarelli et al., 2009,
p.5). Indeed, business and financial cycles have been much more volatile in EMEs than
in AEs (Claessens and Ghosh, 2013, p.92).
g) The surges of capital inflows have been associated with real effective exchange rate
appreciation (Figure 7), damaging the competitiveness of export sectors and potentially
reducing economic growth in the long run (Cardarelli et al., 2009), while contributing to
macroeconomic overheating in the short run by increasing domestic consumption
followed by widening current account imbalances.
      Summing up, boom-and-bust pattern of capital flows has been predominant in
EMEs, as sharp rises in capital flows have been followed by slowdowns and reversal.
This pro-cyclical pattern has been stressed by many analysts, and has important
consequences for the modus operandi of economic policies in EMEs, in particular to the
exchange rate management. These issues are analyzed in the next section.

3. Capital flows and exchange rate regime in emerging economies under conditions
of international monetary asymmetry

        Since the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system and the financial
liberalization trend, both prominent mainstream and heterodox scholars have stressed
the increased likelihood of speculative capital flows, which brings challenges to the
macroeconomic policies, among which the management of the exchange rate.
        Tobin (1978) was one of the first mainstream economists to state that the main
macroeconomic problem related to integrated financial markets is not the choice of the
appropriate exchange rate regime but the excessive short-run capital mobility that
reduces the autonomy of national governments to pursue domestic objectives with
respect to employment, output and inflation. Stepping forward, Stiglitz (2000) points
out the pro-cyclicality of capital flows mainly to EMEs under conditions of asymmetric
information, which exacerbate economic booms, exposing these countries to the
vicissitudes associated with external factors in line with the empirical findings reported
in section 2.2.
      More recently, some empirical works have confirmed the direct relationship
between an increasing international financial integration and the loss of economic



3
    See more on this in the next section.
                                                                                       10
policy autonomy. For instance, Saxena’s (2008), by analyzing the impact of capital
flows and the exchange rate regime on monetary policy in EMEs in 1975-2006, found
that domestic short-term interest rates are significantly affected by foreign interest rates
in countries with high capital mobility. This author also found that flexible regimes tend
to exhibit greater co-movement with US interest rates than the pegged exchange rate
regimes, and consequently even with flexible exchange rate regime the autonomy of the
monetary policy was reduced with greater international financial integration.
        In the same stride, Rey’s (2013) analysis restated that capital flows´ boom and
bust pattern is determined by a global financial cycle, which depends on two linked
variables: the VIX (a measure of investor´s risk aversion) and the monetary policy (Fed
Fund Rate level) in the U.S. Monetary conditions of the centre country influence global
banks leverage, with credit growth in the international financial system, being
transmitted world-wide through cross-border gross credit flows. Therefore, as Rey
stressed, this channel invalidates the traditional “trilemma” of the open economy, upon
which in a world of free capital mobility, independent monetary policies are feasible if
exchange rates are floating. Instead, monetary conditions are transmitted from the main
financial centre to the rest of the world through gross credit flows and leverage,
irrespective of the exchange rate regime. Therefore, “fluctuating exchange rates cannot
insulate economies from the global financial cycle, when capital is mobile. The
‘trilemma’ morphs into a ‘dilemma’ – independent monetary policies are possible if
and only if the capital account is managed, directly or indirectly, regardless of the
exchange‐rate regime” (Rey, 2013, p.21).
       Yet, heterodox scholars has already come to the same conclusion. According to
Flassbeck (2001, p.44) “Fixing the exchange rate one way or the other does not create,
but only reveals, the existing lack of monetary autonomy in a system of free capital and
goods flows. There is no ‘impossible trinity’, but rather an ‘impossible duality’. To
open the capital account and to lose national monetary autonomy is not contingent on
the exchange rate regime”.
        The loss of monetary autonomy even with floating exchange rates is due to the
need of official interventions in the currency market to smooth exchange rate volatility
in the post-Bretton Woods era. As the Post Keynesian literature (Schulmeister, 1988;
Davidson, 1982; Harvey, 2009) highlighted, in this setting, featured by floating
exchange rates and free capital mobility, short-term capital flows constitute the chief
determinant of nominal exchange rates, which are highly volatile. In this perspective,
the speculative feature of these flows, subordinate to financial investors’ risk
aversion/appetite, is the main cause of the volatility of exchange rates. Further, there are
feedback loops between capital flows and exchange rate volatility, inasmuch this
volatility stimulate short-term flows.
        However, in EMEs the volatility of capital flows is higher than in AEs, these
flows are even more sensitive to the monetary policy in the centre country and to risk
perception. As a result, their exchange rates are more volatile, requiring permanent
interventions by the central banks (the so-called “fear of floating”, e.g. Calvo and
Reinhart, 2002) which, in turn, reinforce the interaction between the exchange-rate and
the policy rate, as domestic interest rates are used to curb exchange rate fluctuations.
This means that in the case of EMEs the loss of monetary autonomy in a context of free
capital mobility is greater than in AEs. Further, exchange rate volatility is more harmful
                                                                                         11
for these economies than for the AEs due to its negative impacts on financial fragility
and inflation. One of the reasons why authorities seek to limit exchange rate movements
are related to the effects of excessive exchange rate volatility (mainly devaluation) on
the outstanding foreign currency debts of banks and firms with un-hedged foreign
currency liabilities and also on governments with large foreign currency debt, raising
questions about their fiscal sustainability. In addition, exchange rate fluctuations may
generate uncertainties that can adversely affect export competitiveness and investment
in the external sector. As Flassbeck (2001) pointed out, the “fear of financial fragility”
and the “fear of inflation” underline the widespread “fear of floating” in EMEs.
        The EMEs’ specificities are linked, in last resort, to their position in the current
international monetary and financial system (IMFS). Following Prebisch’s thinking, as
it is impossible to analyze the dynamics of developing countries independently of their
position within the inherently hierarchical “centre-periphery” world economic system
(Ocampo, 2001b), it is not feasible to grasp these specificities without regard to the
hierarchical and asymmetrical nature of the IMFS.
        Besides the superior position of the key currency (currently, the fiduciary U.S.
dollar - USD) – which has the highest degree of liquidity as it performs internationally
the three functions of money (medium of exchange, unit of account and denomination
of contracts, and store of value) – this system is marked by an asymmetry cutting across
the currencies of AEs (other than the U.S), placed in an intermediary position, and those
of EMEs at the bottom of the monetary hierarchy4. While AEs’ currencies are also
international currencies inasmuch they perform (in a lesser degree than the USD) the
aforementioned functions of money, EMEs’ currencies are non-international ones, for
they are incapable of performing at this scale these functions. EMEs are not able to
issue international debt in their own currency (the so-called “original sin”, e.g.
Eichengreen and Hausmann, 2005) and their currencies are the first victims of global
investors’ “flight to quality”. Yet, although EMEs’ currencies (qua assets) are priced
with a lower liquidity premium, they might be demanded according to investor´s
expectations of financial return (Andrade and Prates, 2013)5
        This monetary asymmetry is one of the basic asymmetries featuring the world
economy and superimposed itself on the financial asymmetries, among which two stand
out. Firstly, capital flows towards EMEs depend on exogenous sources, which cause
these countries to be permanently vulnerable to their reversal by virtue of changes in the
monetary conditions of the centre countries (mainly, in the U.S), as well as by the
increase in the risk aversion of global investors; using the words of Ocampo (2001a)
and Rey (2013), whereas the AEs (centre) are “global financial cycle makers”, EMEs
(periphery) are “global financial cycle takers”. Secondly, the disparity between the size
of EMEs’ currency and financial markets and the speculative pressures they face.
Although the residual nature of capital flows directed to EMEs, their potentially
destabilizing effects on their financial markets and exchange rates are significant, since


4
  Cohen (1998) adopts the concept of “monetary pyramid” to classify the different types of currencies,
which should be distinguished according to their degree of “monetary internationalisation”.
5
  The hierarchy of currencies is not about total returns, but about liquidity. For more details, see Andrade
and Prates (2013).
                                                                                                         12
the volume allocated by global investors is not marginal in relation to the size of these
markets (Akyüz and Cornford, 1999). In other words, this financial asymmetry stems
from that fact that international financial integration is integration between ‘unequal
partners’ (Studart, 2001).
        It is exactly the mutually reinforcing monetary and financial asymmetries that
underlie the aforementioned greater macroeconomic challenges faced by EMEs in a
context of free cross-border finance. On one hand, their currencies, placed at the bottom
of the currency hierarchy, are particularly vulnerable to the inherent volatility of capital
flows, ultimately determined by an exogenous process (the global financial cycle).
Consequently, their exchange rates are more volatile. In turn, the greater exchange rate
volatility has more harmful effects than in AEs exactly because EMEs currencies are
non-international ones, which increases the risk of financial fragility (due to the
potential currency mismatches) as well as the pass-through of exchange rate changes to
domestic prices6. On other hand, they also result in different degrees of monetary policy
autonomy in EMEs and AEs. As Ocampo (2001a, p.10) points out: “whereas the center
has more policy autonomy and is thus ‘policy making’ - certainly with significant
variations among the different economies involved -, the periphery is essentially ‘policy
taking’”. In other words, the monetary and financial asymmetries result in a
macroeconomic asymmetry: the dilemma or impossible duality is greater in EMEs
because their position in the IMFS strengthens the relationship between the policy rate
and the nominal exchange rate and the influence of global investors’ portfolio decisions
on these key macroeconomic prices.
       To sum up, in order to figure out the relationship between capital flows and the
exchange rate regime in EMEs, it is necessary to taken into account the monetary,
financial and macroeconomic asymmetries of the current IMFS.

4. Economic policy approaches to deal with capital flows

        The capital flows boom that surged after the 2008 global financial crisis has had
similarities and differences with regard to the pre-crisis one (see section 2). This section
addresses another specificity of this more recent boom: the economic policy responses
of EMEs aimed at curbing the undesirable effects of an excessive entry of foreign
currency. Indeed, the combination of high growth rates under the double-speed recovery
of 2009-2010, accelerating inflation (also associated with a renewed commodity prices
boom), excessive currency appreciation, and/or asset price overshooting presented
EMEs with policy dilemmas (Akyüz, 2011). The adoption of restrictive monetary policy
would also help to contain growth and inflationary pressures, but it would encourage
further capital inflows, which, in turn, would foster an asset price boom and exchange
rate misalignment, aggravating the risk of future sudden stops and subsequent financial
crises.



6
  Many studies show that this pass-through is greater in EMEs than AEs (among others, Mohanty and
Scatigna, 2005). Yet, the main explanation put forward by them is the different composition of their price
indexes: the higher pass-through in EMEs is due to the higher share of basic goods, which prices are set
in the international market, in the consumption basket.
                                                                                                       13
       Unlike the case in the pre-crisis context, many EMEs (even those with current
account deficits) not adopted a hands-off approach to capital inflows in the post-crisis
period. As Rodrik (2006, p.12) points out, during 2003–2007 these countries “over-
invested in the costly strategy of reserve accumulation and under-invested in capital
account management policies.” Indeed, after the financial crises of the 1990s in Latin
America and in Asia, in most EMEs the managed exchange rate regimes (fixed or
currency bands) were replaced by the dirty floating regime in which official intervention
in currency markets became the rule and not the exception (BIS, 2005; Calvo and
Reinhart, 2002).
        In some cases, the significant interventions of central banks aimed at influencing
the level of the nominal exchange in order to ensure a competitive real exchange rate,
the so-called “mercantilist motive”. An increasing number of countries have also started
to intervene in the currency markets to accumulate foreign currency reserves as an
insurance against future negative shocks and speculative attacks against the domestic
currency. Whereas between 1998 and 2002 such a trend was more evident in East Asian
countries (Aizenman et al., 2004; Dooley et al., 2004), after 2003 many Latin American
economies, benefiting from increased commodity prices and the pre-crisis capital flows
wave, have begun to imitate the Asian strategy. However, precautionary reserve
accumulation often implies quasi-fiscal costs, as it generally involves sterilization
operations by the central bank (exchange of high-yield domestic assets for low-yield
foreign reserves).
        Yet, the contagion effect of the 2008 global crisis on EMEs, which witnessed
capital flights and currency depreciations in the last quarter of 2008, brought to light
that the accumulation of foreign currency reserves was insufficient to immunize them
against the potentially destabilising effects of capital flows. These effects reached
especially their currencies due to the asymmetries of the current international monetary
and financial system (see section 3). Moreover, it also revealed that the effectiveness of
reserves in curbing a speculative attack depends on the institutional features of the
currency market and the composition of the balance of payment surplus that enables the
accumulation of the foreign exchange stock. For instance, the greater currency
depreciations took place not only in countries with high current-account deficits (such
as South Africa and Turkey), but also in those that absorbed significant amounts of
speculative capital inflows and/or allowed speculative transactions on the foreign
exchange derivative markets, such as Brazil and South Korea.
        These lessons shaped the economic policy responses over the zenith (mid-2009
to mid-2011) of the post-crisis boom. Over these years, Brazil, South Korea and other
emerging-market countries (such as Indonesia, Thailand, Peru and Turkey) chose to
adopt capital account regulations (CAR) to deal with the aforementioned policy
dilemmas7. Nevertheless, this hands-in approach to capital flows did not result in the
abandonment of the reserve accumulation strategy, but in a slower pace of this strategy
(see Figure 8).




7
 On the regulations adopted by emerging peripheral countries after the global financial crisis see, among
others: IMF (2011b); Klein (2012); Fritz and Prates (2014); Baumann and Gallagher (2013).
                                                                                                      14
Figure 8 Foreign exchange reserves (US$ 1,000)
 600000


                        Brazil     India      Indonesia   South Korea          Russia          Turkey


 500000




 400000




 300000




 200000




 100000




      0
          2005   2006       2007       2008       2009    2010          2011            2012            2013   2014


Source: IMF (2015)

        This new policy mix was also related to the very post-crisis circumstances.
Historical low interest rates, QE and the double-speed recovery resulted in excessive
inflows of capital to EMEs (see section 2) and the related “currency war”, which meant
strong appreciation pressures on their currencies. In this setting, policy-makers in many
EMEs adopted a pragmatic approach, as accumulation reserves policy, besides
insufficient, would be even more costly due to the greater amount of foreign currency
surplus to be sterilized. Ahmed and Zlate (2013) evidenced for the pre-crisis boom that
reserve accumulation improved the country external liquidity situation, having a
positive impact on global investors´ expectations and on the external ratings, therefore
stimulating further capital inflows. This amplifying outcome also justifies the mix of the
two approaches to face capital flows booms.
        CAR belong to the broader family of financial regulations and encompass two
classes of regulations: (i) prudential financial regulations are regulations affecting the
asset and liability positions of resident financial institutions, among which capital-
adequacy standards, reporting requirements, or restrictions on the ability and terms
under which domestic financial institutions can provide capital to certain types of
projects; they may also include prudential rules on currency mismatching of balance
sheets, or restrictions on issuing certain types of derivatives or forward contracts; (ii)
capital controls are a range of financial regulation tools that manage cross-border flows
(both inflows and outflows) associated with foreign investors as well as resident
companies and banks; unlike prudential financial regulations, they can influence
portfolio decisions taken by resident non-financial institutions and non-resident agents
(Gallagher et al, 2012). Capital controls can target inflows or outflows, and generally
concern particular flows (such as portfolio investment). Moreover, they can be tax-
based (financial taxes or reserve requirements against certain types of investments are
                                                                                                                      15
examples of tax-based controls) or quantitative, which may involve outright bans on
certain investments (e.g. the purchase of equities by foreign investors), restrictions or
quotas, or license requirements (Epstein et al., 2004; Prates, 2014).
        CAR can be used for different goals, such as: (i) to reduce the vulnerability to
financial crises related to speculative capital inflows and outflows; (ii) to drive a wedge
between onshore and offshore interest rates in order to provide monetary authorities
with some policy autonomy at least in the short-run; (iii) to maintain short-term stability
of nominal exchange rate and curb currency appreciation pressures derived from
excessive capital inflows. Yet, these goals are related. For instance, currency
appreciation stimulates speculative positions in foreign currency in the spot and
derivatives markets, threatening financial stability. Therefore, the ability to maintain the
exchange rate at a competitive level contributes to financial stability8.

Table 1 Capital account regulations
         Regulation                                                 Agents
                                        Financial vs. non-               Resident vs. non-resident
                                        financial
    Prudential regulation                  Financial institutions                   Resident

    Capital Portfolio and FDI                       Both                         Non-resident
    controls
             Foreign loans                          Both                            Resident
Source: Prates (2014).

        As these two classes of CAR are specific in terms of the range of agents and
capital flows they can reach, the set of CAR adopted has varied among EMEs. Indeed,
the case studies aforementioned as well as the ones on the CAR adopted in the 1990s
(Epstein et al., 2004, Magud and Reihart, 2006) highlight that designing the regulatory
toolkit is country-specific, shaped by the policy goals, the capital flows composition
(Table 1) as well as by macroeconomic and institutional factors9. Regarding the
macroeconomic ones, for instance, a great interest rate differential due to a restrictive
monetary policy stimulates regulatory arbitrage with the aim of circumventing CAR,
mainly in the case of countries with sophisticated financial markets and high degree of
financial openness10. In this scenario, CAR have to be broader and even more dynamic,




8
  Some countries such as Brazil and South Korea needed also to launch specific regulations targeting FX
derivatives operations to reach these two goals due to their central influence in the exchange rate trend
and/or in the financial situation of banks and corporations in both economies (Fritz and Prates, 2014)
9
  As Magud and Reinhart (2006) argue that to enhance the effectiveness of capital controls is necessary to
take into account country-specific features in their design.
10
   Magud and Reihart (2006) reviewed more than 30 papers that evaluated capital controls either on
inflows or outflows around the world, making use of a capital controls effectiveness index in order to
standardize the results of the empirical studies. They conclude that “capital controls on inflows seem to
make monetary policy more independent; alter the composition of capital flow; reduce real exchange rate
                                                                                                       16
flexible and adjustable, involving a steady “fine-tuning” to close the loopholes found by
private agents.11

4. Final remarks

        The amount and volatility of capital flows during the post-crisis boom, their
potentially damaging consequences for EMEs and the very pragmatic response of these
countries summarized above pushed forward the IMF research department to produce a
series of policy and background papers on this subject (IMF, 2011b, Ostry et al. 2010,
among others) that result in a definitive policy framework launched in December 2012
(IMF, 2012).
        This framework made relevant progress compared to the IMF traditional
rejection of capital controls and also to its preliminary approaches of 2010 and 2011.
These approaches established a clear-cut hierarchy between instruments to manage
capital flows covering the whole range of macroeconomic policies, prudential regula-
tions and capital controls (defined in a jurisdictional manner12) which should be used
under highly specific circumstances (from Ostry et al. 2010 to IMF, 2011c). By
introducing the term “capital flow management measures” (CFMs), the IMF gives more
policy space to EMEs subject to major capital inflows. Yet, by labeling CFMs as a tem-
porary instrument, it still supports financial liberalization in these economies as a final
goal and keeps discriminating between CFMs and financial prudential measures, setting
bounds to EMEs´ policy space and their country-specific needs13.
        Therefore, the differences between prudential regulation and capital controls
regarding the types of agents and capital flows they could reach as well as the other
macroeconomic and institutional specificities shaping each country regulatory approach
(see section 4) are not taken into account by the IMF in its new institutional view on
capital flows regulation.
        Yet, EMEs should have permanent authority to manage capital flows based on
all types of available regulatory tools not only because each country approach need to
be tailor-made according to the aforementioned specificities (as the experiences in the
1990s and 2000s revealed), but also due to the features of the current IMFS. As the
global financial crisis was not followed by the structural reforms awaited by many
scholars (Davidson, 1982), this system is still featured by a currency hierarchy with the
dollar at its top and an asymmetrical financial integration. The interplay of these
features has more harmful impacts exactly on EMEs whose currencies are positioned at
the hierarchy lower bond, as detailed in section 3. Moreover, the improvements in the
international governance after this crisis have been shy (Frieden et al., 2012) As AEs




pressures (although the evidence is more controversial)”, but “seem not to reduce the volume of net flows
(and hence, the current account balance (Magud and Reihart, 2006, p.6-7).
11
    This is the case of the Brazilian experience with CAR after the global financial crisis. See Fritz and
Prates (2014) and Paula and Prates (2015).
12
   Capital controls are defined as measures discriminating between residents and non-residents.
13
   For a detailed description of the preliminary approaches and the new institutional view, see Fritz and
Prates (2014) and Gallagher (2012).
                                                                                                       17
are business and financial cycle makers (Ocampo, 2001a; Rey, 2013) and have not
embraced capital outflow regulations, EMEs need to tackle alone the spillover effects of
those countries domestic policies.
        Hence, CAR need to be a permanent part of the policy toolkit to be used in a
counter-cyclical way to smooth booms and busts, to curb financial risks and to increase
the policy space in order to exert control over the key macroeconomic prices such as the
exchange rate and interest rate. We call this strategy “an integrated approach of capital
flows regulation”.

References
Ahmed, S. and A. Zlate (2013) ‘Capital Flows to Emerging Market Economies: A brave
       new world?’ Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. International
       Finance Discussion Papers n. 1081, June.
Andrade, R. and D.M. Prates (2013) Exchange Rate Dynamics in a Peripheral Monetary
       Economy, Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, 35, 399-416.
Akyüz, Y. (2011) ‘Capital Flows to Developing Countries in a Historical Perspective.
       Will the current boom end with a bust and how?’ South Centre Research Paper
       37.
Akyüz, Y. and A. Cornford (1999) ’Capital Flows to Developing Countries and the
       Reform of the International Financial System’. UNCTAD, Discussion Paper
       143, November.
BIS (2015) http://www.bis.org/statistics/index.htm (home page), data accessed 04 June
       2015.
Baumann, B.A., and K.P. Gallagher (2013) ‘Post-Crisis Capital Account Regulation in
       South Korea and South Africa’, PERI Working Paper No. 320
       April 2, 2013.
Bluedorn, J., R. Duttagupta, J. Guajardo, and P. Topalova (2013) ‘Capital Flows are
       Fickle: Anytime, Anywhere’, IMF Working Paper WP/13/183, August.
Cardarelli, R., S. Elekdag, and M.A. Kose, (2009), ‘Capital Inflows: Macroeconomic
       Implications and Policy Responses’, IMF Working Paper 09/40, Washington:
       International Monetary Fund, March.
Calvo, G. and C. Reinhart, 2002. ‘Fear of floating’, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
       117(2), 379-408
Claessens. S. and S.R. Ghosh, (2013) ‘Capital Flow Volatility and Systemic Risk in
       Emerging Markets: The policy toolkit’, In Canuto, O. and S.R. Ghosh (ed.)
       Dealing with the Challenges of Macro Financial Linkages in Emerging Markets.
       (Washington: The World Banks).
Canuto, Otaviano, and D.M. Leipziger (ed.) (2012) Ascent After Decline: Regrowing
       global economies after the great recession (Washington D.C: World Bank).
Cohen, B.J. 1998. The Geography of Money. (Ithaca: Cornell University Press).
Davidson, P.(1982) International Money & The Real World (Basingstoke: Macmillan).
Eichengreen, B. and R.Hausmann (ed.) (2005) Other People’s Money – Debt
       Denomination and Financial Instability in Emerging Market Economies
       (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).


                                                                                      18
Epstein, G., I. Grabel, and K.S. Jomo (2004) ‘Capital Management Techniques in Developing
        Countries: An assessment of experiences from the 1990s and lessons for the future’,
        G-24 Discussion Paper 27.
Flassbeck, H. (2001) ‘The Exchange rate – Market Price or Economic Policy Tool’,
        UNCTAD Discussion Paper no. 149, November.
Frieden, J., M. Pettis, D. Rodrik,, E. Zedillo (2012) ‘After the Fall: The Future of
        Global                   Cooperation’.               Available                  at:
        http://www.ycsg.yale.edu/assets/downloads/geneva_report.pdf
Ghosh, A., J.Kim, , S.Qureshi, and J.Zalduendo, (2012) ‘Surges’. IMF Working Paper
        WP/12/22, January.
Gallagher, K., S. Griffith-Jones, and J.A. Ocampo (ed.) (2012) Regulating Global
        Capital Flows for Long-Run Development (Boston, MA: Pardee Center Task
        Force Report).
Gallagher, K. (2014) Countervailing Monetary Power: Emerging Markets and the Re-
        Regulation of Cross-Border Finance (Ithaca, Cornell University Press).
Gallagher, K. (2012) The IMF’s New View on Financial Globalization: A Critical
        Assessment, Pardee Center, Issues in Brief No. 2
Harvey, J.T. (2009) Currencies, Capital Flows and Crises: A Post Keynesian Analysis
        of Exchange Rate Determination (London, Routledge).
IMF (2011a) World Economic Outlook 2011 - Tensions from the Two-Speed Recovery:
        Unemployment, Commodities, and Capital Flows (Washington, D.C.,
        International Monetary Fund).
IMF. (2011b) Recent Experiences in Managing Capital Inflows – Cross-Cutting Themes
        and Possible Policy Framework, at: http://bit.ly/QSqrVQ (last access
        10/12/2012)
IMF. (2011c) The Multilateral Aspects of Policies Affecting Capital Flows, at:
        http://bit.ly/SRk4lr (last access 10/12/2012)
IMF. (2012) The Liberalization and Management of Capital Flows – An Institutional
        View, at: http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2012/111412.pdf (last access
        03/18/2013)
IMF (2015), http://www.imf.org/data (home page), data accessed 3 June 2015.
Institute for International Finance (2015), https://www.iif.com/publications/capital-
        flows (home page), date accessed 2 June 2015.
Klein, M.W., 2012. Capital Controls: Gates and Walls [Conference draft presented at
        the Fall 2012 Brookings Panel on Economic Activity, September 13-14].
Lane, P.R. and G.M. Milesi-Ferretti, (2007) ‘The External Wealth of Nations Mark II:
        Revised and extended estimates of foreign assets and liabilities, 1970–2004‘,
        Journal of International Economics 73, 223-250.
Magud, N. and C.Reinhart, (2006) ‘Capital Controls: An evaluation’, NBER Working
        Paper nº 11973.
Magud, N., C.M. Reinhart, and K. Rogoff (2011) Capital Controls. Myth and Reality –
        A Portfolio Balance Approach (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of
        Economic Research).
Mohanty, M. and M.Scatigna (2005) ‘Has Globalization Reduced Monetary Policy
        Independence?’, BIS Papers no 23.
Ocampo, J.A. (2001a) ‘International Asymmetries and The Design of the International
        Financial System’, CEPAL Serie Temas de Coyuntura n.15, April.

                                                                                        19
Ocampo, J.A. (2001b) ‘Raúl Prebisch and the Development Agenda at the Dawn of the
        Twenty-first Century’. CEPAL Review, 15, 23-37.
Paula, L.F., F.Ferrari-Filho, and A.Gomes, (2013) ‘Capital Flows, International
        Imbalances and Economic Policies in Latin America’. In Arestis, P. and Sawyer,
        M.(ed.) Economic Policies, Governance and the New Economics (London:
        Palgrave Macmillan).
Ostry, J., Ghosh, A., Habermeier, K., Chamon, M., Qureshi,M. and Reinhardt, D.(2010)
        ‘Capital Inflows. The Role of Controls’, IMF Staff Position Note 10/04.
Ostry, J., A. Ghosh, K. Habermeier, L. Laeven, M. Chamon, M. Qureshi, and A.
        Kokenyne (2011a) ‘Managing Capital Inflows: What Tools to Use?” IMF Staff
        Discussion Notes 11/06.
Ostry, J., A. Ghosh, M. Chamon, and M. Qureshi (2011b) ’Capital Controls: When and
        Why’ IMF Economic Review 59(3), 562-580.
Paula, L.F., and D.M. Prates (2015) ‘Cuenta de Capitales y la Regulación de Derivados
        del Mercado de Divisas: La experiencia reciente de Brasil’, Investigación
        Económica, LXXIV(291), 79-115.
Pradhan, M., R. Balakrishnan, R. Baqir, G. Heenan, S. Nowak, C. Oner, and S. Panth
        (2011) ‘Policy Responses to Capital Flows in Emerging Markets’, IMF Staff
        discussion Paper 11/10.
Prates, D.M. (2014) ‘A Gestao do Regime de Câmbio Flutuante no Brasil:
   Especificidades e Dilemas’, Associate Professorship thesis. (Campinas, Sao Paulo,
   IE/UNICAMP).
Prates, D. and B.Fritz (2014) ‘Capital Account Regulation as Part of the
        Macroeconomic Regime: Comparing Brazil in the 1990s and 2000s
        (manuscript).
Rey, H. (2013) ‘Dilemma not trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary
        Policy Independence’, London Business School, CEPR and NBER, Jackson
        Hole Symposium.
Rodrik, D. (2006). ‘The Social Cost of Foreign Exchange Reserves’, International
        Economic Journal (20): 3, 253-266.
Sahay, R. V.Arora, , T.Arvanitis, , H.Faruqee, , P. N'Diaye, and T. Mancini-Griffoli
        (2014) ‘Emerging Market Volatility: Lessons from the Tape Tantrum’, IMF Staff
        Discussion Note SDN/14/09, September.
Saxena, S. (2008) ‘Capital Flows, Exchange Rate Regime and Monetary Policy’, BIS
        Papers No 35.
Schulmeister, S. (1988) ‘Currency Speculation and Dollar Fluctuations’, Banca
        Nazionale Del Lavoro Quarterly Review, December.
Stiglitz, J. (2000) ‘Capital Market Liberalization, Economic Growth, and Instability’,
        World Development, 28(6), 1075-1086.
Studart, R. (2001) ‘Integrating Uneven Partners: the Destabilizing Effects of Financial
        Liberalization and Internationalization of Latin American Economies’.
        Proceedings of the 29th Brazilian Economics Meeting. Niterói: ANPEC.
Tobin, J. (1978) ‘A Proposal for International Monetary Reform’, Eastern Economic
        Journal, 4, 153-159.




                                                                                    20
