                        Corporate Debt Expansion in Emerging Countries after 2008:
                         Profile, Determinants and Financial Stability Implications
                                                                            Cristiano Boaventura Duarte*
Abstract
        This study aims to explore corporate debt expansion in emerging countries after 2008 crisis,
presenting its profile, main determinants and financial stability implications. First, it is presented the
features of emerging market corporate debt after 2008, with the growth of leverage, net foreign exchange
exposure, later leading to deterioration in debt repayment capacity. Next, we do a panel regression to
identify the main changes in the determinants of emerging market corporate debt expansion before and
after 2008 crisis. Our analysis suggests that the exchange rate has been one of the most important
determinants through the period 2000-2016, and also in the period before 2008. But after 2008, beyond
some country level factors (exchange rate, national GDP growth, firms higher liquidity levels), other
factors that have global origins (more accommodative monetary policy stance in USA, lower financial
market volatility, higher commodity prices, global GDP growth) have become increasingly important.
One of our contributions is to identify a factor not previously emphasized in the literature which
investigates the determinants of corporate debt in emerging economies: the interaction between higher
commodity prices and more appreciated exchange rates. Combined with an international scenario
particularly uncertain, this raising indebtedness generated financial stability concerns. Those concerns
would be better addressed if emerging countries and international institutions took additional initiatives,
such as an improvement in the regulatory/supervisory framework and coordinated macro and micro-
prudential measures, in order to enhance these countries resilience against financial crises.

Keywords: corporate debt; emerging countries; financial stability

Resumo
        O objetivo deste estudo é analisar a expansão da dívida corporativa em países emergentes após a
crise de 2008, apresentando seu perfil, principais determinantes e implicações para a estabilidade
financeira. Primeiramente, apresenta-se as características da dívida corporativa em países emergentes
após 2008, com o crescimento da alavancagem e exposição cambial líquida, com posterior deterioração
na capacidade de pagamento das firmas. Em seguida, realizamos uma regressão em painel para identificar
as principais mudanças nos determinantes da expansão da dívida corporativa antes e depois da crise de
2008. Nossa análise sugere que a taxa de câmbio foi um dos determinantes mais importantes durante o
período 2000-2016, e também no período antes de 2008. Porém após 2008, além de alguns fatores em
nível nacional (taxa de câmbio, crescimento do PIB doméstico, maior nível de liquidez das firmas), os
fatores com origens globais (política monetária mais acomodatícia nos EUA, menor volatilidade no
mercado financeiro, preços mais altos de commodities, crescimento do PIB global) tornaram-se
progressivamente importantes. Uma de nossas contribuições é identificar um fator não enfatizado
previamente na literatura que investiga os determinantes de dívida corporativa em economias emergentes:
a relação entre preços mais altos de commodities e taxas de câmbio mais apreciadas. Somado a um
cenário internacional particularmente incerto, o crescimento deste endividamento traz preocupações
relacionadas à estabilidade financeira. Estas preocupações seriam mais bem combatidas se economias
emergentes e instituições internacionais tomassem iniciativas adicionais, no sentido de uma melhoria no
arcabouço regulatório/de supervisão e medidas micro/macro prudenciais coordenadas, de modo a
aumentar a resiliência destes países contra crises financeiras.

Palavras-Chave: dívida corporativa; países emergentes; estabilidade financeira
JEL: F34, F65, G32

Área 7: Economia Internacional

*
 PhD Candidate double diploma (Université Sorbonne Paris Cité/ Federal University of Rio de Janeiro) and analyst at Central
Bank of Brazil. The views expressed in the article are those of the author and do not reflect those of the Central Bank of Brazil.
                                                                                                                                1
1. Introduction
         Private debt ratios, especially of non-financial firms, have grown considerably since the 2000s, in
advanced (AEs) and emerging economies (EMEs). However, the 2008 global financial crisis marked a
tipping point for both group of countries. In advanced economies, corporate debt levels generally peaked
in 2008. In the post 2008 period, after a limited downward adjustment, corporate debt ratios continued at
high levels, and in some countries actually increased, according to OECD (2017). Conversely, emerging
economies corporate debt levels increased since the 2000s from lower levels than AEs. But the 2008
crisis did not interrupt this trend, with EMEs corporate debt levels continuing to increase up to 2016. The
post 2008 crisis period was marked by a development of international debt markets, with bond issuance
growth (especially in foreign currency), coupled by an unprecedented monetary expansion in advanced
economies, that eased international financial conditions, lowered risk spreads and increased search for
yield, in particular for bonds of those countries.
        However, this expansion in EMEs corporate debt started to be challenged by recurrent episodes of
volatility in international debt markets: in 2013, the “taper tantrum” in USA; in 2014, the fall in
commodity prices (especially oil/minerals); in 2015, uncertainties in China’s foreign exchange/stock
markets; in 2016, after the election of the new US president. Beyond difficulties posed by the
international economic scenario, EMEs companies face challenges related to currency mismatch (i.e.
deficiencies in hedging); susceptibility to the interests of creditors/ institutional investors/ banks and
macroeconomic volatility, which may put into question the financial sustainability of these companies.
Moreover, although in recent decades several sovereign macroeconomic lines of defense have been
developed to shield national governments from external shocks (e.g. flexible exchange rates; international
reserves accumulation; currency swap agreements; development of local currency sovereign debt
markets), the capacity of such lines to fulfill private firms’ needs in those occasions is uncertain, due to
the mentioned problems. Hence, the increase in EMEs corporate debt size (even after 2008 crisis), the
changes in its profile/determinants and the financial stability concerns associated to it raised attention to
this issue, which deserves a deeper analysis.
        Therefore, this study main objective is to discuss the increase in corporate debt in emerging
countries after 2008, aiming to understand the changes in its profile, its determinants, and its financial
stability implications. The article is structured as follows. After this introduction in section 1, section 2
presents the main features related to the amount/ profile of corporate debt expansion in emerging
economies. Some of the main features of this expansion in EMEs corporate debt were the increase in
leverage, net foreign exchange exposure, later leading to a deterioration of debt repayment capacity in a
significant share of them.
        In section 3 we do a literature review on theoretical approaches that underpin debt expansion in
corporations and its features, including agents’ procyclical behavior. We observe that those approaches
that have been well described both in the mainstream and heterodox literature, related to concepts such as
the risk-taking channel of monetary policy, herd behavior and financial instability hypothesis. We also
undertake a literature review on empirical articles that seek to understand the determinants of corporate
debt in emerging economies.
        In section 4, it is presented our own panel analysis to explain the main determinants that were
behind this debt expansion. Our contribution in this literature is to investigate the determinants of EMEs
corporate debt expansion by using a dataset which goes from 2000 Q1 up to a more recent period (2016
Q4), and with subsamples before and after the 2008 crisis, so we identify the main changes in the factors
that explain EMEs corporate debt expansion before and after this event. Among them, a factor which was
not previously used in the literature with that purpose: the interaction between higher commodity prices
and more appreciated exchange rates. Our findings suggest that the exchange rate has been one of the
most important determinants that explain the increase in EMEs companies' debt expansion through the
period 2000-2016, and also in the period before the 2008 crisis. But after 2008, beyond some country
level factors (exchange rate, national GDP growth, firms higher liquidity levels), other factors that have
global origins (more accommodative monetary policy stance in USA, lower financial market volatility,
higher commodity prices, global GDP growth) have become increasingly important to explain emerging
market corporate debt expansion.
                                                                                                           2
        Section 5 closes the study with the final considerations and conclusions, discussing the financial
stability implications of this debt increase, and the need to enhance regulatory/supervisory framework and
implement micro/macroprudential measures (preferably on a coordinated way), in order to improve the
resilience against financial crises.

2. Features of Corporate Debt in Emerging Countries
        This section presents the main features of the evolution of corporate debt in emerging economies
in the recent period, with a special focus on non-financial companies.
        Regarding the evolution of non-financial corporate debt in emerging countries, its amount rose
from US$ 9 trillion in March 2008 to US$ 25.7 trillion in December 2016, according to BIS data (2017).
Considering these values as percentages of countries’ GDPs, growth between March 2008 and December
2016 was on average 41 percentage points (pp.), from 61% to 102% of GDP. In geographical terms, this
increase occurred in all major regions that group emerging countries: Asia, Latin America, Emerging
Europe, Middle East and Africa - EMEA. However, this expansion did not occur homogeneously: in
Hong Kong and China, the increase in non-financial corporate debt in the period was 82 pp. and 69 pp.
respectively, to levels above 166% of GDP. Chile, Turkey and Singapore also had significant increases of
38, 34 and 31 pp., respectively. In other emerging markets, the increase in non-financial corporate debt in
the period was less than 30 pp., to levels generally below 100% of GDP, as can be seen in figure 1 in the
appendix.
        In terms of economic sectors, the ones that experienced higher debt growth were construction/real
estate, mining (especially the oil and gas sub-sector) and utilities, according to IMF (2015).
        With regard to leverage, its degree can be measured using various indexes. Two indicators
commonly used are: i) Total liabilities to total equity; ii) Total liabilities to earnings before taxes (EBT).
Using a compilation of data from EMEs companies, both indicators had a significant expansion between
2007 and 2013: the first, by 88 pp. and the second, by 28 pp., according to IMF (2015).
        Regarding emerging companies’ foreign debt, Mc Cauley et al (2015a) estimate that the
percentage of non-financial corporate debt denominated in U.S. dollars in Q2 2015 averaged 10%.
However, these figures varied widely among countries (from 5% in China1 to 52% in Indonesia and 66%
in Mexico). Nevertheless, these values are a simple estimate of the amount of EMEs firms dollar
denominated debt, and do not take into account financial and operational hedging instruments available.
        An alternative measure of foreign exchange exposure is estimated in IMF (2015), which draws a
sample of 5000 firms in 31 emerging countries between 2001 and 2014, and calculates net values
excluding financial and operational hedging mechanisms2. The study concluded that, with the exception
of China, there was a significant expansion of net foreign exchange exposure of emerging companies in
the period. The increase in net foreign exchange exposure level in EMEA was from 45% to 50% (5 pp.).
In Latin America, it has increased from about 40% to 60% (20 pp.). In general, non-tradable sectors have
higher net foreign exchange exposure, because non-tradables cannot rely on the alternative of operational
hedging (available for tradable sectors). Still, this operational hedging might not be enough to protect
balance sheets of tradable sectors, as they are also negatively affected in occasions when commodity
prices fall and exports volumes decline, with a slowdown in international trade.
        Regarding the profile of non-financial corporate debt in emerging countries, there was also a
significant change in its composition in post-2008 crisis period. Although most of the debt remained
being funded by bank loans, an increasing share of EMEs firms’ debt has been funded by bonds issued in
capital markets (from 9% in 2007 to 17% in 2014, according to IMF 2015). In absolute terms, the amount
of annual non-financial corporate debt issuance jumped from about US$ 586 billion in 2007 to US$ 3.025

1
  Despite the low percentage of corporate debt denominated in dollars in China, the significant increase of leverage in sectors
such as real estate and construction in recent years has drawn attention to the level of non-financial corporate debt in this
country.
2
  Net foreign exchange exposure is estimated using the sensitivity of the company’ share price to exchange rate fluctuations
according to an augmented CAPM model. It incorporates a β coefficient, which represents the foreign currency exposure of a
firm, net of financial and operational ("natural") hedging mechanisms. A positive currency exposure means that the firm's
share price falls when the exchange rate depreciates.
                                                                                                                             3
trillion in 2014. In many countries, there was an increase in the concentration of debt issuance by major
companies. In terms of sectors, the most relevant issuers were construction and oil/gas. Regarding the
currency of issuance of these securities, domestic ones accounted for a larger share. However, there was
an increase in the foreign share of non-financial corporate debt issuance in EMEs excluding China3, from
about 40% between 2003-2007 to 45% between 2010-2014. The most used foreign currency was the
dollar (usually over 80%), with the euro, yen and other currencies composing a smaller share.
         It is worth mentioning that using bonds as source of funding has advantages and disadvantages for
firms. The advantages are: i) Better financing conditions when compared to bank loans, such as lower
costs and longer maturities4 and ii) Using capital markets as an alternative source of funding, even when
banks are more restrictive. Among the disadvantages, it can be mentioned: i) The increasing reliance on
funding from more volatile sources (i.e. institutional investors) and ii) Market investors are less stringent
in monitoring firms' balance sheets than banks, fact that may encourage excessive leverage and risk-
taking by firms.
         Regarding the allocation of funds raised by companies through bonds, there is no consensus about
their destination. On the one hand, Chui et al (2014) mention the existence of studies showing a one-third
increase in capital investments by 120 companies that issued bonds in EMEs between 2010 and 2013.
However, the increased availability of resources for funding would have decreased entrepreneurs’
minimum expected rate of return. This would have removed constraints for the implementation of several
new investment projects, including the ones with lower profitability. In other words, the availability of
funding would have allowed an increase in the amount of investments, but also the implementation of less
profitable projects. Then, even with more favorable financing conditions, the growth in debt amounts and
the fall in investments profitability led to a deterioration of EMEs firms debt repayment capacity. In
particular, a firm would present risk to be in arrears with interest payments when its interest coverage
ratio is lower than 2. IMF data (2015) shows that the percentage of EMEs firms whose interest coverage
ratio was below 2 increased from 17% in 2007 to 36% in 2013. A more recent number regarding EMEs
companies debt repayment capacity was published in IMF (2016), showing that the percentage of EMEs
companies whose earnings were lower than interest expenses (interest coverage ratio below 1, a more
critical situation) was of around 11% , corresponding to US$ 430 billion of “debt at risk”.
         On the other hand, several studies point that bond issuance resources were less used for new
investments, and more destined towards refinancing debt or buying short-term financial assets. According
to IMF (2015), the allocation of funds raised by firms through bonds was higher for refinancing than for
new investments5. Moreover, Chui et al (2014) mention that high interest rate differentials from domestic
to international levels stimulated an intensification in carry trade activities by firms, which suggests the
allocation of these resources for speculative purposes. A sign of those activities is the increase in
companies’ assets held as cash or bank deposits, which has grown significantly since 2009. The fact that
this trend has not reversed after the crisis shows that the accumulation of financial resources by firms
wasn’t only a precautionary behavior immediately after the 2008 episode. Conversely, it was a strategy to
increase financial returns, raising funds abroad with low interest rates and depositing in local banks or
buying high yield assets from institutional investors.
         Other factor associated with this process was the expansion of bond issuance through offshore
subsidiaries, benefiting from jurisdictions that offer tax and regulatory advantages. The headquarters of
these subsidiaries are located mainly in the following countries: China, Brazil, Russia, India and South
Africa. Mc Cauley et al (2015a) estimated that in the second quarter of 2015, these offshore subsidiaries
3
  If we consider the total of emerging countries including China, the share of issuance in foreign currency decreased after the
crisis, given the high amount of issuance in this country, mostly denominated in renminbi.
4
  Indeed, IMF data (2015) shows that, in average, EMEs firms have managed to raise funds with yields 2 pp lower in 2014
(5%) than in 2007 (7%), and with a one year longer term (6 years in 2014 vs. 5 years in 2007). One of the factors that played a
role for these favorable funding conditions was accommodative monetary policies prevailing in the global economy after the
crisis.
5
  This does not mean that firms have necessarily decreased their amount of investment. Instead, it means that firms have used a
larger portion of bond issuance proceeds to refinance debt or to buy short-term assets, and may have increased their
investments with other resources. But with the decrease in minimum expected rates of return, the profitability of those new
investments was lower.
                                                                                                                             4
held an amount of bonds of US$ 558 billion. With the funds obtained abroad, an offshore subsidiary of a
non-financial company can transfer funds to their home country through three channels: i) Making a
direct loan for its headquarters (within-company flows); ii) Providing credit to other non-financial
companies (between-company flows) or iii) Making a cross-border deposit in a bank (corporate deposit
flows). Based on an analysis of emerging countries’ balance of payments data performed by Avdjiev et al
(2014), it was noted that capital flows to EMEs associated with all three mentioned channels have grown
considerably in the period between 2009 and 2014. As most of these flows were allocated for financial,
rather than real activities, evidence suggest that offshore subsidiaries of emerging companies have acted
in this period also as financial intermediaries, obtaining funds from global investors through bond
issuance and remitting these resources to their home countries through those three different channels.
Nonetheless, it's important to point that the increase in bond issuance abroad by EMEs firms was not only
due to their own strategy to enlarge their investor base and raise funds with better conditions, but it was
also a consequence of the interests/demands of international investors, seeking higher yields.
        Overall, the features of corporate debt presented in this section showed that non-financial
companies in emerging countries expanded considerably their presence in financial markets, searching for
higher profits and often acting as financial intermediaries. They increased their degree of leverage and net
foreign currency exposure, especially in the post-2008 crisis period, and a significant share of them later
presented deterioration in debt repayment capacity.

3. Literature Review
        In this section we present a literature review on theoretical approaches that underpin debt
expansion in corporations and its features (subsection 3.1), and empirical articles that seek to understand
the determinants of corporate debt in emerging economies (subsection 3.2).

3.1 Theoretical Approaches for Corporate Debt Expansion
        The features of corporate debt described in section 2 (increase in leverage and net foreign currency
exposure, with later deterioration in debt repayment capacity) would have as a common point agents'
procyclical behavior, being in accordance with theoretical approaches that have been well described
both in the mainstream and heterodox literature.
        In the mainstream literature, Bruno and Shin (2015) highlight the "risk-taking channel of monetary
        6
policy" , and its impact on financial and real variables through bank leverage. These authors develop a
model where looser international financial conditions (expansionary US monetary policy) are associated
with an increase in cross-border capital flows intermediated through higher leverage in the international
banking system. The mechanism operates via stronger local borrower balance sheets as a result of local
currency appreciation, allowing banks to lend more and take on more risk. Feyen et al (2015) argue that
this mechanism would also apply for corporate foreign bond issuance. Looser international financial
conditions would be associated to a US dollar real depreciation, increasing the propensity for emerging
market corporations to issue abroad above their historical average volume. More specifically, when
domestic currency appreciates, local companies’ balance sheets strengthen. This would increase their
external borrowing capacity, fostering higher cross-border inflows into EMEs by international investors
who are willing to take on more risk. Conversely, tighter international financial conditions would lead to
an appreciation of the US dollar and cross border capital outflows from EMEs, with depreciation of
domestic currencies, reducing companies' external borrowing capacity and weakening their balance
sheets.
        In the heterodox literature, descriptions of agents' procyclical behavior date back to Keynes
General Theory (1936). Assuming fundamental uncertainty and adaptive expectations, Keynes argued
that each individual has the incentive to imitate other agents' average behavior (conventional or herd
behavior). As long-term expectations are formed under a fragile basis, those expectations would be

6
 The "risk-taking channel of monetary policy" was an expression coined by Borio and Zhu (2012), who intended to convey the
impact of monetary policy on the willingness of market participants to take on risk exposures, thus influencing financial
conditions and real economic decisions.
                                                                                                                        5
subject to sudden shifts, due to changes in entrepreneurs "animal spirits" that would influence their
actions. This change in entrepreneurs' views could spread through the market (herd behavior), triggering a
"self-fulfilling prophecy": entrepreneurs' pessimism leads them to invest less, and thus the economy
enters a downward trajectory, "confirming" the initial pessimism. A more in depth analysis of firms’
procyclical behavior was made by Hyman Minsky (1992) with his "Financial Instability Hypothesis".
This concept was based in two central propositions: the first is that there are stable funding models and
unstable ones; the second is that in prolonged periods of economic growth, stable financial relations may
become unstable. Under this view, after an expansionary period with increasing liquidity and credit, firms
would take more speculative and Ponzi postures, deteriorating their "safety margins" (i.e. debt repayment
capacity) and weakening their balance sheet positions. In this context, Minsky argued that procyclical
behavior and the generation of instability and crises are features intrinsic to capitalist dynamics. Hence,
he believed that a financial crisis of great magnitude did not need to be necessarily triggered by a huge
adverse shock. Conversely, a reversal of expectations caused by a one-off episode would be sufficient to
modify refinancing conditions and, consequently, to push firms that were already under weak balance
sheet conditions to a situation of illiquidity/insolvency.

3.2 Empirical Literature Review on the Determinants of Corporate Debt in Emerging Countries
          The literature which investigates debts in emerging economies and their determinants is quite
vast. It covers several episodes of crises, related to sovereign debt, banks, exchange rate depreciations, as
well as their interlinkages with important macroeconomics aspects, such as emerging countries' fiscal
positions, current accounts and capital flows. However, articles which try to deal specifically with the
issue of the determinants of corporate debt in emerging economies in a global sense (not from a single
country or region, as a consequence of a local/regional crisis) became more frequent only recently,
especially after 2013, when macroeconomic conditions in EMEs in general deteriorated, and institutions
such as the IMF and BIS started to highlight in their reports concerns related to the growth of corporate
debt in those countries.
         For instance, Mc Cauley et al (2015b) center their analysis on the growth of US dollar credit to
non-residents on a sample of 22 countries (of which 14 emerging economies) through the period Q1 2000
- Q2 2014. In order to take into account the changes in the profile of credit, they use two different
dependent variables: the log change in loan/GDP, and the log change in bonds/GDP. They also test
alternative samples (2000-2014, before 2008, after 2008). They find that, prior to 2008, the determinants
of US dollar credit growth were more related to common drivers of international bank credit: bank
leverage (as measured by financial commercial paper and broker-dealer repo), or low-cost leverage (as
measured by the VIX). For longer time series (i.e. year on year, rather than quarterly growth rates), they
find that the level of the Federal Funds rate matters, especially in occasions when the effective Federal
Funds rate is below the one prescribed by the Taylor rule.
         Furthermore, Feyen et al (2015) gather data of the universe of all foreign bonds issued by 71
emerging and developing economies (companies/governments) during the 2000-14 period, and show that
global factors had a powerful impact on primary activity in international bond market by corporations and
sovereign governments of emerging and developing economies. In particular, after conducting a panel
regression analysis, these authors found that a decrease in i) expected U.S. equity market/ interest rate
volatility, ii) U.S. corporate credit spreads, iii) U.S. interbank funding costs and an increase in the Federal
Reserve’s balance sheet were associated to the following events: i) Increase the probability that the
monthly external issuance volume is above its own historical average; ii) Lower yield-to-maturity spread
of external bonds at the time of issuance; iii) Increase the maturity of non-perpetual external emerging
and developing economies bonds at the time of issuance.
         In addition, Serena and Moreno (2016) analyze the determinants of US dollar bonds issued
offshore, for a sample of 41 countries (34 EMEs) from 2000-2015. They find that easier external
financing conditions (proxied by a lower VIX) increase the amount issued in offshore bond markets.
However, this impact is increased if countries present some of the following constraints: i) low onshore
financial market depth; ii) presence of capital controls on local bond markets; iii) Presence of withholding
taxes on corporate bond income. Hence, the authors show that, even if external financing costs fell,
                                                                                                             6
limited financing opportunities in domestic markets also played an important role in inducing EME firms
to raise their offshore bond issuance.
        Moreover, a study presented in IMF (2015) uses private databases of more than 1 million non-
financial firms for 24 emerging market economies, during the period 2004–2013, totaling more than 1.3
million firm-year observations. They run a panel regression model where their dependent variable is the
change in leverage (change of total liabilities/book equity), and their main explanatory variables are
grouped into three categories: Firm Indicators (e.g. measures of size, profitability and asset tangibility),
Country Macro Indicators (i.e. International Country Risk Guide - ICRG), Global Indicators (price of oil,
US shadow interest rate, VIX, Global GDP), as well as some interactions among those variables and
dummies for firm fixed effects. Their main result is that a decrease in the US shadow rate is associated
with faster leverage growth, with a higher effect for the subsample 2010-2013.

4. Determinants of Corporate Debt Expansion in Emerging Countries
        The objective of this section is to explain what factors were behind the expansion of corporate
debt observed in emerging countries’ companies during the period 2000-2016. We undertake a panel
analysis where we present a number of factors, with domestic and global origins, in order to check
whether they were significant to explain corporate debt growth in EMEs corporations. In particular, we
aim to identify the main changes in the explanatory factors of EMEs corporate debt expansion before and
after the 2008 crisis.

4.1 Data
        Our dataset gathers 15 emerging countries: Brazil, Chile, Czech Republic, China, Hungary, India,
Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Poland, Russia, South Africa, South Korea, Thailand, Turkey. All those
countries are emerging markets according the BIS definition, and are listed on the MSCI EME index 7,
which provides aggregate indicators for firms in each of those countries. Their geographical distribution
is the following: Latin America (3 - Brazil, Chile, Mexico); Emerging Europe, Middle East and Africa (6
- Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Russia, South Africa, Turkey); Emerging Asia: (6 - China, India,
Indonesia, South Korea, Malaysia, Thailand).
        The time period analyzed is 2000 Q1-2016 Q4, with quarterly data. We also compare sub-samples
for periods before the 2008 financial crisis (2001 Q1-2007 Q4), and after the crisis financial crisis (2009
Q1 - 2016 Q4). In our model, the dependent variable for corporate debt expansion - Leverage - is
measured as companies' Debt to Equity ratio in each of the countries, obtained from MSCI country
indexes. The explanatory variables are divided into two big groups: Country and Global factors.

Country Factors: Represent factors that are linked with individual features in each country, whether
microeconomic (firms’ fundamentals) or macroeconomic (aggregate economic indicators).
Microeconomic Factors: Balance sheet indicators, based on reports from publicly traded companies,
which are compiled by MSCI to compose indexes for each indicator in its respective country. They
measure companies’ main accounting aspects:
   i) Profitability: return on assets (ROA)
   ii) Solvency ratio: free cash flow per share /short and long term debt
   iii) Liquidity: current ratio (current assets/current liabilities)
   iv) Asset quality: tangible assets per share
Macroeconomic Factors: Main country indicators supposed to be relevant for companies’ leverage
   i) Real GDP growth (% YoY). Our source to this data was the IMF International Financial Statistics
        (IFS) database.
   ii) Monetary Policy Rate (% YoY), obtained on the BIS statistics database.
   iii) Real Effective Exchange Rate (REER). Our source was the BIS statistics database.

7
 An index created by Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI) that is designed to measure equity market performance in
global emerging markets. It captures large and mid cap representations, covering about 85% of the market capitalization in
each country.
                                                                                                                        7
Global Factors: Include elements that have global implications, or are common for the world economy
as a whole.
    i) Monetary policy rate of four major central banks (FED, ECB, BOE, BOJ). Measured through the
         “Shadow Short Rate (SSR)”, based on the short-term policy interest rate, but accounting the
         stance and direction of monetary policy (level and slope), including the use of unconventional
         measures. The term structure of interest rates is used to find what policy rate would generate the
         observed yield curve if the policy rate could be taken to negative values. The "shadow rate" curve
         is obtained from calculating the value of a call option to hold cash at the ZLB and subtracting it
         from the actual yield curve. Our source to those rates was Kripnner (2016).
    ii) Real Global GDP growth (% YoY). Our source was the IMF IFS database.
    iii) Commodity price: All Commodity price index, compiled by the IMF. It is composed by weighted
         averages US dollar prices (2005=100) of non-fuel (edible, industrial inputs) and energy
         commodities.
    iv) VIX: Index of market's expectation of US stock market (S&P 500) volatility over the next 30-day
         period, calculated by the Chicago Board Option Exchange (CBOE). Proxy for market
         sentiment/global risk aversion, as described by several authors such as Rey (2015) and the ones
         mentioned in subsection 3.2.

4.2 Model Specification and Methodology:

         Regarding the model specification, our main panel regression is the following:
                  log Leverage  c   log CountryFactors   log GlobalFactors  

        This specification broadly follows the one used in IMF (2015). The dependent and independent
variables are all presented in quarterly log changes, and we also do proper stationary tests to make sure
there are no unit roots in the series. To address a possible endogeneity problem on microeconomic factors
(higher firm leverage influencing contemporaneous balance sheet indicators - profitability, liquidity,
solvency, asset tangibility), the variables that measure them are lagged by one quarter, so that balance
sheet indicators in the previous quarter will eventually explain leverage.
        On an alternative specification, we also include an interaction term between two important
variables, namely Commodity Price Index and the Real Effective Exchange Rate, so we can analyze how
the introduction of this interaction term affects the model results.
           log Leverage  c   log CountryFactors   log GlobalFactors   log Interaction  

        The interaction term captures a singular relationship that exists between commodity prices and
exchange rate movements, particularly in emerging commodity exporting countries. The idea is that an
increase in global commodity prices would result in an improvement of commodity exporters’ terms of
trade, raising prospective currency inflows and leading to appreciation of foreign exchange in those
countries, therefore reinforcing easing borrowing conditions for firms, especially abroad. This special link
between commodity prices and exchange rates is documented by Kohlscheen et al (2017), who affirm this
link goes beyond the global risk appetite (i.e. the one driven by the simultaneous movement of investors
into / out of commodity markets and high-yielding currencies during risk-on/risk-off episodes), but do not
use it with the purpose to explain the rise in corporate debt. The introduction of an interaction term
between two explanatory variables could raise a question about the presence of multicollinearity in the
model. But multicollinearity is not considered an issue for the model as a whole when using interaction
terms, once the p-value for the interaction is not affected by the multicollinearity, according to authors
such as Goldberger (1991) and Allison (2012)8.

8
  Those authors explain that, before creating the interactions, one can reduce the correlations by subtracting the means
(centering) the variables. But the p-value for the interaction will be exactly the same, regardless of whether or not one centers
the variables. And all the results for the other variables (including the R2) will be the same in either case. So the
multicollinearity has no adverse consequences in this situation. Furthermore, they explain that multicollinearity main problem
                                                                                                                               8
        The methodology employed was a Feasible Generalized Least Squares (FGLS) estimation on the
previous regressions. In order to control for omitted variable bias, we make the option to use first
differences, as our aim is to control for unobserved heterogeneity among selected countries across time.
In the panel estimation, we add weights that follow the Cross Section Seemingly Unrelated Regression
(SUR) method, to include robustness to groupwise heteroskedasticy, autocorrelation and cross section
dependence. On the coefficient covariance, we also use the Cross Section SUR method, but with a
modified specification (Panel-Corrected Standard Errors PCSE), which has an increased accuracy in
hypothesis testing9.
        Table 1 in the appendix provides a summary of the expected signs of the relationships between the
dependent variable with each one of the explanatory variables.
        Regarding the expected signs addressing the relationship between microeconomic factors and
leverage, they can be positive or negative, and depend on the theoretical approach adopted. There would
be a positive correlation between the variable and leverage if one considers the trade-off theory, and a
negative correlation if it is considered the pecking order theory10. In general terms, the argument in favor
of the trade-off theory supposes that firms with higher levels of profitability, solvency, liquidity and asset
tangibility face lower expected costs of financial distress and find interest tax deductions more valuable,
thus having higher incentives to take on more debt. Conversely, the argument supported by the pecking
order theory assumes that firms with higher levels of profitability, solvency, liquidity and asset tangibility
dispose of more internal funds and may rely less on external funds, hence there would be less incentive to
increase leverage.
        For macroeconomic factors, the expected signs are that higher levels of leverage would be
associated with: a higher level of real GDP growth (higher domestic demand would foster an expansion in
leverage); lower domestic monetary policy rate (lower policy rates would increase borrowing and
leverage by firms); higher REER level (more appreciated exchange rate would allow higher leverage,
especially in foreign currency).
        When it comes to global factors, the expected signs are that higher levels of leverage would be
associated with: a higher level of real global GDP growth (higher global demand would foster an
expansion in leverage); higher commodity prices (higher commodity prices would incentivize more
investments in this sector by EMEs companies and an increase in leverage); lower VIX (lower volatility
in financial markets would encourage investors sentiment and an expansion in leverage); lower
international interest rates. In particular, the transmission of a more accommodative stance by main

is variance inflation, which imply high standard errors for the variables, and p-values less likely to be below a critical
threshold. If confidence intervals are still small enough to have significant p-values in spite of sizable standard errors, then it is
very likely that the actual effect of each variable is being isolated. That is what we observe in the results in the 2009-2016
sample, where each of the variables REER, Commodity Prices and Commodity Prices*REER have different coefficients,
which are significant and whose values exceed the ones of the respective standard errors, supporting that individual coefficient
effects are being properly isolated in the model.
9
  The Cross Section Seemingly Unrelated (SUR) method uses an error structure clustered by period. The method proceeds in
two stages: (i) The model is estimated by OLS and the residuals are used to build a consistent estimator of the errors
covariance matrix; (ii) Using this consistent estimator on the errors covariance matrix, one can implement a Feasible GLS
estimation. The method is also known as Parks estimator, once the classic reference for this method is Parks (1967). On its
turn, the Panel-Corrected Standard Errors (PCSE) was an alternative specification of the Parks estimator developed by Beck
and Katz (1995), which preserves the weighting of observations for autocorrelation, but uses a sandwich estimator to
incorporate cross-sectional dependence when calculating standard errors. Moundigbaye et al (2017) show that the Parks
estimator has the highest degree of efficiency in panel analysis when the ratio T/N is above 1.5 (case of our samples). In
addition, the PCSE specification on the coefficient covariance improves the accuracy of hypothesis testing.
10
   Under the literature of Corporate Finance, two main different approaches try to explain the determinants of corporate
leverage, according to Adair and Adaskou (2015). On the one hand, the trade-off theory supposes that firms choose how to
allocate their resources comparing the tax benefits of debt with the bankruptcy costs associated, targeting an optimal debt ratio.
On the other hand, the pecking order theory assumes that firms prefer a sequential choice over funding sources. They avoid
external financing if they have internal financing available and avoid new equity financing whenever they can engage in new
debt financing. Debt funding would be preferred than equity funding because the cost of debt is usually lower, once it's a
deductible expense. Additionally, although equity financing is less risky as regards cash flow commitments, it dilutes share
ownership, control and earnings. According to the authors, there is no consensus in the literature, with evidence supporting
both theories, varying according to each different situation.
                                                                                                                                    9
central banks (including the implementation of quantitative easing programs - QEs) into an increase in
corporate debt would occur through two ways: i) stock channel (QEs leading to lower risk premia and
better financing conditions); flow channel (central bank asset purchases inducing portfolio rebalancing
across countries, "crowding out" investors towards corporate bonds). According to Lo Duca et al (2016),
the channel which would be more relevant for EMEs companies would be the first one.
        Regarding the interaction term, its expected sign is positive, once it’s composed by the product of
two terms with expected positive signs (commodity prices and REER).

 4.3 Results
        Table 2 in the appendix reports our estimation output results. Analyzing the results of the table as
a whole, we observe that the signs of the coefficients are according to previously expected. For
microeconomic factors, the signs are positive, hence in accordance with the trade-off theory. One of the
main explanatory factors for leverage would be the real effective exchange rate (REER), once this
variable is significant in all specifications, and it has the largest coefficient in most samples (except
2009-2016). Its positive sign means an exchange rate appreciation in EMEs is linked to an increase in
firms' debt/equity ratios.
        Observing the full sample (2000 Q1-2016 Q4), we see that beyond the REER, other variables that
presented statistical significance were: i) At the microeconomic level, the ones related to firms'
profitability (return on assets), liquidity (current ratio) and asset tangibility (tangible assets per share), all
positively related to leverage; ii) At the global level, the variable which represents USA monetary policy
stance (US shadow short rate) and the VIX (proxy for global risk aversion), both negatively related to
leverage, meaning leverage tends to increase when those variables are lower.
        In the sample 2000 Q1- 2007 Q4, the most significant variables are at country level: the exchange
rate (REER) and firms' profitability (return on assets). Other variables are also significant: at micro level,
firms' solvency ratio (free cash flow per share /short and long term debt); at the global level, the VIX.
Even so, the degree of significance of those two last variables is lower (p-values closer to 10%).
        In the sample 2009 Q1- 2016 Q4, several variables are significant: at the micro level, firms'
liquidity and asset tangibility indexes; at the macro level, REER and real GDP growth; at the global level,
the VIX and US shadow short rates are strongly significant; the UK shadow short rate is also significant,
albeit at a lower level11. In the specification with the interaction term, also appear as significant firms'
profitability in the micro level, and Global GDP growth at global level. And most importantly, in this
specification Commodity Prices and the interaction Commodity Price*REER are strongly significant and
have the largest coefficients. Their positive sign mean an increase in commodity prices, and the
interaction between higher commodity prices and exchange rate appreciation in EMEs are linked to an
increase in firms' leverage. This finding is in accordance with data which shows that a considerable share
of EMEs corporate debt after 2008 was taken by commodity sector industries, as was previously
described in section 2.
        In order to analyze better the changes in the determinants of corporate debt expansion between the
time periods analyzed, we perform Wald tests to check the joint significance of independent variables'
coefficients. The results are reported in Table 3 in the appendix.
        We divide the coefficients into two big groups: country coefficients and global coefficients.
Country coefficients are then split into two smaller groups: Micro (firm factors) and Macro (aggregate
economic factors). Global coefficients are also divided into two groups: one that gathers main central
banks' monetary policy rates (US, Euro, UK and Japan shadow short rates), and a second that accounts for
other global variables in the model (global GDP growth, commodity price index and VIX). In the
specification that considers the interaction term Commodity Price*REER, the term was included in the
domestic macro factors (as the REER), due to its particular influence according to each country. In order
to verify the statistical significance of each coefficient block, we test two hypotheses: i) If the coefficients
11
  The fact that FED’s accommodative policies have a higher impact on EMEs corporate debt and capital flows to emerging
economies in general, when compared to other major central banks (BOE, BOJ, ECB), can be understood, among other factors,
by the role of the dollar as a benchmark for offshore credit in most emerging markets and at a global level. This result is in
accordance with other studies in the literature, such as Chen et al (2017).
                                                                                                                           10
are different in the 15 countries; ii) If the coefficients are different from zero in the 15 countries. Thus, an
answer “Yes” implies the joint coefficients have statistical significance as a group, while an answer “No”
means they don’t have joint statistical significance.
        The results in both specifications (without and with the interaction term) are similar, and
analyzing them one can reach the following conclusions. Before the 2008 crisis, the main determinants of
debt expansion were in the group of country factors (as shown by the high significance of the return on
assets in domestic microeconomic factors, and the REER in domestic macroeconomic factors).
Conversely, after the 2008 crisis, while country factors remain important, factors in the global group also
gain ground, both in the block related to international interest rates (e.g. US shadow short rate), as well as
in the block related to other global variables (VIX, commodity prices, Global GDP growth). Those results
are consistent with other studies available in the literature previously mentioned in subsection 3.2.
        As a robustness analysis, we removed China from the country sample, in order to test if its faster
pace of credit growth when compared to other countries and its profile more reliant on local currency debt
were introducing some bias on the results. However, the results kept broadly similar to the full country
sample, with the same variables appearing as significant and in the same degree of significance, as
reported in table 5 in the appendix.
        Overall, our findings suggest that the exchange rate has been one of the most important
determinants that explain the increase in EMEs companies' debt through the period 2000-2016, and also
in the period before the 2008 crisis. But after 2008, beyond some country level factors (exchange rate,
national GDP growth, firms higher liquidity levels), other factors that have global origins (more
accommodative monetary policy stance in USA, lower financial market volatility, higher commodity
prices, global GDP growth) have become increasingly important to explain emerging market corporate
debt expansion.

5. Conclusions
        This study explores corporate debt expansion in emerging markets after the 2008 crisis, its profile,
main determinants, and discusses financial stability implications for those countries. Some of the main
features of this expansion in EMEs corporate debt were the increase in leverage, net foreign exchange
exposure, later leading to a deterioration of debt repayment capacity in a significant share of them. Those
features would have as a common point agents' procyclical behavior, being in accordance with theoretical
approaches that have been well described both in the mainstream and heterodox literature, related to
concepts such as the risk-taking channel of monetary policy, herd behavior and financial instability
hypothesis.
        Our contribution in this literature is to investigate the determinants of EMEs corporate debt
expansion by using a dataset which goes from 2000 Q1 up to a more recent period (2016 Q4), and with
subsamples before and after the 2008 crisis, so we identify the main changes in the factors that explain
EMEs corporate debt expansion before and after this event. Among them, a factor which was not
previously used in the literature with that purpose: the interaction between higher commodity prices and
more appreciated exchange rates. Our findings suggest that the exchange rate has been one of the most
important determinants that explain the increase in EMEs companies' debt through the period 2000-2016,
and also in the period before the 2008 crisis. But after 2008, beyond some country level factors (exchange
rate, national GDP growth, firms higher liquidity levels), other factors that have global origins (more
accommodative monetary policy stance in USA, lower financial market volatility, higher commodity
prices, global GDP growth) have become increasingly important to explain emerging market corporate
debt expansion.
        Hence, if EMEs companies are more sensitive to the movements of the global economy, a reversal
of international favorable conditions may generate adverse effects, increasing firms' borrowing costs,
worsening debt rollover conditions and weakening their balance sheets. In this context, difficulties posed
by the international economic scenario - uncertainties in major economies as well as large swings in
emerging currencies and commodity prices - together with problems related to currency mismatch;
susceptibility to the interests of creditors/ institutional investors/ banks and macroeconomic volatility may
put into question the financial sustainability of these companies. Moreover, although in recent decades
                                                                                                             11
several macroeconomic lines of defense have been developed by EMEs governments to combat
economic/financial crises, the capacity of such lines to fulfill private firms’ needs in occasions of crises is
uncertain, due to the mentioned problems.
        Ultimately, we draw attention to the need for policies oriented not only to enhance
macroeconomic fundamentals, but also to improve regulatory/supervisory frameworks and micro/macro
prudential instruments. Due to the close relationship between macroprudential and financial
regulation/supervision with antitrust, fiscal and monetary policies, it would be recommended an
improvement in the coordination among those policies. In particular, with appropriate coordination
between monetary and macroprudential policies, central banks and financial supervision authorities could
take balanced decisions, aiming to achieve both macroeconomic and financial stability. Therefore,
emerging countries could strengthen the monitoring of individual/systemic risks, enhancing their
resilience against financial crises.

6. References

Adair, P. and Adaskou, M. (2015), "Trade-off-theory vs. pecking order theory and the determinants of
corporate leverage: Evidence from a panel data analysis upon French SMEs (2002–2010)" in: Cogent
Economics & Finance, 3 (1), 1-12.

Allison, P. (2012), “When Can You Safely Ignore Multicollinearity?”, available at
https://statisticalhorizons.com/multicollinearity

Avdjiev, S.; Chui, M.; Shin, H.S. (2014), "Non-financial corporations from emerging market economies
and capital flows", in: BIS Quarterly Review December 2014. Basel, December.

Bank for International Settlements - BIS (2017), "BIS Statistical Bulletin June 2017", Basel, June.
Beck, N. and Katz, J. N. (1995), "What to do (and not to do) with time series cross-section data",
American Political Science Review, 89, pp. 634-647.

Borio, C. and Zhu, H. (2012), "Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary policy: A missing link in the
transmission mechanism?" in Journal of Financial Stability, 8 (4), 236–251.

 Bruno, V. and Shin, H.S. (2015), “Capital Flows and the Risk Taking Channel of Monetary Policy”, in:
Journal of Monetary Economics, 71(C), 119-132.

Chen, Q.; Lombardi, M.; Ross, A.; Zhu, F. (2017), “Global impact of US and euro area unconventional
monetary policies: a comparison”, BIS Working Papers No. 610, February.

Chui, M.; Fender, I.; Sushko, V. (2014), "Risks related to EME corporate balance sheets: the role of
leverage and currency mismatch", in: BIS Quarterly Review September 2014, Basel, September.

Feyen, E.; Ghosh S.; Kibuuka, K.; Farazi, S. (2015), “Public Global Liquidity and External Bond
Issuance in Emerging Markets and Developing Economies”, World Bank Policy Research Working
Paper, WPS No 7363, July.

Goldberger, A. S. (1991), A Course in Econometrics, Cambridge-MA, Harvard University Press.

International Monetary Fund - IMF, (2015), "Global Financial Stability Report – Vulnerabilities,
Legacies and Policy Challenges: Risks Rotating to Emerging Markets", Washington, October.

_________ (2016), "Global Financial Stability Report - Fostering Stability in a Low-Growth, Low-Rate
Era", Washington, October.
                                                                                                            12
Keynes, J.M. (1936), The General Theory of Interest, Employment and Money, London, Macmillan
Publishers.

Kohlscheen, E.; Avalos, F.; Schrimpf, A. (2017), "When the Walk Is Not Random: Commodity Prices
and Exchange Rates" in: International Journal of Central Banking, 13 (2), 121-158.

Kripnner, L. (2016), “Comparison of international monetary policy measures”, RBNZ Additional
Research,        available       at       http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/research-and-publications/research-
programme/additional-research/measures-of-the-stance-of-united-states-monetary-policy/comparison-of-
international-monetary-policy-measures.

Lo Duca, M.; Nicolleti, J.; Martinez, A.V. (2016), "Global Corporate Bond Issuance: What role for US
Quantitative Easing?", in: Journal of International Money and Finance 60 (C), 114-150.

Mc Cauley, R.; Mc Guire, P.; Sushko, V. (2015a), "Dollar Credit to Emerging Market economies", in:
BIS Quarterly Review December 2015, Basel, December.

________________________________ (2015b), “Global dollar credit: links to US monetary policies and
leverage”, BIS Working Papers No. 483, January.

Minsky, H. (1992), "The Financial Instability Hypothesis", Working Paper No. 74, Annandale-on-
Hudson, USA: The Levy Economics Institute of Bard College.

Moundigbaye, M.; Rea, W.S.; Reed, W.R. (2018), "Which panel data estimator should I use?: A
corrigendum and extension", Economics: The Open-Access, Open-Assessment E-Journal, 12 (2018-4):
1–31.

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development - OECD (2017), "Resilience in a Time of
High Debt" in OECD Economic Outlook, volume 2017 Issue 2, Paris: OECD Publishing, pp. 55-96.

Parks, R. W. (1967), "Efficient estimation of a system of regression equations when disturbances are both
serially and contemporaneously correlated", Journal of the American Statistical Association, 62, pp. 500-
509.

Rey, H. (2015), "Dilemma not trilemma: the global cycle and monetary policy independence", NBER
Working Paper No. 21162, May.

Serena, J.M and Moreno, R. (2016), “Domestic financial markets and offshore bond finance, in "BIS
Quarterly Review September 2016", Basel, September.




                                                                                                      13
                                                     Appendix

            Figure 1- Credit to Non-financial Corporations - Q1/2008 to Q4/2016 (% GDP)




Note: EMEs mean is composed by the 18 countries in the figure, plus Argentina, Hungary and Israel, which were excluded
from the figure because they have presented negative corporate credit growth in the period (-4 pp., -7 pp. and -22 pp.,
respectively). Source: BIS (2017).

            Table 1- Expected sign for Relationship between Leverage and Explanatory Variables
                    Explanatory Variable             Expected Sign      Reference in Literature

                                                Microeconomic Factors
                   Profitability: Return on assets        Positive/            Adair and Adaskou (2015)
                                                         Negative                     IMF (2015a)
             Solvency ratio: Free cash flow                Positive/            Adair and Adaskou (2015)
            per share /Short and long term debt            Negative                    IMF (2015a)
                       Liquidity: Current ratio            Positive/                   IMF (2015a)
                                                           Negative
                   Asset Quality: Tangible assets          Positive/            Adair and Adaskou (2015)
                              per share                    Negative                    IMF (2015a)
                                                Macroeconomic Factors
                        Real GDP Growth                   Positive                 Feyen et al (2015)
                                                                                     IMF (2015a)
                     Monetary Policy Rate                   Negative                 IMF (2015a)
                                                                                  Lo Duca et al (2016)
                 Real Effective Exchange Rate               Positive               Feyen et al (2015)
                                                                                     IMF (2015a)
                                                    Global Factors
                    Monetary policy rate of               Negative                 Feyen et al (2015)
                    FED, ECB, BOE, BOJ                                               IMF (2015a)
                                                                                  Lo Duca et al (2016)
                   Real Global GDP Growth                   Positive               Feyen et al (2015)
                                                                                     IMF (2015a)
                       Commodity Price                      Positive                 IMF (2015a)
                                                                                Kohlscheen et al (2017)
                              VIX                           Negative            Mc Cauley et al (2015b)
                                                                               Serena and Moreno (2016)
                                                      Interaction
                   Commodity Price*REER                    Positive                         -
                                                                                                                    14
                                       Table 2 - Panel Estimation Output – Results
                                         Dependent Variable: Debt to Equity
          Independent           2000 Q1 - 2016 Q4         2000 Q1 - 2007 Q4                  2009 Q1 - 2016 Q4
           Variables             No       Interaction      No       Interaction                No      Interaction
                             Interaction               Interaction                         Interaction
                                                      Country
           Return on          0.029***     0.029***     0.045***     0.048***                 0.011        0.020**
          Assets (1 lag)       (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.013)      (0.013)                (0.010)       (0.010)
           Free Cash            0.002        0.002       0.010*       0.009*                  0.002         0.003
           Flow/Short          (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.005)      (0.006)                (0.002)       (0.002)
           Long Term
          Debt (1 lag)
            Tangible           0.024*          0.024*          0.006          0.005          0.028*          0.024
           Assets per          (0.013)         (0.013)        (0.013)        (0.014)         (0.017)        (0.017)
          share (1 lag)
            Current           0.109***        0.108***        0.038           0.037         0.188***       0.199***
          ratio ( 1 lag)       (0.023)         (0.023)       (0.027)         (0.027)         (0.021)        (0.020)
           Real GDP             0.001           0.001         0.006           0.005         0.009***       0.007***
            Growth             (0.004)         (0.004)       (0.007)         (0.007)         (0.003)        (0.002)
           Monetary            -0.015          -0.015        -0.024          -0.027          -0.004         -0.001
           policy rate         (0.018)         (0.018)       (0.023)         (0.024)         (0.016)        (0.016)
             REER             0.396***        0.381***      0.591***        0.587***        0.131***       0.185***
                               (0.068)         (0.069)       (0.095)         (0.098)         (0.047)        (0.050)
                                                            Global
           US shadow           -0.009*        -0.009*        -0.004          -0.002        -0.008***      -0.006***
           short rate          (0.005)        (0.005)        (0.033)         (0.036)        (0.002)        (0.002)
          UK shadow             -0.000         -0.001        -0.300          -0.309         -0.003*        -0.002*
           short rate          (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.088)         (0.094)        (0.001)        (0.001)
          EUR shadow            -0.002         -0.002        -0.222          -0.236          -0.006         -0.009
           short rate          (0.012)        (0.012)        (0.085)         (0.091)        (0.005)        (0.004)
             Japan              -0.013         -0.013        -0.017          -0.017          -0.041         -0.054
            shadow             (0.007)        (0.007)        (0.006)         (0.006)        (0.008)        (0.007)
           short rate
          Global GDP           0.008           0.009          0.022           0.014           0.004         0.008**
            Growth            (0.010)         (0.010)        (0.037)         (0.039)         (0.004)        (0.004)
          Commodity            0.065           0.003          0.109           0.106           0.020        0.335***
             price            (0.041)         (0.088)        (0.063)         (0.096)         (0.026)        (0.049)
              VIX            -0.034***       -0.033***       -0.068*         -0.068*       -0.024***      -0.024***
                              (0.009)         (0.010)        (0.015)         (0.016)         (0.005)        (0.004)
                                                         Interaction
           Commodity               -            0.053            -     0.006                    -          0.265***
           Price*REER                          (0.062)                (0.067)                               (0.035)
                                                    Other Information
           Number of              66             66          30         30                     32              32
            quarters
          Observations           913            913             373            373             480            480
            R2 (GLS             0.092          0.094           0.204          0.196           0.316          0.401
           weighted)


Notes: All variables are measured in log changes. P values: *, **, ***, denote statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent
                                level, respectively. Robust standard errors are in parenthesis




                                                                                                                               15
 Table 3 - Joint Significance on Independent Variables' Coefficients (Wald Test):
Coefficient        2000 Q1 - 2016 Q4           2000 Q1 - 2007 Q4                    2009 Q1 - 2016 Q4
Group              No        Interaction       No        Interaction                No        Interaction
               Interaction                 Interaction                          Interaction
                                 Domestic Microeconomic Factors
Different
in all
                 Yes***          Yes***          Yes***          Yes***           Yes***          Yes***
countries
Different
from zero        Yes***          Yes***          Yes***           Yes***          Yes***          Yes***
in all
countries
                                   Domestic Macroeconomic Factors

Different
in all
                 Yes***          Yes***          Yes***          Yes***           Yes***          Yes***
countries
Different
from zero        Yes***          Yes***          Yes***          Yes***           Yes***          Yes***
in all
countries
                                   Domestic Micro & Macro Factors

Different
in all
                 Yes***          Yes***          Yes***          Yes***           Yes***          Yes***
countries
Different
from zero        Yes***          Yes***          Yes***          Yes***           Yes***          Yes***
in all
countries
                           US, UK, Euro Area, Japan Shadow Short Rates

Different
in all
                  Yes*            Yes*              No              No            Yes***          Yes***
countries
Different
from zero           No              No              No              No            Yes***          Yes***
in all
countries
                                  World GDP, Commodity Price, VIX

Different
in all
                  Yes**           Yes**            Yes*            Yes*           Yes***          Yes***
countries
Different
from zero        Yes***          Yes***            Yes*            Yes*           Yes***          Yes***
in all
countries
                                           All Global Factors
Different
in all
                 Yes***          Yes***            Yes*            Yes*           Yes***          Yes***
countries
Different
from zero        Yes***          Yes***            Yes*            Yes*           Yes***          Yes***
in all
countries


 Note: P values: *, **, ***, denote statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.



                                                                                                               16
     Table 4 - Results for model with full country sample and model without China
                            Specification Without Interaction

                            Dependent Variable: Debt to Equity
Independent         2000 Q1 - 2016 Q4      2000 Q1 - 2007 Q4                      2009 Q1 - 2016 Q4
 Variables           Full     Without       Full     Without                       Full     Without
                  Country     China       Country    China                       Country    China
                   Sample                 Sample                                 Sample
                                        Country
 Return on        0.029***     0.024***  0.045***     0.049***                     0.011          0.003
Assets (1 lag)     (0.011)      (0.012)   (0.013)      (0.014)                    (0.010)        (0.012)
 Free Cash          0.002        0.001    0.010*       0.010*                      0.002          0.001
 Flow/Short        (0.003)      (0.003)   (0.005)      (0.006)                    (0.002)        (0.002)
 Long Term
Debt (1 lag)
  Tangible          0.024*        0.037***          0.006          0.023          0.028*         0.039*
 Assets per         (0.013)        (0.014)         (0.013)        (0.017)         (0.017)        (0.017)
share (1 lag)
  Current         0.109***        0.112***         0.038           0.018        0.188***        0.180***
ratio ( 1 lag)     (0.023)         (0.025)        (0.027)         (0.030)        (0.021)         (0.023)
 Real GDP           0.001           0.002          0.006           0.010        0.009***         0.005**
  Growth           (0.004)         (0.004)        (0.007)         (0.007)        (0.003)         (0.003)
 Monetary          -0.015          -0.015         -0.024          -0.015         -0.004           -0.017
 policy rate       (0.018)         (0.018)        (0.023)         (0.025)        (0.016)         (0.015)
   REER           0.396***        0.421***       0.591***        0.568***       0.131***        0.181***
                   (0.068)         (0.071)        (0.095)         (0.107)        (0.047)         (0.058)
                                                 Global
 US shadow         -0.009*         -0.009*        -0.004          -0.015        -0.008***      -0.007***
 short rate        (0.005)         (0.005)        (0.033)         (0.040)        (0.002)        (0.002)
UK shadow           -0.000          -0.001        -0.300          -0.224         -0.003*        -0.002*
 short rate        (0.003)          (0.003)       (0.088)         (0.110)        (0.001)        (0.001)
EUR shadow          -0.002          -0.008        -0.222          -0.227          -0.006         -0.003
 short rate        (0.012)         (0.012)        (0.085)         (0.105)        (0.005)        (0.004)
   Japan            -0.013          -0.016        -0.017          -0.013          -0.041         -0.033
  shadow           (0.007)         (0.007)        (0.006)         (0.007)        (0.008)        (0.008)
 short rate
Global GDP          0.008           0.006       0.022              0.039           0.004          0.001
  Growth           (0.010)         (0.010)     (0.037)            (0.045)         (0.004)        (0.004)
Commodity           0.065           0.077       0.109              0.113           0.020          0.046
   price           (0.041)         (0.043)     (0.063)            (0.079)         (0.026)        (0.026)
    VIX           -0.034***       -0.027**     -0.068*            -0.096*       -0.024***      -0.018***
                   (0.009)         (0.010)     (0.015)            (0.018)         (0.005)        (0.004)
                                        Other Information
 Number of            66             66           30                 30             32             32
  quarters
Observations          913            847             373            343            480             448
  R2 (GLS            0.092          0.098           0.204          0.209          0.316           0.275
 weighted)


Notes: All variables are measured in log changes. P values: *, **, ***, denote statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1
                     percent level, respectively. Robust standard errors are in parenthesis.




                                                                                                                       17
