 Endogenizing non-price competitiveness in a
model with capital accumulation and BoPC on
                    growth
                  Marwil J. Dávila-Fernández
             Università degli Studi di Siena (UNISI)
                          José L. Oreiro
                  Universidade de Brasília (UnB)
                     Mario W. D. Dávila
       Universidade Federal de São João del-Rei (UFSJ)


                                 Abstract
      At a theoretical level this article revisits Thirlwall’s rule (or law)
  proposing a new channel through which it is possible to endogenize non-
  price competitiveness in the BoPC framework. We develop a model that
  formalizes the inverted-U relationship hypothesis that non-price compet-
  itiveness rises as countries move from a primary productive structure to
  light manufactures and then decreases as richer countries get locked into
  antiquated industrial structures. We name it the strati…cation mechanism.
  Finally we incorporate the supply side of the economy into the structure
  of the model in order to avoid the so called inconsistency problem.
                                  Resumo
        O artigo revisita a lei de Thirlwall propondo um novo mecanismo
  para endogeneinização da competitividade não-preço dentro do referencial
  teórico BoPC. Nós desenvolvemos um modelo que formaliza a hipótese do
  U-invertido em que a competitividade não-preço aumenta a medida em
  que um país migra de estruturas primárias para industriais e depois se
  reduz a medida em que a estrutura produtiva se atro…a. Nós o chamamos
  o mecanismo de estrati…cação. Finalmente incorporamos o lado da oferta
  da economia no modelo de modo a evitar o chamado problema de incon-
  sistência.
      Keywords: Growth, Balance-of-Payments Constraint, Thirlwall´ s
  law.
      Palavras chave: Crescimento, Restrição do Balanço de Pagamentos,
  Lei de Thirlwall.
      Área 6: Crescimento, Desenvolvimento Económico e Instituciones
      JEL: O10, O11, O40.




                                      1
1    Introduction
One of the main aims of growth theory has been to explain why growth rates
di¤er across countries and overtime. In the traditional neoclassical framework
and also in modern New Growth Theory, growth is said to be supply constraint
in the sense that it is limited either by the accumulation of production factors
and/or by technology. In both cases the …gure of the production function in
neoclassical lines is at the center of the stage.
    In the other hand, Post Keynesian models have emphasized over the years
the importance of demand constraints on growth. One of the most successful
empirical regularities among them is Thirlwall’s rule (or law). According to it,
since countries cannot systematically …nance permanent balance-of-payments
imbalances, there is an adjustment in aggregate demand that constrain its ex-
pansion and consequently output’s growth. Therefore, in the long run, growth
is Balance-of-Payments Constrained (BoPC).
    Despite its simplicity and powerfulness in explaining the great income diver-
gence between advanced and developing/poor economies, there are at least two
main issues still to be solved. The …rst of them consists in the fact that foreign
trade income elasticities - which represent the non-price competitiveness of a
country (or region) - are taken as exogenous. The second one is the inconsis-
tency (or over determination) problem that may arise if the supply side of the
economy is not properly incorporate.
    There have been a recent number of e¤orts trying to formally endogenize non-
price competitiveness in a BoPC framework (e.g. Palley, 2003; Setter…eld, 2011;
Ribeiro et al, 2016; Oreiro, 2016). In some cases there were also explicit concerns
about the consistency of the BoPC growth rate and the capital accumulation
problem. However we are still far from a consensus. It is well understood
that distributive and technological questions matter and should be taken into
account. But the subject is still open.
    This paper aims to contribute to both issues developing a model that for-
malizes the inverted-U relationship hypothesis that non-price competitiveness
rises as countries move from a primary productive structure to light manufac-
tures and then decreases as richer countries get locked into antiquated industrial
structures. The relationship above was …rst proposed by Thirllwall himself even
though never in a formal way. We name it the strati…cation mechanism. It is
a way through which divergent forces on growth are diluted over time, opening
space for the appearance of falling-behind behavior or convergence clubs.
    Finally we incorporate the supply side of the economy in a dynamic fashion
in order to study the interaction between capital accumulation and the external
constraint avoiding the so called inconsistency problem. This is an innovation
with respect the contributions of Palley (2003) and Oreiro (2016) who explicitly
address the over determination problem in static models.
    The paper’s next section is dedicated to revisit the basic Thirlwall’s rule
(or law) proposing a particular way to derivate it. Section 3 brings our model
of the strati…cation mechanism and its simulation exercise. In section 4 we
extend the model incorporating the supply side of the economy and the capital


                                        2
accumulation process. Once again we run some numerical simulations. The last
section brings some …nal considerations.


2    Growth and the BoPC
The idea of a BoPC on growth has been a crucial component of much demand-
led growth theory since at least Prebisch (1959) and Thirlwall (1979). However
it is the role of the demand side in de…ning the nature of the constraint that
distinguishes the BoPC approach from other growth models. Thirlwall begins
proposing that exports and imports are functions of the exchange rate and the
level of income. He also adopts as simplifying hypothesis that equilibrium in
the balance-of-payments is given by equilibrium in foreign trade.
    The hypothesis that trade is balanced over the long run is crucial for the
model and is quite plausible. In this section we show that in fact Thirlwall’s law
(or rule) can be obtained from the so called fundamental identity. We suggest
that this may help us to enlighten some strange results showing that countries
like the United States are BoPC (e.g. Bagnai, 2010; Gouvea and Lima, 2013).
    Consider an open economy without government. Using standard notation,
aggregate expenditure is de…ned as:

                           Yt = Ct + It + Xt     E t Mt                       (1)

where Y is aggregate demand, C is consumption, I stands for investment, X
are exports, M imports, and E is the exchange rate.
   Rearranging we have:

                          (St   It )   (Xt   E t Mt ) = 0                     (2)

where St = Yt Ct is simply private domestic savings. From the equation above
the sum of domestic and foreign net lending must equal zero. This expression
sometimes is called the fundamental identity and must always hold.
   Now, de…ne domestic net borrowing as the opposite of net lending, Dt =
  (St It ) so that Dt = Xt Et Mt . It is straightforward the relation between
domestic borrowing and current account imbalances. Dividing both sides by Y ,
we obtain:
                              Dt     X t E t Mt
                                  =                                       (3)
                              Yt          Yt
A look at individual country data reported in the UNCTAD Handbook of Sta-
tistics for the period 1980-2014 reveals that current account imbalances as pro-
portion of GDP are limited to the 5% range for most countries. This in turn
indicates that, for the long run, the hypothesis of equilibrium in foreign trade
is actually a proxy for the fundamental identity.
    We proceed separating countries in two groups. The …rst one corresponds to
those economies that in the long run do not take D Yt as given. This implies they
                                                    t


have fully convertible currencies. The second group is formed by countries that



                                        3
in the long run take D   Yt as given, and may or may not have fully convertible
                          t


currencies. We say that for this second group growth is BoPC.
    The proposition above may help to understand why countries like the United
States appear to be BoPC in empirical exercises. It has strong implications in
terms of interpretation of the model and also of the data. As pointed out
by Ramzi (2015) among others, empirical tests on Thirlwall’s law are actually
testing the hypothesis that foreign trade is balanced. What we are saying is
that if for a certain country D  Yt is exogenously given - re‡ecting the long run
                                  t


capacity of a country (and a limited willingness of the rest of the world) to
…nance it - then trade must be balanced and as showed by Thirlwall growth
must be BoPC. In this case balanced trade and BoPC growth directly follow
from the fundamental identity. On the other hand, if a country does not take
Dt
 Yt as given, then still we may …nd that trade is balanced but growth cannot be
considered BoPC because the external constraint becomes endogenous.
    In order to complete the model we de…ne as does Thirlwall a function for
exports and imports:
                                    Xt = Et Zt'                                (4)
                                        Mt = Et Yt                              (5)
where and < 0 are price elasticities, ' and > 0 are income elasticities,
and Z corresponds to income of the rest of the world.
   Suppose an economy that takes D   Yt as given, being determined by historical
                                       t


reasons, and is fairly stable in time. Taking logarithms and time derivates of
equation (3) to (5) we have:
                                :     : !     :     :
                               Xt    Yt      Et    Mt
                                          =     +                            (6)
                               Xt    Yt      Et    Mt
                                :                :           :
                               Xt            Et    Zt
                                  =             +'                              (7)
                               Xt            Et    Zt
                                    :        :           :
                                Mt   Et   Yt
                                   =    +                                       (8)
                                Mt   Et   Yt
where = XtX+D  t
                 t
                   . Solving the system and assuming that in the long run terms
of trade are constant we obtain:
                                         :           :
                                         Yt   Zt
                                            =                                   (9)
                                         Yt   Zt

with = +' . For instance, this result is very similar to the aggregate BoPC
growth models that include capital ‡ows like Thirlwall and Hussain (1982) or
Moreno-Brid (2003).
    Income elasticities are dependent upon the level of specialization of the coun-
try’s (or region) productive structure. A high level of specialization is associated
with a high marginal propensity to import which in turn implies in a high income


                                             4
elasticity of imports. It is also associated with low elasticity of exports, since
the economy will have few di¤erent types of goods to export in face of increasing
world demand. The expression above is a simple but powerful instrument to
explain the great divergence in income between advanced and developing/poor
economies1 .
     The foreign trade income elasticities ratio, , represent the non-price com-
petitiveness of a country (or region) and in a sense is comparable to “Solow’s
residual”because even though occupy a central position in the …nal expression,
originally is taken as exogenous. After its empirical success in both aggregate
and disaggregate versions (e.g. Bagnai, 2010; Gouvea and Lima, 2010, 2013;
Romero and McCombie, 2016), a next and natural step consists in endogenize
then.
     Palley (2003) was the …rst one to do it in a model with capital accumula-
tion, proposing that the income elasticity of imports is a positive function of
the level of capacity utilization. He explicitly addressed both the endogeneity
of non-price competitiveness and the inconsistence problem. A di¤erent route is
followed by Setter…eld (2011). Taking as departure point the Kaldorian cumu-
lative causation model, he endogenized foreign trade elasticities as a function of
labour productivity growth rate.
     In order to take into account technological issues, Cimoli and Porcile (2014)
proposed to endogenize non-price competitiveness as a function of an index of
technological complexity. A similar route is followed by Ribeiro et al (2016) also
including the distributive dimension into the equation. Recently, Oreiro (2016)
recalled Palley’s solution and proposed an extension putting the exchange rate
at the center of stage.
     As this brie‡y revision shows, there have been a recent number of e¤orts
trying to endogenize non-price competitiveness in a BoPC framework. In some
cases there were also explicit concerns about the consistency of the BoPC growth
rate and the capital accumulation problem. However we consider that we are
still far from a consensus.
     The BoPC growth literature has taken two di¤erent routes in terms of math-
ematical modeling. In one hand authors like Araújo and Lima (2007) and Nishi
(2016) have developed multi-sectoral versions of the rule. In this approach, non-
price competitiveness is in a sense already endogenized since aggregate foreign
trade elasticities can change due to changes in the productive structure of the
economy. Based in a multi-sectoral Pasinetian approach the model is inherently
consistent and does not su¤er with the over determination problem.
     On the other hand a second group of scholars have incorporated the other
elements of the BoP to the aggregate model (e.g. Barbosa-Filho, 2001; Moreno-
Brid, 2003, Alleyne and Francis, 2008). In this paper we focused on the ag-
gregate version of Thirlwall’s rule. This allows us to present in a clearer and
pedagogical way the mechanisms we intend to show.
    1 For a further discussion of the implications behind Thirlwall’s law and the BoPC growth

literature see Thirlwall (2011).




                                             5
3     Non-price competitiveness and the strati…ca-
      tion mechanism
3.1     The model
After the empirical consolidation of Thirlwall’s rule (or law) during the eight-
ies and the beginning of the nineties, the behavior of the foreign trade income
elasticities came to the discussion. In the late nineties a particular hypothe-
sis was proposed by Thirlwall among others. Thirlwall (1997) and Setter…eld
(1997) argued that the elasticity of exports growths as the country moves from
the production of primary products to manufactures and decreases when the
economy gets locked in antiquate industrial structures.
    In the same line, McCombie and Roberts (2002) considered that while low
growth rates generate pressures to an increase in the elasticities ratio, high
growth rates would encourage the lock-in of the productive structure. They
assume that actually is the ratio of foreign trade income elasticities that is en-
dogenous. Even though discussed, this “inverted-U”relation was never properly
formalized in a mathematical model2 .
    We propose the following set of equation that summarizes two basic forces
acting on the system:                :
                                    Yt
                                       = t z;                                 (10)
                                    Yt
                             :          :     !
                              t        Yt
                                = "              + :                          (11)
                              t        Yt

    Equation (10) corresponds to Thirlwall’s rule (or law), where z stands for the
growth of the rest of the world and is taken for simpli…cation as constant. The
only di¤erence between our formulation and the original one is the subscript
t that follows the foreign trade elasticities ratio. The interpretation of the
expression is the same.
    Equation (11) is the representation of the hypothesis discussed above and
that we name as the strati…cation mechanism. Low growth rates - bellow
- generate pressures to an increase in non-price competitiveness. In the other
hand, high growth rates –above - would encourage the lock-in of the produc-
tive structure. All this process is intermediate by the strati…cation coe¢ cient
(or elasticity), , that captures the impact of growth on the non-price competi-
tiveness. Finally, aggregates all other forces not represented.
    Since it is a crucial proposition we shall brie‡y discuss it here. It may sound
at …rst implausible that structural change is induced by an economy with low
growth. However, we argue that growth bellow certain rates can be expected to
give rise to a pressure for reform; while high growth rates give incentives to “keep
things like they are”. This represents the struggle between reform vs status quo
that we consider is part of growth and structural change processes. Bellow
   2 McCombie and Roberts (2002) do provide for expositional purposes the sketch of a model

in a broader discussion of the role of balance of payments in economics growth.


                                            6
reform prevails while above status quo prevails. As result of the prevalence of
status quo we shall expect a strati…cation of the productive structure.
    While " is a technical structural parameter, can be understood as a social
construction. That is, a threshold that society implicitly chose of what is a
“satisfactory” growth rate. A lower is associated with countries that do not
value GDP growth that much. On the other hand it is reasonable to suppose that
a higher " is associated with countries with complex and diversi…ed productive
structures because the economy takes more time to get locked in old structures.
    Substituting equation (10) in (11) and rearranging, we obtain:
                             :
                              t   =   t   (" +       "z t ) :                (12)

    The expression above corresponds to a logistic one (see appendix 1). The
story it tells is basically the inverted-U. In the beginning an increase in non-
price competitiveness increases competitiveness itself up to a limit when there
is a strati…cation of the economic structure. The speed of this process and the
…nal level of the elasticities ratio depend on the parameters of the economy
    When the system comes to apparent rest (or steady-state) . We have one
non-trivial solution given by:
                                              " +
                                          =                                  (13)
                                                "z

with @@" < 0.
    As Thirlwall’s rule (or law) itself, the result above is very simple but with
a straight message. Higher strati…cation elasticity implies lower non-price com-
petitiveness. We shall expect that economies with higher " would lock-in them-
selves faster, conditional to a given threshold. This brings us to our second
point. Higher threshold imply in higher foreign trade elasticities. Finally, there
is a direct and positive relation between the autonomous growth rate and the
equilibrium level of non-price competitiveness.
    Therefore the BoPC growth rate is given by:
                                  :
                                  Yt              " +
                                     =     z=         :                      (14)
                                  Yt                "
    Equation (14) shows that even though the original expression for Thirlwall’s
rule depends on the growth rate of the rest of the world, once the strati…cation
mechanism is taken into account it does not anymore. This is an important
(and not obvious) result that comes from the fact that equilibrium non-price
competitiveness depends inversely on .

3.2    Numerical Simulations
We shall proceed to some numerical simulations in order to study the dynamic
properties behind the model so far developed. The software employed was the
E&F Chaos in its 2012 version.


                                              7
    First we represent a situation in which the world economy growths at a
rate of z = 3%, the strati…cation elasticity is " = 1, threshold growth level
  = 1:5%, and the autonomous component of non-price competitiveness growth
is = 1:5%. We set it as a benchmark case. Two di¤erent initial conditions are
established, namely, 0 = 1:5 and 0 = 0:5. The results are plotted in …gure 1.




                         Figure 1: Benchmark economy

    For both initial conditions the model shows slowly convergence. The blue
line corresponds to an economy that use to growth faster than the rest of the
world but is converging to the same growth rate. The red line represents the
opposite situation. After one hundred periods both economies still have not
reached the equilibrium.
    A second case corresponds to an economy that in equilibrium is falling be-
hind, that is, growths less than the rest of the world. We keep all the parameters
and the initial conditions the same, except the strati…cation elasticity that now
equals " = 3. Consequently we have that            0:67. The results are plotted in
…gure 2.




                       Figure 2: Falling behind economy

    Once again we observe convergence to equilibrium. However in this case
non-price competitiveness comes to a state of rests in 50 periods. Therefore an
increase in the strati…cation elasticity not just reduces the elasticities in level
but also increases the speed of converge. The blue line represents the path of
an economy that use to growth faster than the rest of the world but after 10


                                        8
periods starts to fall behind. The red line corresponds to an economy that is
able to increase its growth rate but not enough to overcome the falling behind
process.
    Finally we consider the case of an economy that in equilibrium growths
faster than the rest of the world. It could be a developing country in catching
up or an already developed economy di¤erentiating itself from the leading group.
Once more we keep the same parameters except the strati…cation elasticity that
now equals " = 0:6. Non-price competitiveness at equilibrium approximates
      1:3. The results are plotted in …gure 3.




                Figure 3: Catching up/di¤erentiating economy

    One more time the model shows convergence to its steady state values. How-
ever, since we are taking a lower strati…cation coe¢ cient, convergence takes more
time and goes to higher values of non-price competitiveness. The blue line cor-
responds to an economy that maintains its growth rate above the rest of the
world. The red line represents an economy that was falling behind but after 50
periods is able to start catching up.
    The model so far presented crucially depends on the strati…cation coe¢ cient.
For a given " the dynamics are pretty clear. It is a way through which diver-
gent forces on growth among countries are diluted over time, opening space for
the appearance of falling-behind behavior or convergence clubs. However, even
though it allows us to go one step further in the study of the dynamics behind
non-price competitiveness in a BoPC growth framework, one might ask how it
interacts with the rest of the productive structure. This issue is discussed in the
next section.


4    Incorporating the supply side
According to the Keynesian hypothesis, investment is in the short and long
run independent of savings that would be forthcoming from normal utilization
of productive capacity. Traditionally the argument has been justi…ed on the
grounds that the level of capacity utilization is endogenous and its variations
are modeled as the di¤erence between investment and savings.
    Recently it has been proposed that the Keynesian Hypothesis could be sus-
tained through the endogeneity of the share in GDP of an autonomous compo-

                                        9
nent of aggregate demand. It implies that the e¤ective demand principle relies
on the existence of autonomous expenditures that do not generate capacity for
the private sector. This proposition has gained some attention in the literature
(e.g. Allain, 2015; Dutt, 2015; Pariboni, 2015; Lavoie, 2016) and is going to be
used in this section to model the relation between the BoPC growth rate and
capital accumulation.
    Our exercise is in line with a recent contribution of Nah and Lavoie (2016)
that extend this approach to a small open economy framework. However, our
e¤ort is di¤erent in the sense that we are interested exclusively in the long run
dynamics of non-price competitiveness in economies that are BoPC.
    It is necessary to incorporate the supply side of the economy in order to
avoid the inconsistence (or over determination) problem. We begin stating the
following production function:
                             Yt = min fat Kt ut ; qt Lt g ;                   (15)
where capital, K, and labour, L, are weighted by their respective productivity
coe¢ cients, a and q. Variable u stands for the level of capacity utilization and
it is equal to the ratio of current output, Y , and potential output, Y . If inputs
are used e¢ ciently then the economy must be operating with a level of output
that satis…es the following condition:
                               Yt = at Kt ut = qt Lt :                        (16)
   Using the traditional de…nition of capital, empirical evidence seems to indi-
cate that the capital productivity coe¢ cient is fairly stable (e.g. Kaldor, 1957;
Homburg, 2015; Barbosa-Filho, 2015). Taking logarithms and time derivatives:
                                    :       :     :
                                   ut   Yt       Kt
                                      =                                       (17)
                                   ut   Yt       Kt
                                    :       :    :
                                 qt    Yt    Lt
                                    =           :                           (18)
                                 qt    Yt    Lt
    From equation (17) we have that variations in the level of capacity utiliza-
tion are given by the di¤erence between the growth rate of output and capital
accumulation. Equation (18) on the other hand states that the growth rate of
labour productivity is obtain as a residual of the di¤erence between the growth
rate of output and labour. Both expressions directly come from the Leontief
e¢ ciency condition.
    Turning back to equation (17) it follows that:
                                    It    It
                                       = a ut :                               (19)
                                    Kt    Yt
                  It
   De…ning ht =   Yt   as the ratio between investment and output (or the propen-
                                                                      :
sity to invest), and disregarding capital depreciation so that It = Kt we have:
                                        :
                                    Kt
                                       = aht ut :                             (20)
                                    Kt

                                            10
    An increase in the investment-output ratio or in the level of capacity uti-
lization directly increases capital accumulation. This comes again from the e¢ -
ciency condition. In the limit, if there is no investment or no capacity utilization
is being use, obviously there is no capital accumulation.
    Recall the aggregate expenditure identity (equation 1). De…ne Ct = cYt ,
where 0 < c < 1 is the behavioral propensity to consume. As already de…ned,
investment is given by It = ht Yt . Exports and imports are given by equations
(4) ad (5). Assume constant terms of trade. Substituting those de…nitions in
the identity, taking logarithms and time derivates we have:
                           :     :                     :
                          Yt   At                      ht
                             =    +                                ;           (21)
                          Yt   At   1          c       ht +    M
        :
       At
where A  t
           = X 'z is the autonomous component growth rate, and X and M
are the shares of exports and imports in aggregate demand, respectively. For
simplicity we assume that the product M is constant. Moreover 1 c h1t + M
                                                           :
is the Keynesian multiplier. In steady state ht = 0 and aggregate demand
follows the weighted growth rate of exports, i.e. the autonomous component
growth rate.
    Now, we are dealing with an economy that is BoPC, which according to
our …rst proposition means that it takes D
                                         Yt as exogenously given in the long
                                           t

                                                   :

run. This means that in the long run A   At = t z because aggregate demand
                                           t


must follow the external constraint. Therefore the share of exports in aggregate
demand becomes endogenous accommodating both growth rates. Using the
de…nition of t we have:
                                      X   =   :                             (22)
                                           +
    The result above holds for a BoPC economy because of the fundamental
identity. It is also in line with the Kaldorian tradition which considerers that
“from the point of view of any particular region, the ‘autonomous component
of demand’is the demand emanating from outside the region; [...] the rate of
economic development of a region is fundamentally governed by the rate of its
exports” (Kaldor, 1970, p.342). We can rewrite equation (21) as:
                           :                           :
                          Yt                           ht
                             =   tz   +                            :           (23)
                          Yt              1    c       ht +    M

    Changes in aggregate demand have lagged e¤ects on investment that may
give rise in the long run to the Harrodian instability problem. Skott (2010)
shows that the Harrodian instability condition can be satis…ed by the following
special case:                   :
                               ht
                                  = (ut un )                                (24)
                               ht
where un is the planned, desired or normal level of capacity utilization and is
an adjustment parameter.

                                              11
   Substituting equation (20), (23) and (24) in (17) we obtain:
                         :
                      ut                         (ut un ) ht
                         =        tz   +                               aht ut :                (25)
                      ut                   1     c ht + M
    The dynamic non-linear system is formed by equations (12), (24) and (25).
                                                     :    :    :
When the economy comes to a state of apparent rest, ht = ut = t = 0. In this
situation, for ht , ut , and t 6= 0 we have that:

                             0=    (ut         un ) ;                             (Harrodian curve)

                                  (ut un ) ht
         aht ut =   tz   +                    ;                       (Capacity utilization curve)
                             1    c ht + M
and
                 = " ( tz          ):                           (Non-price competitiveness curve)
    From the Harrodian curve it is straightforward that in equilibrium the level
of capacity utilization equals its normal rate. On the other hand the capac-
ity utilization curve corresponds to the combination of endogenous variables
that bring aggregate demand and capital accumulation growth rates to equilib-
rium. Finally the Non-price competitiveness curve brings to equality the e¤ect
of growth on competitiveness with its autonomous component.
    Equilibrium values are de…ned and given by:
                                                          z
                                               h =          ;                                  (26)
                                                        aun
                                                u = un ;                                       (27)
                                         " +
                                               : =                             (28)
                                           "z
    All equilibrium values are positive. An increase in non-price competitiveness
has no permanent impact on the level of capacity utilization but implies in a
higher investment-output ratio. It is an interesting result because while the level
of capacity utilization accommodates di¤erences between demand growth and
capital accumulation through the investment-output ratio, is the investment-
output ratio that accommodates in steady state variations in non-price compet-
itiveness.

4.1    Stability properties
To investigate the local stability of           the system we linearized it around the equi-
librium values. So that:
                  2 : 3 2                                       32          3
                     ht           0              J12         0      ht    h
                  4 u:t 5 = 4 J21                J22        J23 5 4 ut    u 5;                 (29)
                      :
                       t
                                  0               0         J33      t
                             |                   {z             }
                                                   J


                                                       12
                                          J12 = h > 0;                                         (29a)
                                                       2
                                      J21 =       a (u ) < 0;                                  (29b)
                              h       a     (1     c h +       M      )
                      J22 =                                                < 0;                    (29c)
                                          1 c      h + M
                                          J23 = zu > 0;                                        (29d)
                                          J33 =     "z < 0:                                        (29e)
   Outside equilibrium there must be room for the induced investment neces-
sary to growth at its …nal equilibrium rate, and for the extra induced investment
responsible for adjusting capacity to the trend of demand. This implies that
the Keynesian multiplier and the Harrodian coe¢ cient are low enough so that
      1         a
1 c ht + M < . This condition guarantees that J22 < 0.
   The characteristic equation of the Jacobian matrix is:
                                  3          2
                                      + a1       + a2 + a3 = 0;                                    (30)

where     denotes a characteristic root. Each coe¢ cient of equation (30) is given
by:

     a1   =       tr J = (J22 + J33 ) ;
                  J22 J23         0 0                   0       J12
     a2   =                  +                     +                       = J22 J33   J12 J21 ;
                   0 J33          0 J33                J21      J22
     a3   =       det J = J12 J21 J33 :

   The necessary and su¢ cient condition for the local stability is that all char-
acteristic roots of the Jacobian matrix have negative real parts, which, from
Routh–Hurwitz condition, is equivalent to the following inequalities:

                    a1 > 0; a2 > 0; a3 > 0 and a1 a2                      a3 > 0:

    Let us examine whether these inequalities hold. It is easy to check that
J22 and J33 are negative, therefore a1 > 0, and the …rst inequality is always
satis…ed. It is also straightforward that J22 J33 > 0 and J12 J21 < 0. Therefore
a2 > 0, and the second inequality is always satis…ed. Moreover, J12 J21 J33 > 0
so that a3 > 0, and the third inequality is also ful…lled. Finally we have to check
if a1 a2 a3 > 0. Through direct computation we have that:

          a1 a2    a3 =   (J22 + J33 ) (J22 J33            J12 J21 ) + J22 J12 J21 > 0:

    Therefore the system is stable around the equilibrium values.
    For an exogenous growth rate of employment, labour productivity growth
is directly obtained as a residual from equation (18) so that there is no in-
consistency problem. Moreover if we state that labour productivity follows a
Kaldor-Verdoorn rule - as does Palley (2003) and Oreiro (2016) - employment
growth adjust to the di¤erence between output and productivity growth rates,
and once again there is no inconsistency.

                                                  13
4.2    Numerical Simulations
In the third section we showed how the strati…cation mechanism operates in
the BoPC framework for a given strati…cation coe¢ cient while in section 4 we
showed how it interacts with the supply side of the economy. We shall proceed
to some numerical simulations in order to study the dynamic properties behind
this broader structure.
    First we represent a situation in which the world economy growths at a
rate of z = 3%, the strati…cation elasticity is " = 1, threshold growth level
  = 1:5%, and the autonomous component of non-price competitiveness growth
is = 1:5%. Normal level of capacity utilization un = 0:7%. Propensity to
consume c = 0:8, and for simplicity the share of imports in output multiplied by
the income elasticity of imports M = 20%. Finally the adjustment coe¢ cient
of investment = 0:02.
    Our simulations are done in terms of deviations from the equilibrium values.
As initial conditions we use the equilibrium values of h and u, and a deviation of
0.5 for . From the combination of the parameters above we obtain h = 0:215,
u = 0:7 and       = 1. We set it as a benchmark case. The results are plotted in
…gure 4:
                             Figure 4: Benchmark economy




                   (4a)                                    (4b)

    For both initial conditions the model shows slowly convergence. Figure (4a)
depicts an economy that use to growth faster than the rest of the world but
is converging to the same growth rate. The blue line is non-price competitive-
ness while the green and purple lines are investment and capacity utilization,
respectively. Because non-price competitiveness is above its equilibrium value,
demand growths faster than capital accumulation and we observe an increase in
the level of capacity utilization and of the investment ratio. However once non-
price competitiveness converges to its equilibrium value, the other two variables
also accommodate to their equilibrium values.
    Figure (4b) represents the opposite situation, that is, an economy that used
to growth less than the rest of the world but that is converging to the same
growth rate. Because non-price competitiveness is bellow its equilibrium value,
demand growths less than capital accumulation and we observe a decrease in
the level of capacity utilization and of the investment ratio. However, once
non-price competitiveness converges to equilibrium, the other two variables also
accommodate to their equilibrium values.


                                         14
   Since we are interested in the impact of the strati…cation mechanism on the
model we continue simulating an economy that in equilibrium is falling behind,
that is, growths less than the rest of the world. We keep all the parameters
and the initial conditions the same, except the strati…cation elasticity that now
equals " = 3. Consequently we have that h = 0:14, u = 0:7, and               0:67.
The results are plotted in …gure 5:
                          Figure 5: Falling behind economy




                   (5a)                                         (5b)

     Results are remarkable similar from the last simulation. Figure (5a) cor-
responds to an economy that use to growth faster than the rest of the world
but after some periods starts to falling behind. Figure (5b) on the other hand
represents an economy that starts a catching up process but interrupts it before
it is complete. Because the strati…cation coe¢ cient is higher we observe a faster
convergence to equilibrium values.
     Finally we consider the case of an economy that in equilibrium growths faster
than the rest of the world. It could be a developing country in catching up or an
already developed economy di¤erentiating itself from the leading group. Once
more we keep the same parameters except the strati…cation elasticity that now
equals " = 0:6. Equilibrium values are h = 0:285, u = 0:7 and            1:3. The
results are plotted in …gure 6:
                   Figure 6: Catching up/di¤erentiating economy




                 (6a)                                        (6b)

    Once again the results are similar from previous simulations. For lower val-
ues of the strati…cation mechanism convergence is slower. However it is also
possible to observe that the magnitude of the variation in capacity utilization
and investment necessary to accommodate misalignments between demand and
capital accumulation growth rates is higher. This suggests that the strati…ca-
tion mechanism in‡uences not just the …nal values of investment and non-price
competitiveness but also their path.


                                            15
5    Final considerations
Even though there have been recent e¤orts in order to endogenize non-price
competitiveness in the BoPC framework, we could say that we are still building
a consensus. Most of the models strongly rely on ad hoc assumptions. It is well
understood that distributive and technological questions matter and should be
taken into account. But the subject is still open.
    This paper aims to contribute to the discussion. We developed a model
that formalizes the hypothesis that while growth rates generate pressures to an
increase in the non-price competitiveness, high growth rates would encourage
the lock-in of the productive structure. Such proposition was sustained on
the grounds of the struggle between reform vs status quo. The inverted U
relationship was …rst proposed by Thirllwall himself and discussed by authors
like Setter…eld and McCombie even though not in a formal way. We name
it the strati…cation mechanism. Finally we incorporate the supply side of the
economy into the structure of the model in order to explicitly avoid the over
determination problem.
    Our simulation exercises showed that under reasonable parameters the model
behaves properly. In section 3 it is clear how the variation of the strati…cation
elasticity impacts non-price competitiveness in di¤erent scenarios. Section 4 on
the other hand shows how this mechanism depends on the productive structure
of the economy.
    We believe that our exercise was able to formalize the strati…cation mech-
anism under very general assumptions. Our results explore the non-linear dy-
namics of the model under the umbrella that the e¤ective demand principle
relies on the existence of autonomous expenditures that do not generate capac-
ity for the private sector. We also provided a particular way to derivate and
(maybe more appropriate) to interpret Thirlwall’s rule (or law). Growth is as
complex as fascinating and we hope that above everything this paper helps to
enlighten a glance of it.


Appendix
     The dynamics of non-price competitiveness are given by:
                                 :
                                  t
                                      = (" +        "z t ) :
                                  t

     This expression can be rewrite as:
                           :
                            t                         "z
                                = (" + ) 1                     t   :        (A1)
                            t                       " +

     De…ne:

                                               "z
                                      xt =           t;                     (A2)
                                             " +

                                         16
                                      m=" + :                            (A3)

    Log-di¤erentiating (A2) on time we have that:
                                       :      :
                                       xt      t
                                          =        :                     (A4)
                                       xt      t

    Substituting (A2)-(A4) in (A1) and after some trivial algebraic manipu-
    lations we have:

                                  :
                                 xt = mxt (1           xt ) :            (A5)

    (A5) is the logistic function in its classical form.


References
[1] Allain, O. “Tackling the instability of growth: a Kaleckian-Harrodian
    model with an autonomous expenditure component”, Cambridge Journal
    of Economics, 2015, 39, 1351-1371.
[2] Alleyne, D. and Francis, A. “Balance of payments constrained growth in
    developing countries: a theoretical perspective”, Metroeconomica, 2008,
    59(2), 189-202.
[3] Araújo, R. and Lima, G. “A structural economic dynamics approach
    to balance-of-payments-constrained growth”, Cambridge Journal of Eco-
    nomics, 2007, 31, 755-774.
[4] Bagnai, A. “Structural changes, cointegration and the empirics of Thirl-
    wall’s law”, Applied Economics, 2010, 42(10), 1315-1329.
[5] Barbosa-Filho, N. “The balance-of-payments constraint: from balanced
    trade to sustainable debt”, BNL Quaterly Review, 2001, 54, 381-399.
[6] Barbosa-Filho, N. “Elasticity of substitution and social con‡ict: a struc-
    turalist note on Piketty’s Capital in the 21st Century”, Cambridge Journal
    of Economics, 2015.
[7] Cimoli, M. and Porcile, G. “Technology, structural change and BOP-
    constrained growth: a structuralist toolbox”, Cambridge Journal of Eco-
    nomics, 2014, 38(1), 215-237.
[8] Dutt, A. “Growth and distribution with exogenous autonomous demand
    growth and normal capacity utilization”, mimeo, 2015.
[9] Gouvea, R. and Lima, G., “Structural change, balance-of-payments con-
    straint, and economic growth: evidence from the multisectoral Thirlwall’s
    law”, Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, 2010, 33(1), 169-204.

                                       17
[10] Gouvea, R. and Lima, G., “Balance of payments constrained growth in a
     multisectoral framework: a panel data investigation”, Journal of Economic
     Studies, 2013, 40(2), 240-254.
[11] Houburg, S. “Critical Remarks on Piketty’s ‘Capital in the Twenty-…rst
     Century”’, Applied Economics, 2015, 47(14).

[12] Lavoie, M. “Convergence towards the normal rate of capacity utilization
     in neo-Kaleckian models: The role of non-capacity creating autonomous
     expenditures”, Metroeconomica, 2016, 67(1), 172-201.
[13] McCombie, J. and Roberts, M., “The role of balance of payments in eco-
     nomics growth”, in: Setter…eld, M. (Ed.), The economics of demanded-led
     growth: challenging the supply-side vision of the long run. 2002. Chel-
     tenham: Edward Elgar.
[14] Kaldor, N. “A Model of Economic Growth”, The Economic Journal, 1957,
     67(268), 591-624.
[15] Moreno-Brid, J. “Capital ‡ows, interest payments and the balance-of-
     payments constrained growth model: a theoretical and empirical analysis”,
     Metroeconomica, 2003, 54(2), 356-365.
[16] Nah, W. and Lavoie, M. “Long run Convergence in a Neo-Kaleckian Open-
     economy Model with Autonomous Export Growth”, PKSG Workig Paper
     1604, 2015.
[17] Nishi, H. “A multi-sectoral balance-of-payments-constrained growth model
     with sectoral heterogeneity”, Structural Change and Economic Dynamics,
     2016, 39, 31-45.
[18] Oreiro, J. “Inconsistency and over determination in balance of payments
     constrained growth models: a note”Review of Keynesian Economics, 2016,
     4(2), 193-200.
[19] Palley, T. “Pitfalls in the Theory of Growth: An application to the bal-
     ance of payments constrained growth model”, Review of Political Economy,
     2003, 15(1), 75-84.
[20] Pariboni, R. “Autonomous demand and the Marglin-Bhaduri
     model:     a critical note”, Working paper 715, Department
     of Economia Politica e Statistica, University of Siena, 2015.
     http://www.deps.unisi.it/sites/st02/…les/allegatiparagrafo/26-09-
     2015/715.pdf Accessed on 15.07.2016.

[21] Prebisch, R. “Commercial Policy in the underdeveloped countries”, Amer-
     ican Economic Review, 1959, 49(2), 251-273.
[22] Ramzi, A. “Correctly analyzing the balance-of-payments constraint on
     growth”, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 2015.

                                     18
[23] Ribeiro, R.; McCombie, J. and Lima, G. “Exchange rate, income distri-
     bution and technical change in a balance-of-payments constrained growth
     model”. Review of Political Economy, forthcoming.
[24] Romero, J. and McCombie, J. “The Multi-Sectoral Thirlwall’s Law: ev-
     idence from 14 developed European countries using product level data”,
     International Review of Applied Economics, 2016, 301-325.
[25] Setter…eld, M., “History versus equilibrium and the theory of economic
     growth”. Cambridge Journal of Economics, 1997, 21(3), 365-378.
[26] Setter…eld, M., “The remarkable durability of Thirlwall’s law”. PSL
     Quaterly Review, 2011, 64(259), 393-427.
[27] Skott, P. “Growth, instability and cycles: Harrodian and Kaleckian mod-
     els of accumulation and income distribution”. In Handbook of Alternative
     Theories of Economic Growth, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 2010.
[28] Thirlwall, A.P., “The balance of payments constraint as an explanation of
     international growth rate di¤erences”. BNL Quarterly Review, 1979, 32,
     45-53.
[29] Thirlwall, A.P., “Re‡ections on the concept of balance-of-payments-
     constrained growth”. Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, 1997, 19(3).
[30] Thirlwall, A.P. “Balance of payments constrained growth models: history
     and overview”, PSL Quaterly Review, 2011, 64(259), 307-351.
[31] Thirlwall, A.P. and Hussain, M.N. “The Balance of Payments Constraint,
     Capital Flows and Growth Rate di¤erences between Developing Countries”,
     Oxford Economic Papers, 1982, 34(3), 498-510.




                                     19
