     “Knowledge” or “Privilege”: Which is the Best Investment? Analyzing the Impact of
           Affirmative Action Policies on Household Educational Investments”
                                        Andreza D. P. Lucas
      Universidade Federal de Pernambuco/Centro Acadêmico do Agreste (UFPE/CAA)
                                            ABSTRACT
Education has a central role in most development strategies. However inequality may increase when
only wealthy individuals are able to access high education levels. In many countries, for instance,
entrance to public universities is subject to an entrance exam. The fact that wealthy families are able
to invest in children’s education more than poor families do, can set a situation in which education
access for the wealthy may be paid for through taxation to the poor. In other to avoid this kind of
problem, affirmative action (AA) policies have been implemented in some countries to improve
educational opportunities for disadvantaged people. In Brazil, for example, there is a given number
of places at public universities reserved for students from the public basic schools. However,
instead of granting access to the poor in public universities, this policy makes possible for the
wealthy to access also public basic school. This paper investigates this problematic. It provides a
brief literature review on this topic, and proposes a model using a game theoretical approach where
Government decides the size of its policy and individuals decide whether or not to pay for private
basic education. It then provides an empirical application using Brazilian data. Finally, it concludes
that public policy on education may have a positive effect on equality up to a certain point; if the
size of the policy is too big, the effect might be negative.
Keywords: Education, Affirmative Action, Equality of opportunity.


                                             RESUMO
A educação tem um papel central na maioria das estratégias de desenvolvimento. Porém, quando
apenas indivíduos ricos conseguem ter acesso a altos níveis de educação, ela pode contribuir para
aumentar a desigualdade. Em muitos países, por exemplo, o ingresso em universidades públicas está
sujeito a um exame de entrada. Se famílias ricas têm mais condições de investir na educação das
crianças que famílias pobres, pode se chegar a uma situação onde o pobre paga educação, através de
impostos, para o rico. De modo a evitar este tipo de problema, políticas de ações afirmativas (AA)
têm sido implementadas em alguns países para melhorar as oportunidades das pessoas
desvantajosas. No Brasil, por exemplo, há um dado número de vagas nas universidades públicas
reservadas para estudantes da escola básica pública. Porém, ao invés de incluir o pobre na
universidade pública, esta política pública pode incluir o rico na escola básica pública. Este artigo
investiga esta problemática. Ele fornece uma breve revisão da literatura neste tópico. Depois, ele
propõe um modelo usando uma abordagem da teoria dos jogos onde o Governo decide o tamanho
da política pública e os indivíduos decidem se adquirir ou não educação básica privada. O artigo
também fornece uma aplicação empírica usando dados brasileiros. E, finalmente, ele conclui que a
política pública tem um efeito positivo até certo ponto, se o tamanho da política é excessivamente
grande, o efeito pode ser negativo.
Palavras-chave: Educação, Ação afirmativa, igualdade de oportunidade.


Área 5: Economia do Setor Público
JEL Classification: I2, I3
                                            1. Introduction
The role of education is central to most development strategies. From a theoretical perspective, the
economic literature recognizes that investments in human capital are important to sustain growth for
different reasons. Hanushek and Woessmann (2007) list the most important: investments in human
capital increase labor productivity (Mankiw, Romer and Weil, 1992), improve the innovative
capacity of the economy (Lucas, 1988; Romer, 1990; and Aghion and Howitt, 1998) and facilitate
the spread and transmission of knowledge (Nelson and Phelps, 1966; Benhabib and Spiegel, 2005).
From the equity point of view, higher investments in education are positively correlated with: better
public health, lower population growth, democratization, human rights, political stability, lower
crime rates, lower deforestation, etc. (see McMahon, 2005).
However, if education is not distributed uniformly among the population it can contribute to
increase inequality. In many countries, for instance, entrance to public universities is subject to an
admission exam. Places are allocated to students with the best scores. If wealthy students achieve
more points, they are more likely to gain a university place. Moreover, if public investment
financed by taxation is biased in favor of advanced levels of education, a situation can be reached in
which the poor pays for education for the wealthy.
According to Garrison-Wade and Lewis (2004), “[s]ince its beginning, the affirmative action
policies’ objective has been to provide opportunities for minorities to advance in society. These
policies, mostly race-sensitive, have since opened many doors for minorities especially in higher
education.” The term Affirmative Action was used for the first time in the US in the 1960’s to refer
to public policies aiming to combat race discrimination in society.
According to Merriam-Webster(2010) Dictionary, AA can be defined as “an active effort to
improve the employment or educational opportunities of members of minority groups and women
sought to achieve a multicultural staff through affirmative action” or “a similar effort to promote
the rights or progress of other disadvantaged persons”.
In the last decades an increasing number of AA policies have been implemented in many countries
around the World, including Brazil, Canada, India and United States, Nigeria, Malaysia, etc. AA
policies were first implemented with the scope of eliminating race discrimination in society. With
passage of time, this kind of policy was used to improve the situation of other minorities, like social
disadvantaged people, for instance. In order to differentiate race-based AA from social-based AA,
literature uses the terms color-conscious aﬃrmative action and color-blind aﬃrmative action
respectively.
In Brazil the implementation of AA at public universities started in 2001. AA policies at Brazilian
universities are based in two main criteria: social and racial. There is a great controversy about
which is the most appropriate criterion. Moehlecke (2002) explains that, on one hand, social criteria
defenders argue that when you focus in color-blinded AA, you necessarily help the races in
disadvantaged position in society; on the other hand, defenders of racial criteria argue that social
criterion may lead to the forgetfulness of the racial problem.
Cestau, Epple and Sieg (2015) analyzed the effects of the different criteria: “We develop an
econometric model that provides a unified treatment of affirmative action and profiling.
Implementing the model for an [American] urban district, we find profiling by race and income,
and affirmative action for low income students. Counterfactual analysis reveals that these policies
achieve more than 80% of African American enrollment that could be attained by race-based
affirmative action.” while Fryer, Jr., Loury and Yuret(2003) show that the short-run eﬃciency
losses of implementing color-blind AA (in their sample) are four to ﬁve times as high as color-
conscious AA.
Another important issue regarding the beneficiaries of an AA policy is endogeneity. Race or gender
are criteria that cannot be changed by individuals, while income, address and type of basic school
attended are characteristics that individuals may have incentive to manipulate in order to be
included in the group considered by the AA policy. This paper aims to analyze the effectiveness of
a color-blind AA with endogeneity problem.
In Brazil, Government offers primary and secondary education for the whole population, while the
number of places at public universities are limited. Wealthy families, in order to guarantee
vacancies at public universities, send their children to private basic school, which are better than the
public ones. With a higher level of education, wealthy students have higher chances of reaching
better scores at the public university entrance exam. Private market offers private universities as
well, but generally with lower quality. Thus, public universities have higher quality without tuition
fee. As wealthy have higher chances of entering public university, we have an inequality trap where
public resources are used to increase human capital of wealthy students, i.e., we have a situation
where inequality reinforces itself.
As mentioned before, in the last decades many AA policies were implemented by Brazilian
Government, some of them with the scope of including more disadvantaged students at public
universities. For more information about Brazilian Educational system, see Machado and Szerman
(2016). One of these policies consists in the establishment of quotas at public university for public
school students. The scope of this policy is to increase participation of disadvantaged students at
public university, but, as pointed by Herskovic and Ramos (2014), it may increase participation of
wealthy children in public basic school and offset the effect of the policy.
Which is the best choice for households: to invest in ‘knowledge’ (pay private basic school and
prepare their children to ‘fight’ for a lower number of positions at public university) or ‘privilege’
(send their children to basic public school and include them in AA policy group)? From the point of
view of Government, which is the optimal number of places at public university that must be
devoted to public school students, since, if this number is too low, it does not improve much the
situation of public school students? However, if this number is too high, wealthy students may send
their children to public school and the policy does not affect disadvantaged students.
This paper analyzes these questions using game theory framework. The originality of this study
consists in focusing specifically in this AA policy and analyzing it in detail, both, theoretically and
empirically. In Section 2 it analyzes previous studies on this topic and correlated issues. Section 3 is
dedicated to the model. Section 4 provides an empirical application. In Section 5 the main results
are discussed. And, finally, conclusions are in Section 6.
                                         2. Previous Literature
Since AA policies started, many studies were made in the direction of analyzing their impacts.
From the theoretical point of view, when implementation of AA policies at Brazilian universities
started, Andrade (2004) proposed a model aiming at analyzing their eﬀects on the eﬃciency of
expenditures in higher education. According to him, the eﬀects on the overall eﬃciency of total
investments (public and private) can be beneﬁcial, nonexistent, or detrimental, depending on the
liquidity constraint degree of low-income families and the quality of public universities in
comparison with private ones. Four of his results are highlighted here: (1) If the beneficiaries of
quotas are families who could actually pay for a private education, the AA policy will simply be a
way of transferring income to low-income families. (2) If the correlation between students’
admission score and academic ability is strong, some individuals who have performed better lose
their place at public university and the eﬃciency of the public expenditures in higher education is
reduced, since there is a decrease in the quality of the labor force produced by these public
investments. (3) If private universities are better than the public ones, quotas would push
individuals with greater abilities to attend the more qualiﬁed universities and the overall eﬃciency
of the system will increase. (4) If quality of public universities is higher, individuals with the
greatest abilities will be taken away from the universities with greater quality, decreasing efficiency
of educational system.
Hickman (2010) used a Bayesian game where heterogeneous students compete for places at
universities with different prestigious levels and compared alternative AA policies on college
admissions. In his model, he shows that there is a tradeoff between equality and academic
performance incentives. He also found that the process of levelling some minority students, make
worse the situation of some disadvantaged non-minorities. However, he affirms that the theoretical
analysis is not enough to evaluate if the results are a socially desirable change.
Another, more recent, theoretical work focusing on Brazilian educational system is Herskovic and
Ramos (2014). It investigates the eﬀects of color-blind AA on economic outcomes like welfare,
inequality, GDP, investment and intergenerational correlation of income. They proposed an
overlapping generation model with four periods in which parents decide whether to send their child
to public or private institutions and how much to invest in it. They compared two different AA
models, the introduction of quotas and the introduction of bonus points on the admission exam, and
concluded: “We ﬁnd that both policies can reduce the intergenerational correlation of earnings, but
the ﬁnal eﬀect on inequality, welfare and GDP depends on the magnitude of the policy.” As we can
observe, their results are in line with Andrade (2004).
Herskovic and Ramos (2014) underline also the limitations of AA policies in the presence of
endogeneity: “The bonus to students from the public school system makes parents enroll their
children in the public school (even if it’s inefficient), because it increases the likelihood of college
admission.”
The main entrance gate to public universities in Brazil is the ENEM (National Secondary School
Exam). It was created in 1998 with the scope of evaluating secondary education in Brazil. At that
time, each university had its own selection process for students’ admission. Over the years, the
ENEM replaced the selection process of universities, and public tertiary education migrated from a
decentralized to a centralized admission system. Machado and Szerman (2016) founded that
“institutions under the centralized assignment are able to attract students with substantially higher
test scores and […] geographical mobility of admitted students increases.”
There is a great debate on the effect of AA policies on effort incentives of disadvantaged groups.
Some studies sustain that AA policies motivate minorities to perform better. Cotton, Hickman and
Price (2014) made an experiment to verify if AA increases average study effort and exam
performance of disadvantaged groups targeted by the policy. They paid students based on relative
performance on a national mathematics exam in US. The results suggest that AA can both promote
greater equality of market outcomes and narrow achievement gaps at the same time. Akhtari and
Bau (2016) analyzed data from a large, urban school district in Texas and found the following
result: “the reinstatement of affirmative action narrowed the achievement gap between minority
(black and Hispanic) and white high school students in standardized test scores, course grades, and
the likelihood of taking advanced courses.” Similar results were found by Saeme (2014), when she
analyzed Brazilian data: “on average, Black students from public schools in São Paulo scored
1.54% higher on the ENEM as a result of the introduction of quotas in UFSCar admissions, and the
estimate for all public school students (unconditional on race) was 1.16% on average.” Also
Francis and Tannuri-Pianto (2012) analyzed Brazilian data: “[W]e compare displaced and
displacing applicants and find that racial quotas helped promote equity to some extent.
Nevertheless, the scale and scope of redistribution were highly limited, and the vast majority of
Brazilians had little chance of attending college, suggesting that more still needs to be done.”
However, there are also studies which results follow a different direction. Ferman and Assunção
(2005) used ‘difference in difference’ estimates to evaluate the effect of the quota system in the
admission to Brazilian public universities. They affirm: “Our findings show that favored groups
attained lower scores, suggesting a negative link between affirmative action and incentives for
effort and skill acquisition.”, while Estevan, Gall and Morin (2016) show that an AA policy applied
to a large Brazilian university increased representation of minorities, but have not increased their
effort to perform better.
As it can be observed the majority of studies, involving AA policies, focus on the impact of policies
and on effort decisions of favored groups. Some of them consider that wealthy families are able to
offer a better basic education for their children, but investment decisions of households is a topic
that deserves more attention. The aim of this paper is to contribute to this debate with both
theoretical and empirical elements. In the next section, a model is proposed considering these
issues.
                                             3. The Model
A given country is considered to be composed by N households indexed by where each household
is composed of one parent and one child. Households differ only in parents’ human capital, , and
child innate ability, . The Cdf of is given by , and                           Child innate ability is
a random variable normally distributed,                  Parents work, receive income and consume,
while children study. Households’ income is determined by parents’ human capital, and it is
increasing on it. For the sake of simplicity, we consider that the minimal income of this economy is
     , which is the minimal amount necessary to supply the basic needs of a family. We normalize
       to zero and suppose that household’s post-taxation income is              . There is no credit
market in this economy.
Household’s utility is quasilinear and depends on parent’s consumption and child’s education. It can
be expressed as:


where is consumption of parent , and                represents the impact of child education in the
utility of household We suppose also that                and               , i.e.,       is increasing
and concave in , child’s education. If the family does not invest in private education, then         .
In our model, educational system is divided in two levels: basic school ( ), which comprises
primary and secondary education, and university ( ), or, tertiary education. Basic education is
compulsory, and we suppose that if a child does not attend university, then      .
There are two types of basic school: the one provided by government, , and the one provided by
private market, . Attendance to      is tuition free, and the Government offers as many places at
as required by population. To attend , it is necessary to pay . The quality of      is lower than the
quality of .
Tertiary education can be of two types as well: Public university, , provided by government is
tuition free, while private sector provides . To attend , families must pay . The quality of
is higher than the quality of . However, there are only        vacancies at . To join , student
must take an admission exam. Students with the best scores win a place at   Private sector offers
as many places at as required by households.
Student mark at university entrance exam,      , depends on parent’s human capital, basic education
and innate ability:
                                                         ,
with         and          . Since the quality of   is lower than the quality of   then:

                                                                       .
If parents invest in  they increase the probability of their child entering public university. Thus, a
wealthy child has two sources of advantage: (1) parent’s human capital, since parents with a higher
level of education share their knowledge at home, buy books, frequent museums, etc.; and (2)
formal education, given that families can pay for high quality private school education.
In order to decrease the degree of inequality of tertiary educational system opportunity, the
Government can stipulate that a given number of places at   must be occupied by public school
students.
The problem can be modelled as a sequential game were, initially, Government decides                 ,
the percentage of places at   devoted to public basic school students. If        , it means that there
is no affirmative action supporting public school students. Whereas if        , we have an economy
where only public school students can apply for public universities. In the second step of the game,
households observe and decide whether to send their child to public or private basic school.
It is considered that the aim of Government is to maximize tertiary education enrollment, and it is
known that all places at public universities will be filled. If a family does not win a place at , they
decide whether or not to pay to send their child to . If a family, whose child did not get a place
at public university, does not have enough money to pay              their child will not attend tertiary
education, while wealthy families in the same situation will be able to pay for private universities
for their child. Thus, the higher the number of poor at public universities, the higher total
enrollment on tertiary education. The scope of government it to maximize production of human
capital in the economy; the higher the number of students enrolled in tertiary education, the higher
the total amount of human capital produced. Thus, Government utility function can be expressed
with the following equation:
                                                                ,
where     is a constant expressing the number of vacancies at        , and            , the number of
students enrolled at private tertiary institutions, depends on      and on the distribution of human
capital( ) and scores( ) among the households.
Considering a family with enough resources to pay for private university, if their child does not get
a place at public university, and          , households expected utility is given by:


where is consumption and is given by                   ; and is the household spending with private
education. The probability of a household to win a position at public university is , and it depends
on and         . The increment in household utility function, if a child goes to public university, is
      . With probability          , a child does not go to public university. In this case, it is optimal
to the family to pay for private university if and only if                . We suppose that private
university is provided by a competitive market that set prices such that                (we discuss the
results when this assumption is relaxed in Appendix A.2). Thus, the expected utility function can be
simplified to the following equation:


After observing , families decide whether or not to pay for private school. Considering again a
family with enough money to invest in private education, the expected utility if they pay to send
the child to


where , is the probability of entering      if the child attended private school. If the family does not
pay the expected utility is:
                                                                         .
with    expressing the probability of child entering public university after attending     .
As affirmed before, the Government utility function is given by                              . A
household whose human capital is     , is not able to pay for private school and send their child
to public school. A household whose human capital is            , must decide whether to invest or not
in private basic school. Figure 1 represents the game in the extensive form.




                                   Figure 1: Game in the extensive form.
                                       Source: Made by the author.

Household pays for private basic school if (The proof is in Appendix A.1):
                                                             (1)
and
                                                                       (2)

However,            and         , thus, the higher , the lower the number of families who send their
child to private basic school. The higher            , the higher the number of families interested in
sending their child to private basic school.
If condition (2) holds, families whose
                                                         ,    (3)
are able to send their child to private university. If condition (2) does not hold, families whose
                                                     ,       (4)
are able to send their child to private university. Then, household’s decision depends on a set of
factors. Table 1 resumes the best decision for a given household in each situation:
                                      Table 1: Household’s decision.
           Household human          Basic school decision           Tertiary education decision
                capital                  ( or )                     (whether pay or not private
                                                                            university)
                   and                                                          No
                                      if                                        No

                                      if                                       No
                                                                               Yes
                    ;                 if                                       Yes
            and
                                      if                                       No
                                      if                                       Yes

                                      if                                       Yes
                                         Source: Made by the author.

As mentioned before, Government aims to maximize the function                                . Let us
denote with the families that, after basic school choice, are able to pay for private university. The
number of families in this situation is , and the share of families in this group whose child goes
to public university is           . Thus, can be expressed as:
                                                                   .       (5)

The effect of in      is ambiguous, since the higher is, the higher the proportion of public school
students at public university is, but, at the same time, the higher the proportion of wealthy students
at basic school is.
Proposition 1. If there is such that the difference function             is increasing in   and there
is a value of             such that                     and                , then
                       .
                                      4. Empirical Application

For the sake of getting the probability of a student (with a given household income and who
attended a given type of basic school) to win a place at university, we will analyze ENEM results.
Thus, we first describe briefly ENEM history and then do the probability estimations.

4.1 ENEM’s History
As mentioned before, in Brazil at the end of secondary school, students take an exam called ENEM
(Secondary School National Exam). The exam was created in 1998 with the scope of evaluating
secondary school. It is optional and subject to payment. Some universities used it as part of their
student selection process. It was composed of 63 multiple choices questions and one composition.
The idea was to evaluate 21 different abilities of candidates. Since 2001, public secondary school
students, private secondary school students with full scholarship and people living in economic
vulnerability are entitled to exemption from the registration fee.
Beyond quotas, another government policy to favor participation of poor people in Brazilian tertiary
education is the PROUNI (University for All Program). In this program, government offers
scholarships in private universities for public school students; students may receive full scholarship
or half scholarship based on family per capita income. In order to provide the vacancies to
PROUNI, Government and private universities do a mutual agreement, and scholarships are
financed through tax exemptions. Only students who took ENEM exam and who reached at least
450 points (the score can varies from 0 to 1000) are allowed to participate in PROUNI program.
The ENEM exam was reformulated in 2009, becoming more complex and more in line with
secondary education curriculum. It is now composed of four exams (languages, human sciences,
natural sciences and mathematics), comprising 180 multiple choice questions and a composition.
Nowadays this exam is considered the main entrance gate to public universities. The exam is also
used to apply for private universities (although most of them have their own candidates’ selection
system) and to request financing or aid from government to study at private universities. On August
29, 2012, Brazilian Government promulgated a law determining that all federal educational tertiary
institutions must designate at least 50% of their vacancies to secondary public school students, and,
at least a half of this amount must be devoted to the poor. It is considered poor those whose per
capita income is equal or lower than 1.5 minimal income. In 2017, Government stablished that
ENEM exam can no longer be used as secondary school completion certificate. In Figure 2 we can
observe a timeline resuming ENEM’s history.
                                                         Figure 2: Timeline ENEM exam.
                                                           Source: Made by the author.

As we can see, ENEM exam increased its importance across the years. Thus, the number of test
registrations has increased as well. Figure 2 shows the approximate number of ENEM registrations
in millions of candidates at each year. As we can notice, in the last year this number decreased to
6.1 million. This reduction is the result of a set of factors: the exemption criterion became stricter,
ENEM exam can no longer be used to certificate conclusion of secondary school and its price
increased 20%.
          10                                                                                                                8.7**          8.6**
           8
           6                                                                                           5.4**         7.2** 7.7**
                                                                                   4.0*                          5.8**           6.1**
           4                                                         3.7*                           4.6**
                                                                  3.0* 3.6*               4.1**
           2                           1.6* 1.8*1.8*
                0.16*0.35*                                    1.6*
           0                      0.39*



                           Figure 3: Confirmed registrations in millions of candidates.
                  Source: Made by the author using data from G1(2017)** and Wikipedia(2017)*.

4.2 Probability Estimations
The model presented in the previous section shows that policies favoring public school students
may stimulate families to invest less in high school education, sending their child to public high
school. Figure 4 shows the percentage of secondary school students enrolled in private institutions.
It can be observed that before the creation of ENEM and the implementation of AA policies, the
percentage of high school students enrolled in private institutions used to be higher.
        25,0%   21,7%
                        20,5% 19,8%
        20,0%                         16,2% 15,8%
                                                    14,1% 13,3%
        15,0%                                                   12,9% 13,5% 12,1% 12,2%                                   12,7% 12,8% 12,9% 13,0% 12,5%
                                                                                        12,0%               11,7% 11,8%
                                                                                                10,7% 11,6%
        10,0%
         5,0%
         0,0%



                  Figure 4: Percentage of secondary school students enrolled at private institutions.
                             Source: Made by the author using data from INEP (2017).
In order to analyze the impact of AA policies in households decision we focus on ENEM exam
results of a specific year. The most recent available dataset is from 2015. Candidates who took the
exam this year could use their score to apply for positions in public universities in 2016, the first
year in which Quota’s Law (Brasil, 2012) was fully implemented by all public universities. Upon
registration, candidates answer a socioeconomic questionnaire. The number of registrations in 2015
reached 8,478,096. When we exclude missing candidates, not confirmed candidates and eliminated
candidates, the remaining candidates are 4,369,371. In our analysis, we have considered only the
candidates who have informed the type of high school attended and, as shown in Table 2, they were
1,450,388. Upon registration, candidates informed the approximate household income and the
number of components of the household; with this data we can calculate the approximate household
per capita income, I. The unit of I is Brazilian minimum wage. As we can observe, there is a high
concentration of households at lower income levels, this is the reason why the first income intervals
have a lower amplitude in comparison to the last ones.
The percentage of private secondary school students on our dataset is 20,6%, it is higher than the
percentage of students enrolled on private secondary school in the same year showed by Figure 4.
In 2016, the number of positions offered at public universities was 284,422. Which means that
approximately 6.5% of valid candidates would have been able to get a place at public university. To
apply for public universities, students observe their ENEM exam result and the cut points of
previous years for each university and course, and decide which ones to apply for. In Brazil, the
higher scores are the ones of medical school candidates. To simplify, we considered that there was
only one course and university and that all candidates applied for it. Considering, that 6.5% of the
candidates won a position at public university, we have estimated the probability of entrance by
type of school and per capita income.
                              Table 2: Number of households by income group.

                            Household
                                               N           NG           NP
                            income
                            I≤0.2        91,651    88,414               3,237
                            0.2<I≤0.4   456,729 431,264                25,465
                            0.4<I≤0.6   234,218 209,323                24,895
                            0.6<I≤0.8   181,414 151,097                30,317
                            0.8<I≤1     149,176 113,217                35,959
                            1<I≤1.5     105,978    66,231              39,747
                            1.5<I≤2      70,660    32,167              38,493
                            2<I≤3        52,962    15,863              37,099
                            3<I≤4        21,990     4,041              17,949
                            4<I≤6        18,936     2,159              16,777
                            I>6          21,674     1,537              20,137
                            TOTAL     1,405,388 1,115,313             290,075
                          Source: Made by the author using data from INEP (2017a).

The cut point is defined as follows. Considering that a given percentage of students goes to public
university, for example, 10%, we order the scores and consider that the better 10% will win a place
at public university. Then we identify the worst score in the 10% group, and define it as the cut
point. Thus, individuals with score equal or higher to it go to public university, and individuals
below it are out of public university. Although this is a very simple estimation process, it seems to
be adequate to do it since candidates usually make decisions considering previous years´ results.
Figure 5 illustrates the results estimated for public high school students (Figure 5a) and private high
school students (Figure 5b), considering five different policies, where represents the percentage
of places in public school devoted to public high school students. As we can see, the higher , the
higher     , and the lower       . We can observe, in addition, that the higher , the higher the
probability of entering in university, which is consistent with our model. The only exceptions are
the wealthiest individuals of public school and the poorest individuals of private school. In Table 2,
we can notice that these are the groups with lower representation on our data set.




     Figure 5: Probability of entering university: (a) Public high school students, (b) Private high school students.
                               Source: Made by the author using data from INEP (2017a).




   Figure 6: Comparison between public and private students: (a) Average score at ENEM exam, (b) Probability of
entering university when β=0, (c) Probability of entering university when β=0.25, (d) Probability of entering university
   when β=0.5, (e) Probability of entering university when β=0.75, (f) Probability of entering university when β=1.
                             Source: Made by the author using data from INEP(2017a).
At all income groups, the average score of private high school students is higher than the average
score of public high school students; and the higher the income, the higher the average score, which
can be observed in Figure 6a. Without affirmative action policies,                      is positive and
increasing in      if          , as reported by Figure 6b and Table 3. If at least 25% of public
university positions must be filled by public school students, the probability of entrance at each
income level increases for public high school students and decreases for private high schoolers;
however, at each income level, private high school students still have a higher probability of
entering public university than public high school students. These results are present on Figure 6c
and Table 3. When 50% of public university positions are devoted to public high school students we
have a surprising result, the probability of entering public university is higher for the wealthy who
attends public high school, and for the poor who attends private school (see Figure 6d). We can
observe in Table 3 that               is positive if         and negative if          . The results are
similar when           ; however, in this situation                 only if         (see Figure 6e and
Table 3). When only public high school students can attend public university                      for all
income levels as showed in Figure 6f. We can notice, as well, that the wealthiest public school
students (      achieve worse results than students whose families have income                 . This
fact deserves more attention, and investigating it goes beyond our scope; however, since this is a
group who should not have great difficulty to pay for private school, it may indicate that there is a
share of households on this group which does not give much importance to education, since they
have money, but does not pay for private education.



            Table 3: Difference between entrance probability of public and private high school students.
                                                     ρP-ρG
                   Income               β=0      β=0.25       β=0.50       β=0.75       β=1
                   I≤0.2               0,085      0,063        0,038        0,006      -0,017
                   0.2<I≤0.4           0,052      0,029        0,005       -0,021      -0,039
                   0.4<I≤0.6           0,085      0,044        0,004       -0,038      -0,069
                   0.6<I≤0.8           0,105      0,051       -0,002       -0,059      -0,101
                   0.8<I≤1             0,124      0,058       -0,010       -0,082      -0,136
                   1<I≤1.5             0,149      0,066       -0,020       -0,116      -0,186
                   1.5<I≤2             0,174      0,072       -0,031       -0,152      -0,241
                   2<I≤3               0,181      0,065       -0,061       -0,204      -0,315
                   3<I≤4               0,203      0,069       -0,071       -0,241      -0,382
                   4<I≤6               0,211      0,066       -0,088       -0,272      -0,453
                   I>6                 0,270      0,136       -0,008       -0,212      -0,435
                   TOTAL               0,216      0,151        0,080       -0,011      -1,704
                            Source: Made by the author using data from INEP(2017a).
In the next section, we discuss the results found in the empirical application and its implications for
the proposed model.
                                                   5. Discussion

The model of Section 3 showed that if                                     households increase their expected
utility if they invest in private high school education. The empirical application showed us that the
higher , the lower the difference                 . Which means that if Government offers places at
university to public school students, it may discourage private investments in private secondary
education institutions. If          is very high in comparison with , a small positive difference
between       and     is enough to convince a family to invest in private high school education, since
the utility of having a child in public university is much higher than the cost of paying basic school.
As confirmed by the data, the score reached by the students is higher when they attend private basic
school, and the higher the income level of the family, the higher the child achievement.
Consequently, the probability of entering public university is higher for private school students, and
the higher the household income level, the higher this probability. When Government books places
at public university to public school students, it increases the probability of entering university for
public school students, and decreases it for private school students at all income levels. If the
percentage of places devoted to public school students is small enough, like              in the case of
the data analyzed, it is possible to increase the chances of public school students entering university
without motivating private school students to change the type of school attended. If is such that,
for a group of households, it is worthwhile to send their child to public school in spite of paying for
private school for them, the policy loses effectiveness. Moreover, wealthy families are the ones with
higher motivation to no longer pay for private school. The intuition behind it is that, since education
acquired by the child depends on both formal (school) and informal (parents’ human capital)
education, and the production of education has declining marginal returns, the effect of private
education is higher to households whose parent has a lower level of human capital. Thus, in the case
of our dataset, if           , it is better for families whose           to pay for private school if
conditions (1) and (2) holds, while families whose             increase their expected utility sending
their child to public basic school.
Brazilian Quotas’ Law (Brasil, 2012) determines that 50% per cent of the positions at public
universities must be filled by public school students, but it also determines that a half of them are
booked to poor students, i.e. students whose            ; thus, for students with          ,           .
The law also stipulates that public basic school students’ positions at public university must be
shared between different races according to the share of races in that region. The reference for the
share of races in the region is the one estimated by official national statistics. Analyzing how these
criteria together affect each income group goes beyond the scope of this paper; however, we can
observe that these additional criteria increase motivations in the poor and those whose race used to
have lower representation at universities, to send their child to public school; and in the wealthy, to
send their child to private school.
It is important to mention too, that booking places at public university is not the only governmental
action to improve access of underprivileged groups to higher levels of education. During university,
many students receive governmental aid for transport, food, etc. There is also the possibility of
receiving full of partial scholarship to attend private universities. Thus, there is a set of other factors
that may stimulate a family to send their child to public basic school.
                                               6. Conclusion
This study has analyzed the effect of AA policies when the definition of the underprivileged group
is endogenous. The use of a game theoretical framework showed that if the advantage offered by
the AA policy is big enough, it will stimulate households to migrate from one group to the other,
and the policy will not reach its scope. In this case, in spite of investing in a higher quality basic
school, in order to provide more knowledge for their offspring, parents send their child to a lower
quality public school in order to give them the possibility of being contemplated by the AA policy.
The data analyzed underscored our main result, as well as indicated that if the size of the policy
exceeds the adequate level, the main beneficiary of the AA policy may be the wealthy. According to
the data, parents’ background is more important than formal education in the definition of a child’s
achievement.
This paper calls attention to the fact that AA policies may lead to undesirable results if the
determination of the disadvantaged group is exogenous. However, if wealthy decides to use public
services in order to be included in the AA policy, considering the higher level of human capital due
to parents background, they are also able to know and demand their rights, thus, in this way, they
can contribute to improve public school.
In future research, it would be interesting to analyze the probability of these groups entering
university in different years, comparing the results before and after the implementation of AA
policies. Another topic to be deepened is the joint effect of poor and race based AA policies and
those comprising public school students. Finally, it would be interesting to analyze the same
problem, considering that the wealthy and the poor attribute different utility levels to education.
References
AGHION, Philippe; HOWITT, Peter W. Endogenous Growth Theory. Cambrige: MIT Press,
1997.
ANDRADE, E. C. Quotas in Brazilian Public Universities: Good or Bad Idea? Revista
Brasileira de Economia, 58(4): 453-84, 2004.
AKHTARI, M. ; BAU, N. Race-based Affirmative Action and Student Effort. Working paper,
February, 2016. Available at : < https://scholar.harvard.edu/makhtari/publications/race-based-
affirmative-action-and-student-effort>.
BENHABIB, Jess; SPIEGEL, Mark M. Human capital and technology diffusion. In: Handbook of
Economic Growth. Amsterdam: North Holland, 2005. p. 935-966.
BRASIL. Lei nº. 12.711. Dispõe sobre o ingresso nas universidades federais e nas instituições
federais de ensino técnico de nível médio e dá outras providências. Brasília, 29 de ago. 2012.
Available at: <http://www.planalto. gov.br/ccivil_03/_Ato2011-2014/2012/Lei/L12711.htm>.
Consulted in: 06/10/2017.
CESTAU, Dario; EPPLE, Dennis; SIEG, Holger. Admitting students to selective education
programs: merit, profiling, and affirmative action. NBER working paper series, Working Paper
21232, 2015. Available at: <http://www.nber.org/papers/w21232>.
COTTON, C.; HICKMAN, B. R.; PRICE, J. P. Aﬃrmative action and human capital
investment: Evidence from a randomized ﬁeld experiment. Working Paper 20397, National
Bureau of Economic Research, 2014.
ESTEVAN, F.; GALL, T.; MORIN, L.-P. Redistribution without Distortion: Evidence from an
Affirmative Action Program at a Large Brazilian University. Ottawa, Working paper, n. 1608E,
Jul, 2016.
FERMAN, B.; ASSUNÇÃO, J. Affirmative action in university admissions and high school
students' proficiency. Working Paper, Department of Economics, PUC-Rio, 2005.
FRANCIS, A. M.; TANNURI-PIANTO, M. Using Brazil’s racial continuum to examine the
short-term eﬀects of aﬃrmative action in higher education. Journal of Human Resources, v. 47,
n. 3, p. 754-784, 2012.
FRYER, R.; LOURY, G. C.; YURET, T. Color-Blind Affirmative Action. NBER Working Paper
n. 10103, 2003. Available at: <http://www.bu.edu/econ/files/2012/11/dp131Loury.pdf>.
G1. Enem 2017 tem o menor número de inscritos confirmados desde 2013. Available at:
http://g1.globo.com/educacao/enem/2017/noticia/enem-2017-teve-pelo-menos-61-milhoes-de-
inscricoes-confirmadas.ghtml>, consulted in: 06/15/2017.
GARRISON-WADE, D. F.; LEWIS, C. W. Affirmative action: history and analysis. The Journal
of College Admission, p. 23-26, 2004.
HANUSHEK, E. A.; WOESSMANN, L. The Role of Education Quality in Economic Growth.
Policy Research Working Papers. Paper 4122, Febuary, 2007.
HERSKOVIC, B.; RAMOS, J. Aﬃrmative Action in College Admission: long-run implications
for eﬃciency and inequality. Working paper, 2014). Available at: < http://www.econ.puc-
rio.br/biblioteca.php/trabalhos/show>.
HICKMAN, B. R. Student effort, race gaps, and affirmative action in college admissions:
theory and empirics. PhD (Doctor of Philosophy) thesis, University of Iowa, 2010.
INEP. O Instituto Nacional de Estudos e Pesquisas Educacionais. Sinopses estatísticas 1995-2016.
Available at: <http://portal.inep.gov.br/web/guest/sinopses-estatisticas>, consulted in : 06/20/2017.
INEPa. O Instituto Nacional de Estudos e Pesquisas Educacionais. ENEM 2015. Available at :
<http://portal.inep.gov.br/web/guest/microdados>, consulted in : 05/20/2017.
INEP. O Instituto Nacional de Estudos e Pesquisas Educacionais. Sinopses estatísticas 1995-2016.
Available at :<http://portal.inep.gov.br/web/guest/micr>.
LUCAS, R. On the Mechanics of Economic Development. Journal of Monetary Economics.
North-Holland, v. 22, p. 3-42, 1988.
MACHADO, C.; SZERMAN, C. Centralized Admission and the Student-College Match. IZA
DP No. 10251, September, 2016.
MANKIW, N. G.; ROMER, D.; WEIL, D. N. A contribution to the empirics of economic growth.
Quarterly Journal of Economics. v. 107, n. 2, p. 407-437, may, 1992.
MCMAHON, Walter W. The social and external beneﬁts of education. In: JOHNES, Geraint;
JOHNES, Jill. International Handbook on the Economics of Education. Massachusetts: Edward
Elgar Publishing Ltd, 2004, p. 211-259.
MERRIAM-WEBSTER. Availabe in: https://www.merriam-webster.com. Consulted in: <15th,
June, 2010>.
MOEHLECKE, S. Ação afirmativa: história e debates no Brasil. Cadernos de Pesquisa, n. 117,
p. 197-217, November, 2002.
NELSON, R. R.; PHELPS, E. S. Investment in Humans, Technological Diffusion, and Economic
Growth. The American Economic Review. v. 56, n. 1/2. p. 69-75, mar, 1966.
ROMER, Paul M. Endogenous Technological Change. Journal of Political Economy. v. 98, n. 5,
p. S71-S102, 1990.
SAEME, D. Does the Implementation of Affirmative Action in a Competitive Setting
Incentivize Underrepresented Public School Applicants’ performance? Evidence from São
Paulo. The Yale Journal of Economics, New Havens, v. 2, n. 2, p. 93-114, Sep, 2014.
WIKIPEDIA.           Inscritos       no    ENEM     por        ano.    Available       at:
https://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Predefini%C3%A7%C3%A3o:Inscritos_no_Enem_por_ano>,
consulted in: 06/15/2017.
Appendix
A.1 Household decision when
If        , the family send child to public basic school.
If        , the family compares expected utility with public and private basic school. Household
send child to basic private school if:




In order to simplify the notation, we use the small form of                              =     in the
demonstration.




A.2 Household decision when
Let us consider initially the situation where           . Household invests in private basic
education if:


In order to simplify the notation, we use the small form of                              =     in the
demonstration.




We have              , then:



Thus, if             the minimal amount of human capital, , necessary to a family decide to invest
in private basic school is lower than in the case        .
