           If bad money drives out good money:
         deunionisation and productivity slowdown
       M. C. Pereira∗1,2 , G. Dosi†2 , R. Freeman‡3 , A. Roventini§2,4 , and M. E.
                                       Virgillito¶5,2

                                          1
                                         University of Campinas
                                      2
                                       Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna
                                    3
                                      Harvard University and NBER
                                           4
                                             OFCE, Sciences Po
                                 5
                                   Universita’ Cattolica del Sacro Cuore



                                                Abstract
           We develop an agent-based model able to account for the macroeconomic conse-
       quences of an endogenous process of de-unionisation resulting from a competition mech-
       anism between two types of firms, namely unionised and non-unionised. Whenever
       non-unionised firms prevail, the average productivity growth declines, the productivity
       standard deviation and the market concentration increase, in a “winner-takes-it-all” sce-
       nario, cost competition induces a deflationary spiral, and product quality is reduced. By
       means of a shift and share decomposition, we track the within, between, cross, entry and
       exit components of productivity growth and the ensuing wage-productivity nexus.
           Keywords: Deunionization, productivity slow-down, agent-based model
           Desenvolvemos um modelo agent-based capaz de analizar as consequências macroe-
       conômicas de um processo endógeno de dessindicalização resultante de um mecanismo
       de concorrência entre dois tipos de firmas, sindicalizadas ou não. Sempre que as em-
       presas não sindicalizadas prevalecem, o crescimento médio da produtividade declina,
       o desvio padrão da produtividade e a concentração do mercado aumentam, em um
       cenário “o ganhador fica com tudo”, a competição de custos induz uma espiral defla-
       cionária e a qualidade do produto é reduzida. Por meio de uma decomposição do tipo
       shift-and-share, rastreamos os componentes do crescimento da produtividade e o nexo
       salário-produtividade resultante.
           Palavras-chave: Dessindicalização, desaceleração produtividade, modelo agent-based
           Área ANPEC: Crescimento, Desenvolvimento Econômico e Instituições (6)
           JEL codes: C63, E02, E24
   ∗
      Corresponding author: Institute of Economics, University of Campinas, Campinas - SP (Brazil), 13083-970.
E-mail address: mcper<at>unicamp.br
    †
      Institute of Economics, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Piazza Martiri della Liberta’ 33, I-56127, Pisa (Italy).
E-mail address: gdosi<at>santannapisa.it
    ‡
      Harvard University and NBER, Cambridge (MA), US
    §
      Institute of Economics, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Piazza Martiri della Liberta’ 33, I-56127, Pisa (Italy),
and OFCE, Sciences Po, Nice France. E-mail address: andrea.roventini<at>santannapisa.it
    ¶
      Institute of Economic Policy, Universita’ Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Via Pietro Necchi 5, I-20123, Milan
(Italy). E-mail addressmariaenrica.virgillito<at>unicatt.it


                                                        1
1    Introduction
A new emerging malaise of capitalist organizations is currently affecting many mature
economies, namely productivity slowdown. Since the First Industrial Revolution produc-
tivity has been the engine pumping wage and output growth and ensuring better standard
of leaving. Currently, the dynamics of productivity does exhibit alarming trends. Syverson
(2017) documents that US productivity growth more than halved between 1995 and 2015,
moving from 2.8% in (1995-2004) to 1.3% (2005 – 2015). A similar pattern characterizes 29
out of 30 countries analysed in the same study, with an average decline of 1.2 percentage
points and 0.9 p.p. of standard deviation.
    Less new are the patterns affecting wage dynamics: stagnant real wage growth and the
surge in wage inequality. Already since the late Eighties, scholars have been studying the in-
creasing patterns of wage dispersion (Freeman, 1984; Lee, 1999). More recent is the acknowl-
edgement of a declining labour share in developed countries (Hutchinson and Persyn, 2012;
Karabarbounis and Neiman, 2013). If the Golden Age of capitalism was characterized by a
proportional wage/productivity growth, and a constant wage share, since the eighties the
wage-productivity nexus has weakened its relationships, with a declining pass-through of
productivity growth on wage growth. The decoupling of wage-productivity growth is there-
fore the result of two concurrent factors: declining labour share and increasing divergence
between median and average income (Schwellnus et al., 2017).
    Moving from macro to micro, a growing stream of literature digs inside into the dynam-
ics of firm/establishment level wage dispersion. In particular, looking at the main drivers of
wage inequality, since the contribution by Dunne et al. (2004), it appears that the between-
establishment component of the overall wage inequality has been the main driver of the
growth of wages dispersion, while the within one, contributed more moderately to the in-
crease in the latter. Recent findings by Barth et al. (2016), linking the Census Bureau’s Lon-
gitudinal Business Data Base (LBD) and the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics
data (LEHD) show that the inter-establishment wage dispersion does contribute roughly
twice with respect to the intra-establishment one. In fact, paraphrasing the article by Barth
et al. (2016), it is exactly where you work that has been strongly impacting on the increase
in wages and earnings dispersion in the US. In a similar vein Berlingieri et al. (2017) have
recently documented a surge in both wage and productivity dispersions across 16 OECD
countries from the mid-1990s to 2012, especially in the service sectors and concerning the
bottom-part of the distributions (50-10 percentiles).
    Which are the causes at the root of the latter empirical patterns? Among the main possi-
ble mechanisms, ranging from demand to supply side ones, the explanation we are going to
explore in this work is the link between the wage structure and firms market performance,
in terms of productivity growth: if low-productive firms are also low-wage firms they might
in tune remain alive leveraging on their cost structure. In this respect, alternative wage set-
ting schemes act as a selection/non selection mechanism cleansing or not the market. This
selection process, going from wage, to productivity to survival/exit is tightly linked to the
changing nature of labour market organization, which in the last decades has seen, together
with many fundamental changes, a dramatic decline in the unionization rate.
    How much of the emerging pattern of average productivity slowdown and increasing
productivity dispersion can be accounted by the process of deunionization of firms? This
paper is meant to address the latter question by means of a simulated economy populated
by a set of heterogeneous interacting agents, according to the modelling practice going

                                              2
under the heading of Agent-Based Models (ABMs). ABMs are large-scale, computational
models which allow the simulation of artificial economies wherein ensembles of heteroge-
neous agents interact on the ground of simple behavioural rules. Aggregate-level outcomes
are the emergent properties from the interactions of such boundedly rational agents. Un-
likely DSGE models driven by the search of closed-form solutions derived from linearisa-
tion around equilibrium conditions, ABMs are open-ended systems where the notion of
coordination substitutes the one of equilibrium. Moreover such models may display path-
dependency along each simulation history, as well as between alternative simulations. Short
of any derivation from some principle of rationality, ABMs ought to be primarily judged on
their ability to reproduce as emergent properties sets of stylised facts, i.e. empirically observed
statistical regularities. The use of agent-based models has become the standard practice in
many disciplines dealing with complex phenomena, wherein the micro and the macro lev-
els are not isomorphic. More recently, these models have also been adopted in economics.
Indeed, the features of ABMs are particularly suited to the analysis of economic phenomena
characterised by (i) disequilibrium processes and (ii) persistent heterogeneity. Therefore we
model the process of deunionziation following a bottom-down perspective, according to the
spurt model first investigated in (Freeman, 1997). Unionised and non-unionised firms do
compete in the product market arena in terms of their relative efficiency, affected by prices,
quality and quantity (excess, unfilled demand) variables. The model produces two possi-
ble statistical equilibrium patterns: a stable case of unsuccessful invasion by non-unionised
firms, and a stable case of invasion by non-unionised firms.
    Whenever non-unionised firms prevail the average productivity growth declines, pro-
ductivity standard deviation and market concentration increase, mimicking a “winners-
take-all” scenario, cost-competition induces a deflationary spiral, and also product quality
is reduced. By means of a shift and share decomposition, we track the within, between, cross,
entry and exit components of productivity growth and the ensuing wage-productivity nexus.


2    At the source of weak selection
Microeconometric firm level studies have been devoting attention to the patterns of firm
level idiosyncratic learning, in terms of productivity growth, and of market selection, focus-
ing on the reallocation dynamics between incumbent firms and at the entry/exit patterns
(Foster et al., 2001). Results from this stream of literature emphasize the phenomenon of
job reallocation as a signal of the cleansing occurring in the market, with workers moving
from low-productivity to high-productivity firms (Davis et al., 1998). However, recent find-
ings provide contrasting evidence: Dosi et al. (2015) using a sample of US listed, big firms
(COMPUSTAT) show that also in the US economy, considered to be quite prone to the pur-
ported reallocation dynamics, according to which less efficient firms lose market shares in
favour of the more efficient ones, the main driver of productivity growth is a within (in-
side the firm) process of accumulation of learning, while the selection process appears to
be quite weak. In line, Foster et al. (2016) find that the pace of reallocation in terms of job
creation/job destruction rates and the ensuing cleansing effect in the Great Recession was
lower than those recorded in previous crisis periods. Additionally, the evidence on the re-
lationship between relative efficiency and firm growth does not provide a strong link on
the co-variations between the two latter variables: in a way, improvements in productivity
do not directly translate into firms market-performance, in terms of sales growth (Bottazzi

                                                3
et al., 2010). These findings suggest (i) the existence of ample heterogeneity in firm level pro-
ductivity dynamics, (ii) a weak productivity-growth nexus, (iii) the absence of any converge
process in the productivity dynamics across firms. A tale of double divergence seems to
emerge: not only firms do present persistent heterogeneity in their performance variables –
including productivity - , but there is also no sign of convergence in wages. On the contrary,
divergence seems to prevail and grow.
    Currently investigated causes of this divergence are the impact of easy access to credit
and entry slowdown. A recent OECD study (McGowan et al., 2017), recalling the idea of
zombie firms, analyses how, over the last decade (2003-2013), the share of zombie firms -
defined as those firms in such financial troubles that are unable to meet their interest pay-
ments, but are still alive - have been steadily increasing. Keeping alive, those firms might
hamper productivity growth. This latter evidence is again in line with some slow-down of
the selection/reallocation process, which is lacking to produce the expected cleansing ef-
fect, especially during recessionary phases. Related, the declining business dynamism, with
a slowdown of entry and a constant exit rate, is the further signal of the reduction in the
selection process (Decker et al., 2016).
    However, less attention has been devoted to the link between labour market organiza-
tion and the ensuing productivity and technological conditions. Given the emerging tale of
double divergence, it is naturally to investigate to what extent the increasing wage disper-
sion has allowed low productivity firms to remain alive. Some empirical evidence points in
favour of the latter mechanism. Barth et al. (2014) when looking at the Scandinavian model
do find evidence that more compressed wage structures, like those in Norway, Sweden and
Denmark, are able to fuel more creative destruction in the market, reducing the dispersion
in productivity. Similarly, Hibbs Jr and Locking (2000) find that lower within-plant wage
dispersion exerts a positive effect on productivity, with a shift of capital and labour from
low-productivity to high-productivity firms. If less unequal between-plant wage level might
foster selection, the process of deunionization, which has largely invested many advanced
economies, is one of the major force pushing in the opposite direction. In this respect, the
increasing wage dispersion between firms induced by deunionization (Freeman, 1984), has
been an implicit buffer which indirectly helped low productivity firms to survive.
    Granted the deunionization-productivity slowdown link we intend to explore, an in-
herent problem relies on how to model the process of deunionization. Freeman (1997),
documenting the patterns of unionization in many advanced economies, proposes the
metaphor of the spurt: unionization was a phase transition occurred after that some thresh-
olds/tipping points have been reached, resulting as a bottom-up emergent property of the
system; clearly, the probability that the spurt occurs positively depends on the existence of
already unionised workers/firms. On the contrary many labour historians and economists
see unionism as the result of some top down act, as the Wagner Act in US, the Blum govern-
ment in France, the PC 1003 in Canada. However, the exogenous shock interpretation leaves
reduced scope to interpret the spurt dynamics of union rise and decline and it predicts a
stable unionization rate over time, which is clearly not revealed by the data.
    Interpreting unionization as a bottom up process allows also to model the process of de-
unionization. Bryson et al. (2017) argue that the process of union decline, more than due to
abandonment rate from previously unionised workers is due to the “never-member" effects,
which see new cohorts of worker never adhere to union organizations. Those firms experi-
encing the “never-member" effects result into being non unionised ones, therefore moving


                                               4
                                                       Production
                                 Queue
                                                       good firms



              Workers           Government             Machines              Bank



                                                      Consumption
                                 Queue
                                                       good firms


                                                   Heterogeneous
                                                 consumption goods


    Figure 1: The model structure. Boxes in bold style represent heterogeneous agents populations.


from worker-level to firm-level unionisation/deunionization process.
   Our ABM, presenting an inherent non-linear strucure allows, in line with the model in
Freeman (1997), to identify two convergence states (statistical equilibrium) of the system,
namely a zero union density and a high (complete) union density. After accounting for the
process of rising and fall of unionism, we shall study the ensuing technological regimes
emerging in the two states in order to explore the deunionization/productivity slowdown
nexus.


3     The model
We build a general disequilibrium, stock-and-flow consistent agent-based model, populated
by heterogeneous firms and workers, who behave according to bounded-rational rules.
More specifically, we extend the existing Keynes Meets Schumpeter (K+S) model (Dosi et al.,
2010), including decentralized interactions among firms and workers in both the product
and the labour markets (Dosi et al., 2017, 2016), to introduce an endogenous process of work-
ers’ skills accumulation and variable number of firms.
    The two-sector economy is composed of three populations of heterogeneous agents, Ft1
capital-good firms (denoted by the subscript i), Ft2 consumption-good firms (denoted by
the subscript j), LS consumers/workers (denoted by the subscript `), plus a bank and the
Government. The basic structure of the model is depicted in Figure 1. Capital-good firms
invest in R&D and produce heterogeneous machine-tools whose productivity stochastically
evolves over time. Consumption-good firms combine machines bought from capital-good
firms and labour in order to produce an homogeneous product for consumers. There is
a minimal financial system represented by a single bank that provides credit to firms to
finance production and investment plans. Total credit is allocated to each firm according
to their own credit demand, which is constrained by their past sales, according to a loan to
value ratio rule. Credit supply is conversely completely elastic and unconstrained, adapting


                                                  5
to credit demand. Workers submit job applications to a subset of the firms. Firms hire
according to their individual adaptive demand expectations. The government levies taxes
on firms, pays unemployment benefits and set minimum wages, according to the policy
setting, absorbing excess profits and losses from the bank and keeping a relatively balanced
budget in the long run.
    In the following, we first summarize the functioning of the capital- and the consumption-
good sectors of our economy, with a focus on the entry process, and then present the labour
market dynamics, detailing the skills accumulation and deterioration mechanisms. Finally,
we describe the two alternative policy regime settings (and variations thereof) under which
the model has been explored.


3.1   The capital- and consumption-good sectors
The capital-good industry is the locus where innovation is endogenously generated in the
model. Capital-good firms develop new machine-embodied techniques or imitate the ones
of their competitors in order to produce and sell more productive and cheaper machinery.
On demand, they supply machine-tools to consumption-good firms, producing with labour
as the only input. Firms have access to bank loans to cover liquidity problems up to a limit.
The capital-good market is characterized by imperfect information and Schumpeterian com-
petition driven by technological innovation. Machine-tool firms signal the price and produc-
tivity of their machines to their current customers as well to a subset of potential new ones,
and invest a fraction of past revenues in R&D aimed at searching for new machines or copy
existing ones. Prices are set using a fixed mark-up over (labour) costs of production.
    Consumption-good firms produce a quality-differentiated single good employing capital
(composed by different “vintages” of machine-tools) and labour under constant returns to
scale. Desired production is determined according to adaptive (myopic) demand expecta-
tions. Given the actual inventories, if the current capital stock is not sufficient to produce the
desired output, firms order new machines to expand their installed capacity, paying in ad-
vance – drawing on their retained past profits or, up to some limit, on bank loans. Moreover,
they replace old machines according to a payback-period rule. As new machines embed
state-of-the-art technologies, the labour productivity of consumption-good firms increases
over time according to the mix of vintages of machines in their capital stocks. Consumption-
good firms choose in every period their capital-good supplier comparing the price and the
productivity of the machines they are aware of. Firms then fix their prices applying a vari-
able mark-up rule on their production costs, trying to balance profit margins and market
shares. More specifically, firms increase their mark-up and price whenever their market
share is expanding and vice versa. Imperfect information is also the normal state of the
consumption-good market so consumers do not instantaneously switch to the most com-
petitive producer. Market shares evolve according to a (quasi) replicator dynamics: more
competitive firms expand, while firms with relatively lower competitiveness levels shrink,
or exit the market.
    The process of entry-exit is entirely endogenous in both sectors. Firms leave the market
whenever their market shares get close to zero or their net assets turn negative (bankruptcy).
Conversely, the number of entrants stochastically depends on the number of incumbents and
on the prevailing financial conditions. When the sectoral liquidity-to-debt ratio is shrinking
new firms find it easier to enter, and vice versa.


                                                6
3.2   The labour market and skills dynamics
The labour market in the model implements a fully-decentralized search and hiring process
between workers and firms. The aggregate supply of labour LS is fixed and all workers are
available to be hired in any period. When unemployed, workers submit a certain number of
job applications to firms. Employed workers may apply or not for better positions, according
to the institutional set up. Larger firms have a proportionally higher probability of receiving
job applications, which are organized in separated, firm-specific application queues. The
labour market is characterized by imperfect information as firms only observe workers skills
and wage requests and workers are aware only of the wage offers they may receive.
     Firms decide about their individual labour demand based on the received orders (capital-
good sector), the expected demand (consumption-good sector), and the expected labour
productivity levels. Considering the number and the productivity of the already employed
workers, firms decide whether to (i) hire new workers, (ii) fire part of the existing ones, or
(iii) keep the existing labour force. Each hiring firm defines a unique wage offer for the
applicant workers, based on its internal conditions and the received applications. Workers
select the best offer they get from the firms to which they submitted applications, if any.
If already employed, depending on the institutional regime, they might quit the current
job if a better wage offer is received. There are no further rounds of bargaining between
workers and firms in the same period. Thus, firms have no guarantee of fulfilling all the
open positions, and no market clearing is ever guaranteed. Moreover, there are no firing or
hiring transaction costs.


3.3   Competition between unionised and non-unionised firms
We employ the model described above to study a process of evolutionary competition be-
tween two types of firms, which we call unionised and non unionised. The distinctive features
of the two types of firms are telegraphically sketched in Table 1.
    In unionised firms, whose market share are denoted as f2U , wages are insensitive to the
labour market conditions and indexed to the productivity gains of the firms. There is a
sort of covenant between firms and workers concerning “long term” employment: firms fire
only when their profits become negative, while workers are loyal to employers and do not
seek for alternative jobs. When hiring/firing, firms aim to keep the more skilled workers.
Labour market institutions contemplate a minimum wage fully indexed to aggregated econ-
omy productivity and unemployment benefits financed by taxes on profits. Conversely, in
non-unionised firms, whose market share are denoted as f2NU , flexible wages respond to un-
employment and decentralised market dynamics, and are set by means of an asymmetric
bargaining process where firms have the last say. Employed workers search for better paid
jobs with some positive probability and firms freely adjust (fire) their excess workforce ac-
cording to their planned production. Hiring/firing workers by firms are based on a balance
between skills and wages, using a simple payback comparison rule. Non unionised firms
operate under different labour institutions: minimum wage is only partially indexed to pro-
ductivity and unemployment benefits – and the associated taxes on profits – are relatively
lower.
    We simulate an artificial economy where at the beginning only unionised firms exist.
After 100 periods non unionised firms start to enter into the market according to an evo-
lutionary competition process. For the following 100 time steps, defined by the parameter


                                              7
ent2trdChg , non unionised firms enter with a fixed proportion with respect to unionised ones,
namely 50%, defined by the parameter ent2HldP er . This time window serves as a buffer in
order to let the new entrant firms growing and populating the market. After the critical
threshold is met, there exists a given probability for a new born firm of being non unionised,
being this probability the realization of a random draw from a uniform distribution bounded
                                     2
from below by a minimum floor fmin      and from above by the share of existing types of non-
                   2,N U
unionised firms ft−1 :

                                         fbNU        2      NU
                                           2 ,t = U[fmin , f2,t−1 ]                         (1)
    where fbNU                                                              NU
              2 ,t is the share of new entrant firms of type NU, while 1 − fb2 ,t is the share

of existing firms of type U. Firms compete in the product market according to their relative
competitiveness. In particular, Consumption-good prices are set applying a variable markup
µj,t on average unit costs:
                                        pj,t = (1 + µj,t )cj,t .                           (2)
Mark-up changes are regulated by the evolution of firm market shares (fj,t ):
                                                              
                                               fj,t−1 − fj,t−2
                           µj,t = µj,t−1 1 + υ                                              (3)
                                                    fj,t−2

with υ ∈ (0, 1). Firm market shares evolve according to a replicator dynamics:
                                                   
                                         Ej,t − Ēt          1 X
                     fj,t = fj,t−1 1 + χ             , Ēt = 2   Ej,t fj,t−1 ,              (4)
                                             Ēt            Ft j

where the firms relative competitiveness Ej,t is defined based on the individual normalized
                                 0
prices p0j,t , unfilled demands lj,t                        0
                                     and product qualities qj,t :
                                                      0
                             Ej,t = −ω1 p0j,t−1 − ω2 lj,t−1       0
                                                            − ω3 qj,t−1 ,                   (5)

being (ω1 , ω2 , ω3 ) ∈ R2 + parameters. Unfilled demand lj,t is the difference between the
demand Dj,t the firm gets and its production Qj,t plus inventories Nj,t , if positive:

                               lj,t = max [Dj,t − (Qj,t + Nj,t ), 0] .                      (6)

Product quality is defined as the average of the log skills s`,t of the firm’s workers:
                                            1        X
                                qj,t =                          log [s`,t−1 ] .             (7)
                                         Lj,t−1
                                                  `∈{Lj,t−1 }


   The skill level s`,t > 0 of each worker ` evolves over time as a multiplicative process:
                 
                 (1 + τT )s`,t−1 if employed in t − 1
          s`,t =        1                                                                   (8)
                           s`,t−1   if unemployed and not under training in t − 1,
                    1 + τU
where τT ≥ 0 is a parameter governing the learning rate while the worker is employed,
and τU ≥ 0 is the corresponding parameter accounting for the skills deterioration when a
worker is unemployed. As a consequence, when worker ` is employed her abilities improve
over time, as she becomes more experienced in her task or acquire new skills. Conversely,
unemployed workers lose skills. When a worker is hired, she immediately acquires the

                                                     8
minimum level of skills already present in the firm (the incumbent worker with the lowest
skills), if above her present level. Workers have a fixed working life: after a fixed number
of periods Tr , workers retire and are replaced by younger ones,1 whose skills are set to the
current minimum level of employed workers.
    Workers’ skills define their individual (potential) productivity A`,t :

                                             s`,t τ                  1 X
                                    A`,t =       A ,        s̄t =        s`,t ,                                (9)
                                              s̄t i                 LS `

where s̄t is the average worker skills level, Aτi is the “standard” productivity of the vintage of
the machinery which the worker operates, and LS , the (fixed) total labour supply. Thus, the
ratio s`,t /s̄t , the worker normalized skills, represents her ability to produce more (if s`,t > s̄t )
or less than the “standard” associated with a given machine technology.2

                                                                U NIONISED          N ON U NIONISED
          Wage sensitivity to unemployment                       low (rigid)          high (flexible)
          Labour firing restrictions                          under losses only           none
          Workers hiring priority                               higher skills        lower payback
          Workers firing priority                               lower skills         higher payback
          Unemployment benefits                                        yes            yes (reduced)
          Minimum wage productivity indexation                         full              partial

                          Table 1: Main characteristics of the two types of firms

    In order to better characterize contemporary labour markets we have also introduced
a profit-sharing mechanism, according to which firms performing better than the average
ones, distribute bonuses to their workers. If distributed, bonuses are equal for all workers
inside the firms, and they are distributed proportionally to firms net profits. Only those
firms whose profit rate is higher than the average one distribute bonuses:

                                                                      Πj,t  Π2
                                  Bj,t = ψ6 Πj,t (1 − tr) if               > t2                               (10)
                                                                      Kj,t  Kt

3.4    Timeline of events
In each simulation time step, firms and workers behavioural rules are applied according to
the following timeline:

   1. Machines ordered in the previous period (if any) are delivered;
   2. Capital-good firms perform R&D and signal their machines to consumption-good
      firms;
   3. Consumption-good firms decide on how much to produce, invest and hire/fire;
   1
     At the start of each simulation, initial workers ages are randomly draw in the integer range [1, Tr ] and all
start from the same skills level.
   2
     Note that, in this specification, the firm-level effective productivity Aj,t is a truly emergent property, re-
sulting together from the technical innovation dynamics (the introduction of new vintages Aτi ), the worker
skills evolution and the effective demand, which guides firms when deciding the capital stock dynamics and
the employed machine mix.


                                                        9
    4. To fulfil production and investment plans, firms allocate cash-flows and (if needed)
       borrow from bank;
    5. Firms send/receive machine-tool orders for the next period (if applicable);
    6. Workers (employed and unemployed) update their own skills;
    7. Firms open job queues and job-seekers send applications to them (“queue”);
    8. Wages are set (indexation or bargaining) and job vacancies are partly or totally filled;
    9. Government collects taxes and pays unemployment subsidies;
 10. Consumption-good market opens and the market shares of firms evolve according to
     competitiveness;
 11. Firms in both sectors compute their profits, pay wages, distribute bonuses and repay
     debt;
 12. Exit takes place, firms with near-zero market share or negative net assets are eschewed
     from the market;
 13. Prospective entrants decide to enter according to the markets conditions;
 14. Aggregate variables are computed and the cycle restarts.


4     Deunionization and productivity slowdown
Let us now focus on the process of deunionization. The model produces two endogenous
statistical equilibria in terms of market shares, or equivalently convergent states. In Figure
???? the stable statistical equilibrium of Invasion is presented: as shown by the light grey
area, representing the maximum and the minimum realizations, there are cases in which the
occurrence of complete invasion by non-unionised firms does not happen. The latter is the
result of the stochastic competition between the two types of firms as defined in Table 1 and
the sign of the path-dependency entailed by the model structure.

              Scenarios                     C ONDITIONS ON NU FIRMS
              Invasion           L OWER / HIGHER PAYBACK ( WAGE / SKILLS RATIO )
                                        WORKERS ARE HIRED / FIRED FIRST
              No Invasion    L OWER / HIGHER WAGE WORKERS ARE HIRED / FIRED FIRST

    Table 2: Model conditions for the equilibrium of unsuccessful invasion (No Invasion scenario).

    What are the conditions under which the process of invasion is not successful? Given
that the baseline configuration of non-unionised firms, as presented in Table 1, produces the
Invasion scenario, where unionised firms are expelled from the marker, we intend to under-
stand under what conditions the survival of unionised firms occurs. The modification to the
baseline configuration is presented in Table 2. The case of unsuccessfully invasion depends
on non-unionised firms becoming more cost-sensitive changing their hiring/firing order
scheme: under the new conditions they simply perform cost-minimization and hire/fire
lower/higher wage workers first. Differently from the baseline configuration presented in
Table 1, if non-unionised firms do not use a payback rule, evaluating the cost of labour rel-
ative to worker skills, they end up loosing competitive advantage, offering too much lower

                                                 10
quality products in the market. Note in fact that under Equation 5, the product quality af-
fects firm competitiveness, and quality, under Equation 7 depends on the average workers’
skills at the firm level.
    What type of wage patterns do emerge in the two scenarios and to what extent the preva-
lence of one of the two types of firm produces a less/more equal wage distributions? Figure
2(a) presents the pooled wage distribution of firm-level wages. As expected, the distribu-
tion of wages is extremely more concentrated and less dispersed in the No Invasion case,
wherein the majority of the firms are unionised ones. Not only in terms of remuneration
but also in terms of wage growth (see Figure 2(b)) the No Invasion scenario presents the
most compressed wage growth patterns, with a range of variation between [−0.05, 0.05].
The range of wage growth variation more than double in the Invasion scenario, explaining
the more skewed distribution in wage level.
    Figure 2(c) presents the time evolution of productivity in the two scenarios, by firm type,
separately accounting for the role of unionised and non unionised firms. Figure 2(c) does
not simply account for the absolute level of productivity dynamics by firm type but it is
also affected by the dynamic evolution of each type of firm in the market. Starting from the
Invasion scenario, non-unionised firms, that are the fraction largely populating the market,
present a higher level of productivity which decouples from the one of unionised firms be-
fore t = 300. The lower productivity level of the latter firms is however largely due to the
reduced numerous of unionised firms. Although largely invaded, the few unionised firms
remaining alive in the market, maintain a positive productivity level, and keep surviving.
The opposite patterns instead occur in the No Invasion scenario: in this case non-unionised
firms completely disappear from the market. A first side note is that, comparing in both
scenarios failing unionised vs non unionised firms, the former are more productive and re-
silient to the process of invasion.
    In Figure 2(d) it is shown the dynamics of productivity standard deviation. Looking
at the Invasion case, after the process of invasion occurred, unionised firms do present a
much lower between firm productivity differential. The latter evidence is also revealed by
the increasing standard deviation spurring after non unionised firms start populating the
market, at t = 100, in both scenarios: in general the variation of productivity across firms
is always higher between non unionised firms (dotted line), as expected from the empirical
evidence.
    Figure 3(a) presents the average productivity growth in the two scenarios comparing the
average value of the latter variable across 50MC runs in each of the two respective scenarios.
The invasion of non unionised firms entails a reduction of the average productivity growth
of 0.17%, signalling that the process of deunionization in our model causes a productivity
slowdown. Not only non unionised firms have in average a lower productivity, they also
produce products of lower quality (Figure 3(b)): the latter mechanism is due to the different
organization of labour market occurring in the two types of firms: in fact, in non unionised
firms, characterized by external flexibility, workers are in average less skilled. The lower
degree of workers competence maps into lower quality products, according to Equation 7.




                                              11
                                                                               Figure 2: Wage and productivity dynamics I - Distributional and time series analysis

                                                            (a) Pooled wage distribution
                                                        Pooled average wages distribution ( all experiments )                                                                                                                           Pooled
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (b)Pooled      wage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              average      growth
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      wage growth      rate distribution
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  distribution ( all experiments )
                        10.00




                                    Invasion                                                                                                                                                                   Invasion
                                    No Invasion                                                                                                                                                                No Invasion




                                                                                                                                                                                                    20.0
                                    Normal fits                                                                                                                                                                Laplace fits
                        5.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                    10.0
                        2.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                    5.0
                        1.00
     Binned density




                                                                                                                                                           Binned density

                                                                                                                                                                                                    2.0
                        0.50




                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.5
                        0.20




                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.2
                        0.10




                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.1
                        0.05
12




                                     −0.4                   −0.2                               0.0                               0.2                                                                                   −0.10                   −0.05                       0.00                         0.05          0.10

                                                                        log(normalized average real wage)                                                                                                                                              Normalized average real wage growth rate
                                                                          ( Consumption−goods sector )                                                                                                                                                     ( Consumption−goods sector )

                                                           Productivity bydynamics
                                                    (c) Productivity                      by firm type
                                                                          firm type ( all experiments )                                                                                                                        (d) Productivity      standard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Productivity standard           deviation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          deviation by firm type ( allby  firm type
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       experiments )
                        10




                                      Invasion                                                                                         Pre−change firms                                                          Invasion                                                                                            Pre−change firms
                                      No Invasion                                                                                      Post−change firms                                                         No Invasion                                                                                         Post−change firms




                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.5
                        8




                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.4
                                                                                                                                                           Standard deviation of log productivity
                        6




                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.3
     Log productivity

                        4




                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.1
                        2




                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.0
                        0




                                0                     100                               200                                300                       400                                                   0                             100                               200                                 300                 400

                                                                                         Time                                                                                                                                                                               Time
                                                       ( vertical dotted line: regime change / sector 2 only / MC runs = 100 )                                                                                                            ( vertical dotted line: regime change / sector 2 only / MC runs = 100 )
                                                                                       Figure 3: Market competition performance comparison between unionised and non-unionised firms

                                                                                            productivity
                                                                                (a) AverageProductivity growth growth                                                                                                                                                            (b) Product  quality
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Quality




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.8
                                                 0.020




                                                                                                                                                                                Weighted average product quality in sector 2
     Average productivity growth rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.7
                                                 0.015




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.6
                                                 0.010




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.5
                                                 0.005
13




                                                                            Invasion                                                           No Invasion                                                                                                     Invasion                                                           No Invasion


                                                          ( bar: median / box: 2nd−3rd quartile / whiskers: max−min / points: outliers / MC runs = 100 / period = 301 − 500 )                                                                ( bar: median / box: 2nd−3rd quartile / whiskers: max−min / points: outliers / MC runs = 100 / period = 301 − 500 )

                                                                          (c) Variation of price   consumer product
                                                                                              Inflation                                                                                                                                                                           concentration
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (d) MarketMarket concentration - HHI


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.025
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                 0.002




                                                                                                                                                                                Stadardized Herfindahl−Hirschman index in sector 2
     Consumer prices index average growth rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.020
                                                 0.000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.015
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                 −0.002




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.010




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                 −0.004




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.005




                                                                            Invasion                                                           No Invasion                                                                                                     Invasion                                                           No Invasion


                                                          ( bar: median / box: 2nd−3rd quartile / whiskers: max−min / points: outliers / MC runs = 100 / period = 301 − 500 )                                                                ( bar: median / box: 2nd−3rd quartile / whiskers: max−min / points: outliers / MC runs = 100 / period = 301 − 500 )
                                                                                                                                   Figure 4: Market concentration and income distribution dynamics

                                                                                               (a) Market
                                                                                                Market         concentration
                                                                                                       concentration ( all experiments )                                                                                                                                      (b) Bonus    share
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Bonus share       over GDP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ( all experiments )
                                               0.04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.025
                                                           Invasion                                                                                                                                                                        Invasion
                                                           No Invasion                                                                                                                                                                     No Invasion
     Standardized Herfindahl−Hirschman index

                                               0.03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.020
                                                                                                                                                                                             Total real bonuses on GDP
                                               0.02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.015
                                               0.01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.010
                                               0.00
14




                                                       0                              100                               200                                300                         400                                             0                              100                               200                                 300                        400

                                                                                                                         Time                                                                                                                                                                              Time
                                                                                       ( vertical dotted line: regime change / Sector 2 only / MC runs = 100 )                                                                                                                 ( vertical dotted line: regime change / MC runs = 100 )

                                                                                                 (c) Bonus  toto wage
                                                                                                        Bonus            ratio
                                                                                                                 wage ratio                                                                                                                                                 (d) Wage standard    deviation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Wages spread


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.30
                                               0.026




                                                                                                                                                            ●


                                                                                                                                                            ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.25
                                               0.024
     Average bonuses over wages in sector 2




                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                                                                            ●



                                                                                                                                                                                             Standard deviation of log wages
                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                               0.022




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ●
                                               0.020




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.15
                                               0.018




                                                                                       ●
                                                                                       ●
                                               0.016




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.10




                                                                                       ●
                                               0.014




                                                                                       ●




                                                                                   Invasion                                                            No Invasion                                                                                                 Invasion                                                              No Invasion


                                                                 ( bar: median / box: 2nd−3rd quartile / whiskers: max−min / points: outliers / MC runs = 100 / period = 301 − 500 )                                                             ( bar: median / box: 2nd−3rd quartile / whiskers: max−min / points: outliers / MC runs = 100 / period = 301 − 500 )
    Note that, in the Invasion scenario, non unionised firms prevail, independently of their
product quality. This is so because the latter firms leverage on the lower labour costs
due to wage and numerical flexibility, imposing lower prices and and taking advantage
on unionised ones. As a result the long-run price consumer index presents a deflationary
spiral, and is much lower than the case of unionised firms (Figure 3(c)). The type of mar-
ket structure that emerges in the two cases is rather different: in fact, the degree of market
concentration is much higher in the invasion case, with fewer firms appropriating a higher
fraction of the market, as the performance comparison of the HH index shows in Figure 3(d).
The latter finding is consistent with an average sales growth dynamics more heterogeneous
in the invasion case, with few firms experiencing gains and the rest experiencing losses.
    The temporal dynamics of the HH index is presented in Figure 4(a): note that the degree
of market concentration increases in both scenarios as non-unionised firms start to enter
into the market. Once the process of competition between the two types is over, the index
stabilizes in both scenarios, with a considerably higher level in the Invasion case. Which
are the implication of the two different industrial structures? They are reflected, among
other variables, in the different fraction of bonuses distributed to workers. In fact, in the
Invasion scenario the bonus share over GDP is much higher, entailed by the higher distance
characterizing the total profits of the top performing firms and the average ones (Figure
4(b)). A higher share of bonuses and lower wages, results into a higher bonus-to-wage ratio
(Figure 4(c)), which in turn is reflected into a more skew wage distribution, as shown by the
higher wage standard deviation in the Invasion scenario ( Figure 4(d)). Table 3 presents a
summary of our performance comparison.

                                               Baseline[1]   Ratio[2] p-val[2]
                             GDP growth        0.01              1.17    0.00
                     Productivity growth       0.01              1.16    0.00
                                  Quality      1.52              1.13    0.00
                                 Inflation     -0.00            -0.01    0.00
                    Market concentration       0.02              0.41    0.00
                 Wages standard deviation      0.22              0.49    0.00
                      Bonus to wage ratio      0.02              0.82    0.00

Table 3: Summary statistics of the performance comparison. Experiments: [1] Invasion, [2] No Inva-
sion ( numbers in brackets indicate the experiment number / H0: no difference with baseline / MC
runs = 100 / period = 301 - 500 )




5    Shift-and-share decomposition
After this inspection, we now move to better account for the process of productivity growth
and reallocation across firms. We therefore perform a productivity decomposition on the
simulated data, according to Foster et al. (2001). The decomposition reads as in Equation
11 below, where fj,t and πj,t define employment shares and labour productivity of sector
                        P
2 only, and log πt−1 =     j fj,t−1 log πj,t−1 . The first term in this decomposition represents
a within plant component based on plant-level changes, weighted by initial shares in the
industry. The second term represents a between-plant component that reflects changing


                                               15
shares, weighted by the deviation of initial plant productivity from the initial industry in-
dex. The third term represents a cross (i.e., covariance-type) term. The last two terms repre-
sent the contribution of entering and exiting plants, respectively. In this decomposition, the
between-plant term and the entry and exit terms involve deviations of plant-level produc-
tivity from the initial industry index. For a continuing plant, this implies that an increase in
its share contributes positively to the between-plant component only if the plant has higher
productivity than average initial productivity for the industry. Similarly, an exiting plant
contributes positively only if the plant exhibits productivity lower than the initial average,
and an entering plant contributes positively only if the plant has higher productivity than
the initial average.

                           W IT HIN                        BET W EEN                        CROSS
                  z
                  X            }|        { zX             }|              { zX     }|        {
    ∆ log πt2 =           fj,t−1 ∆ log πj,t + ∆fj,t (log πj,t−1 − log πt−1 ) + ∆ log πj,t ∆fj,t +
                      j                       j                                     j
                  |                                              {z                                 }
                                                      IN CU M BEN T S
                                                                                                        (11)
                                EN T RY                                EXIT
                  z
                  X                 }|             { X  z             }|               {
                          fj,t (log πj,t − log πt−1 ) −   fj,t−1 (log πj,t−1 − log πt−1 )
                      j                                j

    Table 4 splits the overall productivity growth documented into the five components of
the FHK decomposition. The decomposition exercise allows in fact to compare the sign and
the intensity of the above components. Figure 5(a) presents the results for all types of firms
during the transient period (t = 270 − 300) of coexistence and then separately analyses the
process of reallocation for unionised (Figure 5(b)) and non unionised firms (Figure 5(c)).
Note that the analysis of the transient phase allows us to understand productivity realloca-
tion when both type of firms do coexist.
    Interesting properties do emerge from this analysis. (1) In line with the empirical ev-
idence, the within component does always account for the higher fraction of productivity
growth, signalling that the process of productivity growth is mostly explained by the accu-
mulation of internal firms capabilities. (2) The between component is lower and positive in
both regime, the cross effect is negative, and higher in the No Invasion case. (3) The cross
effect becomes positive when using market instead of employment shares: the latter find-
ing is due to the fact that market sales move in the same direction of productivity growth,
while in case of employment shares, more productive firms reduce their employment de-
mand. (4) The entry-exit components play a more negligible roles in the long-run, while they
are rather important in the short-run. (5) In both scenarios, the exit of unionised firms reduces
productivity growth to a higher degree than the exit of non unionised firms. (6) During the
entire simulation period the No Invasion scenario exhibits always a higher degree of the
all components, irrespectively of the type of reallocation used, in line with the slowdown
of productivity induced by the invasion of non-unionised firms. (7) The selection process,
including all components of the decomposition but the within one, is much higher in the
No Invasion scenario, signalling that in the latter case competition favour more productive
firms.
    The latter battery of analysis we undertake shows the degree of correlation between pro-
ductivity and wage. In particular, following Bagger et al. (2014) we regress wage level on
productivity levels across firms. The latter regression allows to capture the degree according

                                                            16
                            Figure 5: FHK decomposition of productivity growth - Transient phase

                                                                      (a) All firms
                                                    FHK decomposition of productivity growth ( all firms )


                                                                                                                                 Within
                                                                                                                                 Between
                                                                                                                                 Cross
                                                                                                                                 Entry




                            10
                                                                                                                                 Exit

Labor productivity growth

                            5
                            0
                            −5
                            −10




                                             Invasion                                                              No Invasion

                                                 ( Share = labor / MC runs = 20 / Window = 8 periods / Period = 271−300 )
                                                                       ( Consumption−goods sector )



                                                               (b) Unionised firms
                                              FHK decomposition of productivity growth ( pre−change firms )


                                                                                                                                 Within
                                                                                                                                 Between
                                                                                                                                 Cross
                            4




                                                                                                                                 Entry
                                                                                                                                 Exit
                            2
Labor productivity growth

                            0
                            −2
                            −4




                                             Invasion                                                              No Invasion

                                                 ( Share = labor / MC runs = 20 / Window = 8 periods / Period = 271−300 )
                                                                       ( Consumption−goods sector )



                                                          (c) Non Unionised firms
                                             FHK decomposition of productivity growth ( post−change firms )


                                                                                                                                 Within
                                                                                                                                 Between
                                                                                                                                 Cross
                                                                                                                                 Entry
                            10




                                                                                                                                 Exit
Labor productivity growth

                            5
                            0
                            −5




                                             Invasion                                                              No Invasion

                                                 ( Share = labor / MC runs = 20 / Window = 8 periods / Period = 271−300 )
                                                                       ( Consumption−goods sector )



                                                                               17
Table 4: Productivity growth decomposition - Sample size = 934019 firms / Window = 8 periods /
MC runs = 20 / Period = 301 - 500

              INVASION        Total Within Between Cross Entry Exit Error
                  Overall     23.00  17.54     7.66 -5.36 -0.76 2.09  2.71
                     (s.e.)   1.15    1.35     0.65  0.67  0.36 0.60  0.39
          Unionised firms     -1.73   0.14    -0.14 -0.05  0.38 -1.96 0.03
                     (s.e.)   0.21    0.03     0.17  0.03  0.09 0.23  0.01
      Non Unionised firms     24.73  17.40     7.80 -5.30 -1.14 4.05  2.83
                     (s.e.)   1.21    1.34     0.66  0.68  0.30 0.45  0.42
          NO INVASION         Total Within Between Cross Entry Exit Error
                  Overall     25.94  20.40     8.05 -7.85  1.26 0.13  4.17
                     (s.e.)   0.61    1.07     0.27  0.78  1.07 1.34  0.59
         Unionised firms      30.89  20.37    10.17 -7.82 -0.59 4.12  4.89
                     (s.e.)   1.06    1.09     0.57  0.80  0.43 0.74  0.86
      Non unionised firms     -4.95   0.03    -2.12 -0.03  1.84 -3.98 0.03
                     (s.e.)   0.88    0.07     0.58  0.03  0.68 0.74  0.03


to which high-productive firms are also high-wage firms and conversely, the extent to which
low-productive firms are also low-wage firms. Results are presented in Table 5 which shows
a parametric estimation for 20 MC realizations. The No Invasion scenario is characterised by
a lower productivity-wage correlation, signalling that the wage-productivity nexus is more
flat and equal across firms: a more compressed wage structure implies that wages are less
sensitive to productivity variations, in both direction. Conversely, in the Invasion case, the
wage structure is much more linked to the productivity dynamics: productivity gains are
appropriated by those workers employed in more productive firms, conversely workers
employed in less performing firms, enjoy relatively less productivity gains.

Table 5: Monte Carlo regressions summary - Sample size = 10393 firms / MC runs = 20 / Cross-
section = 300 - 304 by 4

                              Scenario     Invasion   No Invasion
                              Intercept        1.77          4.49
                              (s.e.)           0.31          0.21
                              Beta             0.63          0.14
                              (s.e.)           0.06          0.04
                              Std. error       0.05          0.01
                              (s.e.)           0.00          0.00
                              p-value          0.00          0.08
                              (s.e.)           0.00          0.06
                              R2               0.36          0.24
                              (s.e.)           0.03          0.05
                              Firms          296.80        313.05
                              (s.e.)           8.92         10.50




                                              18
6    Conclusions
This paper presents an ABM which endogenously accounts for the process of deunioniza-
tion. The process of deunionziation occurs following a bottom-down perspective, according
to the spurt model first investigated in (Freeman, 1997). Unionised and non-unionised firms
do compete in the product market arena in terms of their relative efficiency, affected by
prices, quality and (excess) quantity variables. The model produces two possible statistical
equilibrium patterns: a stable case of unsuccessful invasion by non-unionised firms, and a
stable case of stable invasion by non-unionised firms.
    The results from our analysis provide support in favour of the efficient dynamics fos-
tered by a “Social market economy”, populated by unionised firms, wherein the process
of innovation, and therefore productivity growth is triggered by the accumulation of firms
level capabilities, workers skills, incremental innovation and an egalitarian wage structure.
Under these conditions, the process of firms competition in the product market features a
positive selection dynamics, with high-productivity firms prevailing upon low-productivity
ones. At the opposite end of the spectrum, a “Free market economy”, populated by non-
unionised firms ensuing a more dispersed wage structure, results into a slowdown of market
selection, with low-productivity firms remaining in the market, therefore reducing average
productivity and increasing its standard deviation. In this latter case, the exit dynamics neg-
atively contributes to the average growth of productivity, such as the negatively contributes
the cross effect, capturing the covariation between market share and productivity. .


Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the support by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation programme under grant agreement No. 649186 - ISIGrowth, and by Fundação
de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (FAPESP), process No. 2015/24341-7.



References
Bagger, J., B. J. Christensen, and D. T. Mortensen (2014). Wage and labor productivity disper-
  sion: The roles of total factor productivity, labor quality, capital intensity, and rent sharing.
  In 2014 Meeting Papers.
Barth, E., A. Bryson, J. C. Davis, and R. Freeman (2016). It’s where you work: Increases in the
  dispersion of earnings across establishments and individuals in the united states. Journal
  of Labor Economics 34(S2), S67–S97.
Barth, E., K. O. Moene, and F. Willumsen (2014). The scandinavian model—an interpretation.
  Journal of Public Economics 117, 60–72.
Berlingieri, G., P. Blanchenay, and C. Criscuolo (2017). Great divergences: The growing
  dispersion of wages and productivity in oecd countries.
Bottazzi, G., G. Dosi, N. Jacoby, A. Secchi, and F. Tamagni (2010). Corporate performances
  and market selection: some comparative evidence. Industrial and Corporate Change 19(6),
  1953–1996.




                                                19
Bryson, A., R. Freeman, R. Gomez, and P. Willman (2017). The twin track model of employee
  voice: An anglo-american perspective on union decline and the rise of alternative forms
  of voice.
Davis, S. J., J. C. Haltiwanger, S. Schuh, et al. (1998). Job creation and destruction. MIT Press
  Books 1.
Decker, R. A., J. Haltiwanger, R. S. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2016). Declining business dy-
  namism: What we know and the way forward. American Economic Review 106(5), 203–07.
Dosi, G., G. Fagiolo, and A. Roventini (2010). Schumpeter meeting Keynes: A policy-friendly
  model of endogenous growth and business cycles. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Con-
  trol 34(9), 1748–1767.
Dosi, G., D. Moschella, E. Pugliese, and F. Tamagni (2015, Oct). Productivity, market selec-
  tion, and corporate growth: comparative evidence across us and europe. Small Business
  Economics 45(3), 643–672.
Dosi, G., M. C. Pereira, A. Roventini, and M. E. Virgillito (2016). The Effects of Labour
  Market Reforms upon Unemployment and Income Inequalities: an Agent Based Model.
  Socio-economic Review (2016/27).
Dosi, G., M. C. Pereira, A. Roventini, and M. E. Virgillito (2017). When more Flexibility Yields
  more Fragility: the Microfoundations of Keynesian Aggregate Unemployment. Journal of
  Economic Dynamics and Control.
Dunne, T., L. Foster, J. Haltiwanger, and K. R. Troske (2004). Wage and productivity dis-
  persion in united states manufacturing: The role of computer investment. Journal of Labor
  Economics 22(2), 397–429.
Foster, L., C. Grim, and J. Haltiwanger (2016). Reallocation in the great recession: cleansing
  or not? Journal of Labor Economics 34(S1), S293–S331.
Foster, L., J. C. Haltiwanger, and C. J. Krizan (2001). Aggregate productivity growth: Lessons
  from microeconomic evidence. In New developments in productivity analysis, pp. 303–372.
  University of Chicago Press.
Freeman, R. B. (1984). Longitudinal analyses of the effects of trade unions. Journal of labor
  Economics 2(1), 1–26.
Freeman, R. B. (1997). Spurts in union growth: Defining moments and social processes.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hibbs Jr, D. A. and H. Locking (2000). Wage dispersion and productive efficiency: Evidence
  for Sweden. Journal of Labor Economics 18(4), 755–782.
Hutchinson, J. and D. Persyn (2012, Apr). Globalisation, concentration and footloose firms:
  in search of the main cause of the declining labour share. Review of World Economics 148(1),
  17–43.
Karabarbounis, L. and B. Neiman (2013). The global decline of the labor share. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 129(1), 61–103.
Lee, D. S. (1999). Wage inequality in the united states during the 1980s: Rising dispersion or
  falling minimum wage? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(3), 977–1023.
McGowan, M. A., D. Andrews, and V. Millot (2017). Insolvency regimes, zombie firms and
  capital reallocation.
Schwellnus, C., A. Kappeler, and P.-A. Pionnier (2017). Decoupling of wages from produc-
  tivity.
Syverson, C. (2017, May). Challenges to mismeasurement explanations for the us produc-
  tivity slowdown. Journal of Economic Perspectives 31(2), 165–86.


                                               20
