             The “Chicago Boys” intellectual transfer: a Gramscian interpretation

                                                                   Ian Coelho de Souza Almeida
                                                   Doutorando em Economia pelo Cedeplar/UFMG


                                           ABSTRACT

In September 11, 1973, the Chilean army, commanded by General Augusto Pinochet, killed the
democratically elected socialist president Salvador Allende. Recognizing the Chicago Boys as the
organic intellectuals of neoliberalism in Chile, we describe how they were a key element to transform
Chilean society in the attempt to form a Historical Block after Salvador Allende’s overthrown. This
allow us to consider not only the ideological, but also the role of class struggle.

Keywords: Chicago Boys; Historical Block; History of Ideas; Gramsci


                                            RESUMO

Em 11 de setembro de 1973 foi assassinado o presidente socialista democraticamente eleito, Salvador
Allende, pelo Exército chileno comandado pelo General Augusto Pinochet. A partir do
reconhecimento dos Chicago Boys como intelectuais orgânicos do neoliberalismo no Chile, nosso
trabalho descreve como esses foram elemento central na tentativa de implementar um novo Bloco
Histórico após o golpe contra Allende. Com isso, podemos tanto observar a transferência ideológica
que ocorreu no período quanto o papel da luta de classes.

Palavras-chave: Chicago Boys; Bloco Histórico; História das ideias; Gramsci

JEL Code: B51; N16; N46
Área 2 – Economia Política
THE “CHICAGO               BOYS”        INTELLECTUAL             TRANSFER:          A     GRAMSCIAN
INTERPRETATION


1 INTRODUCTION

          In September 11, 1973, the Chilean army, commanded by General Augusto Pinochet, killed
the democratically elected socialist president Salvador Allende. Right after the coup, a great shift in
social and economic policies occurs dismantling all the measures taken by the popular government
and by its moderate antecessors as well. It is highly acknowledge that this new economic agenda
adopted by General Pinochet after the coup in Chile can be directly traced back to the “Chicago
Boys”. Those economic advisers Pinochet resorted to were the newly arrived Chileans that made part
of a graduate exchange program at the University of Chicago’s School of Economics. The Chicago
Boys implemented several policies that would be labeled “neoliberal” and replicated throughout the
world. The focus of our work is to understand these economists as what Gramsci called “Organic
Intellectuals”.
          Organic intellectuals1 play a major role in the consolidation of a “Historical Block” (HB) –
“[A] durable alliance of class forces organized by a class (or class fraction) which can exercise
political, intellectual and moral leadership over the dominant classes and popular masses” (Jessop,
1997:570). The intellectuals are the ones who forge and spread the ideology that will make possible
to build a consensus in the society around the referred leadership. Recognizing the Chicago Boys as
the organic intellectuals of neoliberalism in Chile, we describe how they were key elements to
transform Chilean society and to form a new Historical Block, in the form of “passive revolution”,
after a socialist attempt of rupture. Using Gramsci’s ideas we are able to contribute to understand a
turbulent period in Chile’s history, which includes an attempt of a “legal route to socialism” (1970-
73), a coup, and a seventeen years long military dictatorship (1973-89).

1.1 GRAMSCI AND HISTORY

          Although Antonio Gramsci’s writings became known outside Italy only during the 1960’s
(Portelli, 1977), he produced his most important work, the Prison notebooks, while incarcerated from
1926 to 1937. One example is Robert Cox’s Hegemony and International Relations: An Essay in
Method (1983), the first to bring a Gramscian perspective to the international relations studies
(Germain and Kenny, 1998). This happened almost 50 years after the death of the author, and
exemplifies how slow the dissemination of his thought was.
          The Gramscian theory is part of Historical Materialism and represents a major step forward
regarding the relations between the structure and superstructure. He departs from mechanical
materialism and the exclusively focused interpretations on structural conditions of revolution (Femia,
1975). For him the superstructure has an active nature that interact with the structure forming the HB
(D’Assunção, 2010).
          The structure refers to the relations of production, usually seen as the mode of production of
a particular stage of development, as discussed in Williams (2011:46). However, while Gramsci
considers the structure as static, or at least as history’s less variable element (Portelli, 1977), he does
not see it as mere production of material objects, but as a space for the reproduction of global social
relations (Vasconcelos, Silva and Schmaller, 2013). The superstructure on the other hand is formed
by “political society” and “civil society”, representing the space of the State 2 and the space of ideas.
This historical materialism differs from orthodox Marxism while avoiding the complete
determination of the superstructure by the structure. Here the ideas also have the role of molding the
structure at some level, without resulting in idealism. “Hence linking ‘objectivity’ to human
consciousness and the intersubjective constitution of the social world” (Morton, 2003a:136).
          Additionally, Gramsci’s account of history departs from other theories of history, such as
the revisionist method (also known as austere historicism). To this method, the idea is that we need
to understand thought within a precise context, and that it does not last indefinitely. There is no
significance in past ideas for the revisionists historians. Furthermore, there must be a focus on what
the author or authors were consciously trying to say (FEMIA, 1981). Gramsci’s absolute historicism
on the other hand claims that a philosopher cannot ignore his precedents (idem) (i.e. ideologies of the
ruling classes), which coexist in the different levels of thought.

                          “As a result, the appropriateness of the position that past ideas, questions, and philosophies
                         still have a bearing on the present, and may thus transcend social context and ‘speak’ to us,
                         may be established. […]Although a theory is certainly linked to the social relations of a
                         particular epoch, some problems are perennial because underlying thoughts about a range of
                         concrete particulars do recur.” (Morton, 2003a:131)

          The class (or fraction of it) that dominates the contemporary HB is responsible for the
philosophy, i.e. the leading ideology, formulated by their own organic intellectuals. Nevertheless, the
farther other classes are from the ruling one, the more their thought will be composed by past
dominant ideologies from the formers HB or other forms of thinking. The Folklore is the further one
class can get from the philosophy, and the common sense is the middle of the road3 (Portelli, 1977).
          Hence, Gramsci’s analysis will allow us to understand the process of constitution of a new
era in Chile, a new hegemony and a new HB as a dispute of classes. We argue that other works neglect
this facet of history4 or focus on different groups of intellectuals, missing some peculiarities of this
process5. This article intend to show how, Pinochet’s dictatorship, started as a “war of maneuver”
working its way to a “war of position” in a passive revolution, and how the philosophy of the new
Historical Block suffered great influence form abroad, although not connected to any prevailing HB.

2 CHILEAN ECONOMY AND THE FORMER HISTORICAL BLOCKS

         A stable Historical Block is only possible through the existence of hegemony, created by the
consensus among classes. On the other hand, coercion, or the rule of political society, may allow
domination, although in a less stable way. The first one is an organic connection between structure
and superstructure made possible by the organic intellectuals of a certain class (or part of it), i.e. it is
a dispute in the civil society, while the last is a domination using the State apparatus (Portelli, 1977).
“These two levels correspond on the one hand to the function of ‘hegemony’ which the dominant
group exercises throughout society and on the other hand to that of "direct domination" or command
exercised through the State and ’juridical’ government”. (Gramsci, 1992:12). The HB either can be
an independent constitution from inside the country (or another level of analyses or can be a result of
ideological transfer from abroad. As previously asserted, the Chilean case fits in the second approach.
         From 1930 onwards, after profound political and economic crises, Chile changed to being
close to a Transnational Historical Block, as identified by Bob Jessop. Also called the “Atlantic
Fordism” international HB, which

                         Economically […] aimed to secure full employment in relatively closed national economies
                         mainly through demand-side management and regulation of collective bargaining; socially it
                         aimed to generalize norms of mass consumption so that all its citizens shared the fruits of
                         economic growth (and so contributed to effective domestic demand) and to promote forms
                         of collective consumption that supported a Fordist growth dynamic” (Jessop, 1997:572).

          Although Latin American countries did not foster all those practices, such as “generalized
norms of mass consumption”, the increasing role of the State on leading the economy, for example,
was true. After 1929, in LA, “the state machine was conceived as the higher authority which could
integrate and orient internal interests, bolster their economic and political weakness, and take the lead,
on an equal footing, with the external private and public nuclei of power” (ECLAC, 1985:3). The
efforts towards industrialization, ECLAC’s Import Substitution Model (specifically during the 1950s
and the 1960s), and the role of the state in the economy spread through LA. It was no different in
Chile.
          The ECLAC was established in 1948 in Santiago, Chile. Back then, the main concern of the
ECLAC centered on inflation (Baer, 1967). This subject placed the ECLAC and the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) policies recommendations on antagonistic sides.
          The economists connected to ECLAC’s thought are known as “structuralists”. They
advocated that inflation (the major discussion in LA’s economics) is part of the growth process. Thus,
shock policies should not be implemented, but gradualist policies, given that monetary and fiscal
restraints are not fully effective and harmful to growth and employment (Campos, 1967). On the other
hand, the monetarists, closer to the IMF, defended the fiscal and monetary restraints as the solution
to the distortions in the prices and exchange rates caused by the inflationary process. Those distortions
should be held fast in order to avoid explosive tensions that could damage the growth even further
(Ibidem).
          The IMF considered the distortion between prices of domestic and foreign goods as caused
by inflation. This distortion led to an unfavorable balance of payments, exacerbated by the fixed
exchange rate policy. To Furtado and the structuralists on the other hand, the structural changes
created by the industrialization process should be blame for those distortions and inflation
(Boianovsky, 2012)6. More precisely, the supply was inelastic because there was structural
bottlenecks, normally in the agricultural sector (Waschter, 1979) that causes inflation. Import
inelasticity was also to be blamed (Baer, 1967). There are other sensitive points, such as the role
monetarists attributed to inflation distorting the allocation of resources in favor of the less risky and
more unproductive activities (Ibidem), but we will not go further in this analysis. For a more complete
discussion over this matter, see Baer and Kerstenetzky (1964), Fishlow (1986) and Love (1996).
          In the Chilean case, the 1929 crisis caused a fall in mineral commodities prices and created
incentives to begin an industrialization process, creating a national, State-owned industry (Cáceres,
1982). Nevertheless, since the 1950s, economists already pointed out the fragility of this model, with
severe consequences to fiscal debt, migration, agriculture, etc., which accelerated the inflationary
process (Correa, 1985). Following what happened in all Latin America (Foxley, 1983), after 1950,
there were attempts to implement monetary policies. This period differs from the bigger wave of
monetarists policies of the 1970s associated with financial stabilization. During the 70s this happened
more consistently and persistently, mainly in Chile after 1973 and then (in a smaller degree) in
Uruguay and Argentina, in 1974 and 1976 respectively (Foxley, 1983). This scenario differs from
similar attempts in the 1950s due to the lack of structural change and long-term goals of the last
(Ibidem).
          From 1956 to 1958, for example, the Chilean government hired the American consultant
firm Klein-Sachs with the mission to decelerate the 77.5% inflation (Lüders, 2012). The implemented
fiscal and monetary policies succeeded in controlling the inflationary process for a short period7.
          The 1958 elected President Jorge Alessandri made an initial attempt to deepen these changes,
but political pressures stopped him. In that moment, not only ECLAC had a great influence in the
country but also it was the beginning of John F. Kennedy’s Alliance or Progress (Cáceres, 1982:43-
44). In order to avoid the communist treat in Latin America, the Alliance for Progress had an
ambitious plan that included not only the habitual price stability, growth and domestic savings, but
also income distribution, some agrarian reform, low-cost housing and trade diversification (Michaels,
1976:75). The foreign aid influence can be measured by the 1.5 billion dollars Chile received between
1961 and 1970, being the second country in per capita income aid (Ibidem:76). The agency’s goals
however, would match better with the next president, which represented an alternative to the already
popular Salvador Allende.
          Supposing that Chile was part of this Atlantic Fordism HB, we can understand 1958’s
president Alessandri abandonment of austerity policies as concessions to auxiliary groups that were
close to other ideologies as those of ECLAC or non-Marxist left. Alessandri, and the groups he
represented, attempted to diverge from the HB ideology, but they had no support, being drawn back
to what he considered populist and demagogic policies (Cáceres, 1982). They were not able to create
a new consensus. In turn, the next president, the Christian Democrat Eduardo Frei Montalva (1964-
1970), was closely connected to populism (Coelho, 2000). Unlike Marxist revolution or conservative
capitalism, his “Revolution in Liberty” aimed to merge structural changes and the maintenance of
democracy. Frei adopted developmentalist policies and even started land reform, therefore
maintaining the consensus around the HB.
          Eduardo Frei Montalva election, according to Fontaine (1993), was the first that left wing
candidates benefitted from the previous years’ huge rural-urban migration. The rural population had
a smaller participation in the electoral process, but when they migrated to urban centers, they usually
became involved in the political process, such as joining working class unions (Fointaine, 1993).
Nevertheless, elite groups were able to stop Montalva’s populist measures (Valdés, 2008:218), but
they could not avoid the radicalization in Chilean politics that resulted in the election of the socialist
Salvador Allende (which benefited from the migration process as well). As Valdés pointed out, the
number of electors rose from 1.5 to 2.5 million people (or from 15 to 30% of population) from 1958
to 1970. The number of unions doubled as well.
          The Montalva’s term was widely supported while able to combine “a populist desire for
social justice and the corporative institutions […] the corporativist fraction of officislistas
representing the urban industrial managerial wing of the party gave increased production and
technical efficiency a priority over social justice” (Michaels, 1976:79). This was part of his project
named “Revolution in Liberty”, which fitted “the Alliance for Progress’ vision of a revolutionary
peaceful development” (Ibidem). During this period, the Chilean State sought to integrate peripheral
groups socially and economically (Aravena, 1997:53). Frei Montalva, mainly after 1965, needed the
Alliance financial support in order to keep this bold project. However, after 1967, a year that united
rising inflation, low growth and falling prices of copper (Chile’s main export product) Chile needed
even more. This time however, according to Michaels (1976:82-83), the US was less concerned with
the Alliance’s goals and pressed for fiscal restraint. The World Bank and the IMF urged that Chile
reduced the agrarian reform and public housing budged, in addition to other reforms, in order to
reduce inflation (Ibidem: 89). The government lost its popular basis paving the way for Salvador
Allende.
          After Salvador Allende took office in 1970, there were fundamental changes. After winning
the election, the new government imposed a major social and economic rupture, as stated in its
electoral program. Allende brought under state control a major part of Chile’s economy, including
banks and the once foreign-owned copper mines, deepened the land reform (dissolving the latifundia
system) and implemented short-term measures benefiting the popular sectors. “The strategy involved
the brief rupturing of an elitist development model of dependent capitalism, and its replacement with
a more redistributive and participatory state orientation organized around social property” (Barton,
2004:9-10). His intention was to restructure power relations to which the country’s economic interests
would have to adjust to (Fleet, 1973).

                        In adopting this strategy Allende was taking a calculated risk. Measures favorable to the
                        popular classes might well stimulate production through increased demand. But over the long
                        run the burden of government policies would have to be borne by the country’s middle
                        sectors, long the controlling element in national politics. […] Allende would have to hope
                        that economic conditions for the middle sectors would not deteriorate too rapidly, that
                        political forces representing them would remain divided, and that in any event the middle
                        class would retain its traditionally constitutional political inclinations. (Ibidem:768-9)

         It is important to highlight a crucial question about Chile’s elections. There was no need for
absolute majority. Allende took office with less than 37% of the valid votes while Jorge Alessandri
obtained 34.9% (Conservative) and Radomiro Tomic 27.8% (Christian Democrat). Therefore, even
if we consider the votes as a proxy to actual support of a major ideological change, Allende was not
even close to a consensus. The rapid move ahead of Popular Unit’s social objectives, the sharp fall of
growth rates, and rise in inflation in 1971(up to 162% for the year) increased hostility and moved the
Christian Democrats from a neutral position to full-fledge opposition (Ibidem).
         Even though Allende’s/Popular Unity’s short government was not a dictatorship or used
systematic violence to silence opposition, its attempt to institute a new Historical Block in Chile with
socialist tendencies, is considered a war of maneuver. Through democratic elections, they took power
after a moment of weakness and decreasing popularity of the former HB. There was never a
hegemony, no control over civil society during Allende’s term. This can be seen as a lack of
preparation of subordinate classes that allowed a quick recovery by the ruling class. They did not
seized the moment of an organic crisis in the HB, i.e. the moment where the organic intellectuals no
longer represent the ruling class (Portelli, 1977).
          The gradual disappearance of market mechanisms along with the broad nationalization of
private companies and the land reform increased the right wing radicalization. The business owners
started to retain products and practice terrorism in order to wreak havoc and destabilize Allende’s
Government (Valdés, 2008; Fischer, 2009)8. Meanwhile, even before the coup, the Chicago Boys
gained relevance in the formulation of the opposition’s economic plan that could sustain a possible
new government, since they represented a major rupture with socialism and the former populism as
well (Valdés, 2008). These economists represented a complete different paradigm in comparison not
just to Allende’s policies, but also to the former ECLAC structuralist influences. However, the
Chicago Boys were not the leading intellectuals right after the coup yet, as we will see next.
          The ideological radicalization and the alliance between the centre and the right constituted
the support that made possible the military coup. The newly established dictatorship had the will and
the power to conduct the policies they wanted with much less political pressure than before, at least
from dissidents groups. The Chilean students from the University of Chicago had an important role,
as we intend to show. Therefore, the relation between the Chicage and the Pontifícia Universidad
Católica de Chile (PUCC), which started in the 1950s, became central to Chile’s future.

3 THE CREATION OF THE CHICAGO BOYS AND THEIR ROLE ON A NEW
HISTORICAL BLOCK

         An import fact to our discussion is the recognition of the developments of the post-war
Chicago School of Economics (CSE) as a particular school of thought and opposed to the main
authors inside the American academy. It was after this period that the agreements involving this
university and the PUCC started (late 1950s), and this new thinking of the CSE had a direct influence
on the politics adopted during the Pinochet’s dictatorial regime.
         Founded in 1892, with James Lawrence Laughlin as its first director, the Department of
Economics of the University of Chicago has a history of political conservatism and economic
orthodoxy (Valdés, 2008). Nevertheless, the arrival of Milton Friedman in 1946 marked a turning
point9. He was the leader of what latter would be called the anti-Keynesian revolution. His influence
is so important that Van Overtveldt (2007) divided the evolution of the CSE between the Pre-
Friedman Era, Friedman Era and Post-Friedman Era.
         The Friedman Era, (1946-76, his time as a teacher there), was marked by a specialization on
neoclassical price theory, partial equilibrium and empiricism (Van Overtveldt, 2007). Although Van
Overtveldt stressed the major importance of Friedman inside the CSE, Valdés (2008) pointed out the
role of previous professors, as Frank Knight and Henry Simons, not only in price theory but also in
adopting the concept of the Economist as someone designed to make people see things as they really
are (Valdés, 2008:54). The last trait was an important feature of the Chicagoans. Besides, about the
same time as Milton Friedman several professors entered the department, including some from
Cowles Commission (e.g. D. Gale Johnson, H. Gregg Lewis, Theodore Shultz, Jacob Marschak and
Tjalling Koopmans), and several other left or died (e.g. Frank Knight, Henry Schultz, Henry Simons,
Oscar Lange and Paul Douglas) (Hammond, 2010).
         Either way, according to Miller (1962), the specializations mentioned above added to a
convergence on to understand the role of the State and public policies. This makes the CSE
homogeneous enough to differentiate itself from other American schools. In his words,

                       “What does distinguish him [the Chicago Economist] from other economists are a number of
                       closely related attributes: the polar position that he occupies among economist as an advocate
                        of an individualistic market economy; the emphasis that he puts on the usefulness and
                        relevance of neo-classical economic theory; the way he equates the actual and the ideal
                        market; the way in which he sees and applies economics in and to every nook of cranny of
                        life; and the emphasis that he puts on hypothesis-testing as a neglected element in the
                        development of positive economics.” (Miller, 1962:65)10.

           The CSE’s monetarist influence is also prominent and important. Friedman’s work was
highly influential to the foundations of this new monetarism. This approach stood as a direct challenge
to the Keynesian consensus that emerged after the “neoclassical synthesis” (Laidler, 2010). The
“Point Four”, an American technical aid program, had monetarist influence, while the “Projecto
Chile” was the name of the specific project that allowed the implementation of the agreements
between the CSE and the PUCC. One of the Point Four objectives, similarly to the Alliance for
Progress, was to foster development and avoid the socialist threat (Valdés, 2008).
           Theodore Schultz’s Human Capital (that connects individual knowledge, education, value
creation and development, and it was latter developed by Gary Becker) is fundamental to enlighten
the “Projecto Chile” preference for the University of Chicago. According to Valdés (2008), Schultz,
then head of the CSE’s department, established a close relation to Albion Patterson, director of Point
Four and an admirer of the Human Capital theory. Patterson had a clear disagreement with the
ECLAC’s models and theories of development, and saw the Schultz’s work as an alternative. (Ibidem:
98). Given those influences, Chile would later become a big laboratory to the Human Capital theory
(Fischer, 2009).
           In Patterson’s pursuit for a university willing to sign an agreement for professional training
in the United States, his first attempt was with the Universidade de Chile (UC). The university refused
the cooperation due to Patterson’s requirement for an exclusive exchange with the CSE. UC did not
want to restrict its exchange program to only one university. Besides that, ECLAC had a major
influence inside UC’s economic department, where economic development and structuralism
prevailed (Valdés, 2008: 115).
           Then, the next candidate was the not yet widely known Pontifícia Unviersidade Católica de
Chile. Dean Monsignor Alfredo Dias Santiago asked for help with the university’s program of
economics and Patterson established the agreement. In 1956, Theodore Schultz, Earl Hamilton,
Simon Rottenberg and Arnold Harberger arrived in Santiago to formulate the program. Over eight
years, twenty-six Chileans received training at the CSE11. Those who returned to PUCC manage to
dominate the economics department around 1964 (Ibidem). At that moment, PUCC was a small CSE
inside Chile.
           The establishment of a small CSE in PUCC is important to show how the ideological transfer
that would enable the passion revolution as discussed by Davies (1999), and to avoid deterministic
interpretations as the understanding of a imposition of CSE’s ideas. The point is that, to establish a
new Historical Block there must be a demand for a new ideology, and new intellectuals 12 that will
forge it. In order to overcome a HB, both situations should happen simultaneously, organic crises and
the formulation of a new hegemony (Portelli, 1977). When the coup happened in Chile, the Chicago
Boys were there to establish the leading ideology. As we will show, their dominance over the
government policies was not immediate. However, we should first discuss the origin of this ideas,
which are closely connected to the Mont Pèlerin Society. Pinochet’s dictatorship had no popular
support and intended to build a consensus as far as possible from any kind of leftist ideology. The
transference of ideas to Chile (this neoliberal project) had a major influence of this society and started
before their implementation in the leading countries, what would happen only under the Ronald
Reagan and Margaret Thatcher’s governments (Gill and Law, 1993).

3.1 THE MONT PÈLERIN SOCIETY

         The transposition of ideas and the attempt to construct a new hegemony that took place in
the Chicago Boys case is central to this Gramscian analyses. This centrality is related to the passive
revolution and the building of a new hegemony (Davies, 1999).
           Before moving forward, it is important to define the concepts used here. Hegemony,
according to Callinicos (2010:494), is “the synthesis of political domination and ideological
leadership necessary for stable class rule”. Dominance is “concealed behind a veil of consent”
(Morton, 2003b:635), a product of the relationship between rulers and ruled. This relationship
depends on the creation of a consensus among classes around the leading ideology. That means if a
ruling class achieve the said changes, it would be a stable situation or equilibrium because the
hegemony allowed the political climate to its acceptance, not only through the state political society,
which would mean to impose an unstable rule using state apparatus. In cases where the formation of
hegemony is not possible, as in the Risorgimento according to Gramsci, passive revolution is likely
to happen.
          The change in ideology in a passive revolution does not involve a new ideology based on
popular internal struggle and class consensus. It is a “revolution from above” where the bourgeoisie
is no longer a revolutionary class and uses the state apparatus “to assure its property relations”
(Morton, 2007:70). “Gramsci conceptualizes passive revolution as being not just a specific route to
bourgeois domination, but also a means by which capitalist class rule is maintained in an epoch of
crisis, war, and revolution” (Callinicos, 2010:497). This top down change intends to be a gradual
process that represents an alternative for “[managing] the structural contradictions of the capitalist
mode of production” (Ibidem: 498). The renewal of the capitalist mode of production, with the
implementation of neoliberal mode of accumulation, happened in Chile in response to an attempt
socialist revolution. This ideology which the authors in the tradition of this paper call “neoliberal”
can be traced back to the Mont Pelèrin Society.
          The Mont Pèlerin Society, according to Van Horn and Mirowski’s (2009), is an international
bourgeois group established in 1947, in order to foster free market policies around the world. From
this point of view that would be a “source” of the ideology that came to Chile through the University
of Chicago13. We do not mean that price theory or another theoretical framework was imposed to
Chicago or even developed inside Mont Pelèrin, but that the society would finance and foster liberal
ideas that could not be connected to any country’s reality yet. An illustration of that is how the leading
American school on the propagation of these neoliberal policies, in opposition to the Keynesian
mainstream of the time, had great influence from and in this society. Mont Pelèrin’s connection to
the CSE involves several participants that at some point in time were professors there, e.g. Knight,
Friedman, Aaron Director and Stigler, as well as the work of Friedrich Hayek (Van Overtveldt, 2007).
          Hayek became very close not only to Mont Pèlerin but also to the University of Chicago,
even though he was never part of the Economics Department. Hayek was a critic of empiricism while
the Chicago School reinforced the role of macroeconomics statistics on determining cause and effect
of economic phenomena. In addition, his main work, Road to Serfdom, faced strong criticism at CSE
for being considered too popular and non-academic. When Hayek became a professor at the
University of Chicago, it was at the Commission of Social Thought, in 1950 (Ibidem).
          Although not a part of the Economics Department, Hayek had an important role in its
economic policy propositions change, allowing it to distinguish itself from other American
universities. As an evidence of that, during the centenary celebrations of the University of Chicago,
Ronald Coase (1993) affirmed that Hayek assisted Henry Simons in his manifest for a liberal
economics teaching in Chicago. Their relation was also important in the establishment of the Hayek
Research Project that intended to extend analyses based on The Road to Serfdom to the United States.
Aaron Director was appointed the project director. The Volker Fund sponsored the project and also
assisted in the hiring of Hayek at Chicago and the in foundation of the Mont Pèlerin Society’s (Van
Overtveldt, 2007).
          Van Horn and Mirowski claimed that the Mont Pèlerin Society and the CSE were part of the
same post-war deliberated transnational effort to disseminate neoliberal ideas (Van Horn and
Mirowski, 2009:139-140). Their intention is to challenge the impression that surrounds the evolution
of the coherent thought of the CSE as a linear and logical development in the history of ideas, instead
seeing it as planned reinforce of free market capitalism. This approach clarifies some points in our
goal to apply the theory of hegemony to this period in Chile.
          Wen arguing with Van Horn and Mirowski’s interpretation implies to consider the transplant
of neoliberal ideas in Chile, this implies that it happened before any revolution (in the terms of this
ideology) inside the leading countries, what would make it the leading ideology of any Historical
Block. Therefore, the neoliberal HB was fruit of intellectuals assembling supported and funded by an
international bourgeoisie. Davies (1999) analyzed this as a passive revolution, due the incorporation
of external elements from abroad leading to a fragile change in ideology with no popular initiative or
actual hegemony. Due the lack of popular participation, there is no consensus, no balance that will
allow the leading class to govern through civil society. As happened in Chile, that will require a war
of maneuver14, i.e. an assault on power and a rule through political society. This situation can be
carried out in a way that will allow a consensus to be built, gradually, closer to the intended ideology
than it would without the assault; however, that is a fragile form of ruling.
          Davies analyzes the media intellectuals, most of which worked on leading universities in
Chile. While it is a very interesting research, we believe the author does not discuss the importance
of the relation between an international bourgeoisie and their strategies to influence world economy
through government takeover. Back then, economists were more and more seen as of major
importance in several areas of the government [as discussed in Robert Hall’s (1955) lecture and
Ackley (1966)], a result of the increasing role of planning since the beginning of the 1930’s (ROLL,
1968). In Gramscian terms, they were part of the upper echelon intellectuals. The Chicago Boys were
important in order to allow Pinochet’s government to both implement public policy and reform the
State while distancing from populism or left wing ideologies. For this reason, we believe that these
intellectuals (coming from a tradition of applying economics to every aspect of life) 15 played a major
on building and supporting the new transplanted, ideology, modified to serve Chilean bourgeoisie
interests. In order to understand the space conquered by the chicagoans in Chile, we next analyze the
role of Chicago boys as Intellectuals of a new Historical Block.

3.2 THE MILITARY COUP AND THE CHICAGO BOYS

          The coup killed Salvador Allende inside the Presidential Palace and brought the military
junta to power, which Augusto Pinochet would later replace (he was also a member of the junta). As
Kurtz (1999) points out, neither the junta nor Pinochet were advocates of neoliberalism previously.
Both represented a wide range of supporters (from Christian Democrats to liberals), and external
pressures from these groups drove their politics. Actually, during the first phase of the government
(1973-1975) there was no neoliberal policies. “From the beginning, the Chicago team had to struggle
for control in a ‘coalition’ of economists that did not necessarily […] shared their radical, neo-liberal
views” (Valdés, 2008:19).
          The implementation of the most radical fiscal and monetary neoliberal proposals of the
Chicago Boys only started in 1975, when one of them, Sergio de Castro, became Minister of Finance.
In addition, in April 1975, Milton Friedman and Arnold Harberger visited Chile. Friedman wrote
Pinochet suggesting shock therapy in the economy16 (Schlisser, 2010:184). Until 1982, the policies
followed the Chicagoan script, mainly after 1979 (Kurtz, 1999). Moreover, the government attempted
to modify Chilean society and institutions in order to eliminate any possibility of a new socialist rise
to power. That was only possible thanks to the support given to the neoliberal measures by the El
Mercurio17 newspaper and other media. El Mercurio was the principal media vehicle to disseminate
throughout society the misdeeds of Allende’s government as well to defend the dictatorship and its
unpopular measures as a solution. The media had the role of presenting the new dominant ideology
to general society, as a mediator. Furthermore, the Church helped to destabilize Allende and back up
Pinochet (Kallás, 2008 and Azevedo, 2003). The Church had influence among the classes
ideologically farther to the riling one. More than the leading philosophy, in the terms previously
discussed, forms the common sense, and the Church had a unique role in influencing certain strata of
society.
          However, the imposition of the harshest neoliberal policies did not lasted during all the
Pinochet’s dictatorship. After the crisis of 1982, the unpopular measures diminished (Kurtz, 1999).
We interpret that as the necessity to make concessions to auxiliaries groups in order to maintain power
and perpetuate the Historical Block. After the crisis, the pressures against the military rule increased
and these concessions had to be made. The ideology of the Chicago Boys did not rule alone anymore,
but they had already proportionated a great shift in Chile’s capitalism.
          It is also important to stress that the state of exception made possible all the unpopular
political and economic policies for such a long period. The coup and its violence had a central role in
guaranteeing the persistence of the passive revolution, and all those institutions were important to
support it. This made possible the application of market principles throughout society. “While the
Chicago Boys have provided an appearance of technical respectability to the laissez-faire dreams […]
the military has applied the brutal force required to achieve those goals” (Letelier, 1976:52).
          When the Chicago Boys assumed the leading role in formulating the public policies and the
free market economy turn, they were doing more than just economics. The neoliberal ideology sought
not only to transform the economy but also entire social relations. The economic imperialism, that
was a characteristic of the Chicago School as stated earlier, was also present. The position of the CSE
was of creating the conditions to allow the policies recommended by their theory to be applied (Van
Horn and Mirowski, 2009:161). Regarding this, Don Patinkin wrote:

                        What was particularly exciting [about the Chicagoans] were the same qualities that made
                        Marxism so appealing to many other young people at the time: Simplicity together with
                        apparent local completeness: idealism combined with radicalism. For Simons carried out his
                        approach to logical extreme, with the unshaken conviction of a world reformer that life would
                        be better if only his policy recommendations were carried out. (apud Valdés 2008:56).

          The results were profound structural changes in Chile’s economy capable of reformulating
its capitalism completely, as discussed by Delano and Translaviña (1989). Therefore, we argue that
economics became more important than other questions in the formulation of the philosophy and the
Chicago Boys became the leading upper echelon’s Intellectuals. They absorbed a space that could be
filled by another field of knowledge and leaded the reformulation.

4 CONCLUSION

          We used here the Gramscian theory in order to understand the Chicago Boys as an important
part of the upper echelon organic intellectuals of this new Historical Block formation, based in a
passive revolution in Chile. This enabled us to analyze the role of class struggle and ideological
disputes during this period.
          The episode involving the former University of Chicago students, i.e. their role as advisors
in Pinochet’s government, happened right after an unsuccessful attempt of a “democratic route for
socialism”. The Chicago Boys not only represented a complete dismantling of socialists’ policies and
overcoming of their ideology [the removal of the “Marxist cancer”, as stated by Letelier (1976)] but
also of the previous capitalist/populist way of thinking economics (closely connected to ECLAC).
          The transfer of ideas analyzed here was only possible due the failure of the socialist attempt
in maintaining support for its ideology. This means that an organic crisis in the Historical Block, or
the failure in making the HB possible, created a window of opportunity for a takeover by the
bourgeoisie. At that moment, the Chicago Boys were present, brought by the interest of an aid
program director in a not dominant economic discourse from the United States. Schultz’s human
capital theory was central in the process of setting the agreements that allowed the existence of the
Chicago Boys, but it was Friedman’s monetarism the flagship of the transformation inside Chile. This
was a major experience, and Chile became a real laboratory, for the later widely used neoliberal
polices.
5 BIBLIOGRAPHY

Ackley, G. 1966. The Contribution of Economists to Policy Formation. The Journal of Finance,
         21(2): 169-177.
Aravena, F. R. 1997. Chile: mudança política e inserção internacional, 1964-1997. Revista Brasileira
         de Política Internacional, 40(2): 49-75.
Arndt, H. 1985. The Origins of Structuralism. World Development 13: 151–59.
Azevedo, D. 2003. Desafios estratégicos da Igreja Católica. Lua Nova, 60: 57-79.
Baer, W. 1967. The inflation controversy in Latin America. Latin American Research Review, 2(2):
         3-25.
Baer, W. and I. Erstenetzky (Eds.) 1964. Inflation and Growth in Latin America. Hometown-Illinois:
         Richard D. Irwin.
Barber, William J. 1995. Chile con Chicago: A Review Essay. Journal of Economic Literature, 33:
         1941-1949.
Barton, J. R. 2004. The legacy of Popular Unity: Chile 1973-2003. Capital & Class, 28(1): 9-16.
Blankenburg, S., J. Palma and F. Tregenna. 2008. Structuralism, In The New Palgrave Dictionary of
         Economics, ed. S. Dulauf and L. Blume, London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Boianovsky, M. 2012. Celso Furtado and the Structuralist-Monetarist Debate on Economic
         Stabilization in Latin America. History of Political Economy, 44(2): 277-330.
Cáceres, C. F. 1982. La via chilena a la economía de mercado. Estudios Públicos, 6: 71-87.
Callinicos, A. 2010. The limits of passive revolution. Capital and Class, 34(3): 491-507.
Campos, R. 1967. Duas opiniões sobre a Inflação na América Latina. In Monetarismo vs.
         Estruturalismo: um estudo sobre a América Latina, A. O. Hirschman. Rio de Janeiro: Editora
         Lidador.
Coase, R. 1993. Law and Economics at Chicago. The Journal of Law and Economics, 36(1): 239-
         254.
Coelho, S. A. 2000. Democracia Cristã e Populismo: Um marco histórico comparativo entre o Brasil
         e o Chile. Revista de Sociologia e Política, 15: 67-82.
Correa, S, 1985. Algunos antecedentes históricos del proyecto Neoliberal en Chile (1955-1958).
         Opciones, 6: 106-146.
Cox, R. 1993. Gramsci, Hegemony and International Relations: An Essay in Method. In Gramsci,
         Historical Materialism and International Relations, S. Gill, 49-66. Cambridge University
         Press.
D’Assunção, J. B. 2010. O campo da História: Especialidades e abordagens. Petrópolis: Vozes.
Davies, M. 1999. International Political Economy and Mass Communication in Chile. New York:
         Palgrave Macmillan.
Delano, M. and H. Translaviña. 1989. La Herancia de los Chicago Boys. Santiago: Ediciones del
         Ornitorrinco.
ECLAC. 1985. Change and Crisis: Latin America and the Caribbean In Crisis and Development: The
         present situation and Future Prospects of Latin America and the Caribbean, v.1. Santiago:
         United Nations.
Femia, J. 1975. Hegemony and consciousness in the thought of Antonio Gramsci. Political Studies,
         23(1): 29-48.
Femia, J. 1981. A historicist critique of “revisionist” methods for studying the history of ideas.
         History and Theory, 20(2): 113-134.
Fischer, K. 2009. The influence of Neoliberals in Chile before, during, and after Pinochet. In The
         road from Mont Pelèrin: The making of the neoliberal thought collective, ed. P. Mirowski
         and D. Plehwe, 305-346. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Fishlow, A. 1986. Evolução das teorias econômicas na América Latina. Literatura Econômica, 8:
         167–202.
Fleet, M. H. 1973. Chile’s Road to Socialism. The Western Political Quarterly, 26(4): 766-786.
Fontaine, J. A. 1993. Transición económica y política en Chile: 1970-1990. Estudios Públicos, 50:
          219-279.
Foxley, A. 1983. Latin American Experiences in Neoconservative Economics. London: University of
          California Press.
Frank, A. G. 1975. PART II: An Open Letter about Chile to Arnold Harberger and Milton Friedman.
          Review of Radical Political Economics, 7(2): 61-76.
Frank, A. G. 1976. Economic Genocide in Chile: Open Letter to Milton Friedman and Arnold
          Harberger. Economic and Political Weekly, 11(24): 880-888.
Germain, R. and M. Kenny. 1998. Engaging Gramsci: international relations theory and the new
          Gramscians. Review of International Studies, 4(1): 3-21.
Gill, S and D. Law. 1993. Global Hegemony and structural power of capitalism. In Gramsci,
          Historical Materialism and International Relations, ed. S. Gill, 93-124. Cambridge
          University Press.
Goldberg, P. A. 1975. The Politics of Allende Overthrow in Chile. Political Science Quarterly, 90(1):
          93-116.
Gramsci, A. 1992. Selections from the Prison Notebook. ed. Q. Hoare and G. Smith. New York:
          International Publishers.
Hall, R. 1955. The place of the Economist in the government. Oxford Economic Papers, 7(2): 119-
          135.
Hammond, D. J. 2010. The development of post-war Chicago price theory In The Elgar Companion
          to the Chicago School of Economics, ed. R. Emmet, 7-24. Northampton-Massachusetts:
          Edward Elgar Publishing.
Jessop, B. 1997. Capitalism and its future: remarks on regulation, government and governance.
          Review of International Political Economy, 4(3): 561-581.
Kallás, A. 2008. A “legalidade democrática” no golpe de 1973: bispos, democracia cristã e El
          Mercúrio no Chile de Allende. Em Tempos de História, 12: 128-150.
Kurtz, M. J. 1999. Chile’s Neo-Liberal Revolution: Incremental Decisions and Structural
          Transformation, 1973-89. Journal of Latin American Studies, 31: 399-427.
Laidler, D. 2010. Chicago Monetary Traditions. In The Elgar Companion to the Chicago School of
          Economics, ed. R. Emmet, 70-80. Northampton-Massachusetts: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Lazear, E. P. 2000. Economic Imperialism. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(1): 99-146.
Letelier, O. 1976. Economic ’Freedom’s’ Awful Toll; The ’Chicago Boys’ in Chile. Review of
          Radical Political Economics, 8(44): 44-52.
Love, J. 1996. Economic Ideas and Ideologies in Latin America since 1930. In Ideas and Ideologies
          in Twentieth Century Latin America, ed. L. Bethell, 207–74. Cambridge: Cambridge
          University Press.
Lüders, R. 2012. La Misión Klein-Saks, los Chicago Boys y la Política Económica. Documento de
          Trabajo n.411, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago: Oficina de Publicaciones.
Michaels, A. L. 1976. The Alliance for Progress and Chile’s “Revolution in Liberty”, 1964-1970.
          Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs, 18(1): 74-99.
Miller H. L. 1962. On the "Chicago School of Economics”. Journal of Political Economy, 70(1): 64-
          69.
Missio, F., F. Jayme Jr. and J. L. Oreiro. 2015. The structuralist tradition in economics:
          methodological and macroeconomics aspects. Brazilian Review of Political Economy, 35(2):
          247-266.
Morton, A. D. 2003a. Historicizing Gramsci: situating ideas in and beyond their context. Review of
          International Political Economy, 10(1): 118-146.
Morton, A. D. 2003b. Structural change and neoliberalism in Mexico: ‘passive revolution’ in the
          global political economy. Third World Quarterly, 24(4): 631-653.
Morton, A. D. 2007. Waiting for Gramsci: State Formation, Passive Revolution and the International.
          Millennium: Journal of International Studies, 35(3): 697-621.
Portelli, H. 1977. Gramsci e o Bloco Histórico. Rio de Janeiro: Paz e Terra.
Reder, M. W. 1982. Chicago Economics: Permanence and Change. Journal of Economic Literature,
          20(1): 1-38.
Reder, M. W. 1991. Chicago School In The World of Economics, ed. J. Eatwell, M. Milgate and P.
          Newman, 40-50. Macmillan Press.
Rothkopf, D. 2008. Superclass: The global power elite and the world they are making, Macmillan.
Roll, E. 1968. The uses and abuses of Economics. Oxford Economic Papers, 20(3): 289-302.
Schliesseer, E. 2010. Friedman, positive economics, and the Chicago Boys theory In The Elgar
          Companion to the Chicago School of Economics, ed. R. Emmet, 175-195. Northampton-
          Massachusetts: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Semeraro, G. 2006. Intelectuais “orgânicos” em tempos de pós-modernidade. Caderno Cedes, 26(70):
          373-391.
Stigler, G. J. 1962. On the "Chicago School of Economics": Comment. Journal of Political Economy,
          70(1): 70-71.
Valdés, J. G. 2008. Pinochet’s Economists: The Chicago School in Chile. Cambridge: Cambridge
          University Press.
Van Horn, R. and P. Mirowski. 2009. The Rise of the Chicago School of Economics and the Birth of
          Neoliberalism, In The road from Mont Pelèrin: The making of the neoliberal thought
          collective, ed. P. Mirowski and D. Plehwe, 139-178. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Van Overtveldt, J. 2007. The Chicago School: How the University of Chicago assembled the thinkers
          who revolutionized economics and business. Chicago: Agate.
Vasconcelos, K., M. Silva and V. Schmaller. 2013. (Re)visitando Gramsci: considerações sobre o
          Estado e o poder. Revista Katálysis, 16(1): 82-90.
Wachter, S. 1979. Structuralism vs. Monetarism: Inflation in Chile. In Short-Term Macroeconomic
          Policy in Latin America, ed. J. Behrman and J. Hanson. NBER Books.
Williams, R. 2011. Cultura e Materialismo. São Paulo, Editora Unesp.


FOOTNOTES
1
   Every individual is an “Intellectual” in some degree. What differs them is how connected is their daily work to the
intellectual activity. Organic intellectuals are those who “besides being specialists in their profession […] elaborate an
ethical-political conception that allows them to engage in cultural, educational and organizational activities in order to
assure the social hegemony and the domination of the state by the class they represent” (Semeraro, 2006:378, author’s
translation)
2
  Here State does not concern government activities exclusively. It should also include other political structures of civil
society that “which helped to create in people certain modes of behavior and expectations consistent with the hegemonic
social order” (Cox, 1993:51). It includes, for example, the church, the press and the educational system.
3
  The Church represents the most common mode of former dominant ideology present outside the ruling philosophy.
4
   For example Valdés (2008). Although extensive and very elucidating on the “international traffic of ideas” and the
“political implications of the way economists understand the properties of their discipline” (Barber, 1995:1941), the role
of class in the ideological dispute is underestimated.
5
  That is the case for Davies (1999), who focuses in media intellectuals.
6
  As pointed out by Boianovsky (2012), the roots of the LA’s structuralist thought can be traced back to the 1930s and
1940s doctrine of Market Failure, developed in Great Britain (Arndt, 1985), the French structuralist school (Blankenburg,
Palma and Tregenna, 2008) and others. Therefore, “the domestic character of Latin American structuralism should not be
stressed too much, though” (Boianovsky, 2012: 285). Nevertheless, Missio, Jayme Jr. and Oreiro (2015), argues that
despite all those and other influences LA’s structuralism characterizes a new structuralist school.
7
  Both Lüders (2012) and Cáceres (1982) points out the importance of the hesitance of politicians to continue and deepen
the monetarist’s policies.
8
  On the destabilization process, see Goldberg (1975).
9
  “Friedman swiftly took over the intellectual leadership of one faction of the Department and energetically attacked the
views and proposals of the others. His vigor in debate and the content of his arguments set the tone and public image of
Chicago economics for at least a quarter century” (Reder, 1982:10).
10
   When Miller wrote his paper, the idea of the CSE as a distinguished line of thought was not so much widespread, as
can be seen on George Stigler (1962) response.
11
   The exchange between Chileans and US’s universities continued, funded by other institutions such as the Rockefeller
Foundation and the Organization of American States (Fischer, 2009).
12
   There are two divisions inside the intellectuals. First, they can be connected to the leading class or not. Second, they
can be of a higher echelon, who formulate the philosophy of the ruling class, or of a lower echelon, the ones who
reproduce it.
13
   The society is supposed to be a think tank to promote and finance the implementation of pro market policies throughout
the world. This is also coherent with Rothkopf’s (2008) idea of “superclass”. An international group identified as a class
of super-rich ratter with their own countries.
14
   In opposition to that is the war of position, where a group seeks to build a consensus around its ideology before seizing
power. It is a hegemony built in civil society.
15
   Although this was more evident from the 1960s onwards, the Chicago School already laid the foundations in the
works of Margaret Reid and Theodore Schultz (REDER, 1991 and LAZEAR, 2000).
16
   Both Friedman and Harberger were largely criticized for showing support to Pinochet’s dictatorship. See Frank
(1975; 1976) and Letelier (1976) (this article was originally published in the Nation on August 28, 1976. The author
was murdered on September 21 of the same year, in the city of Washington).
17
   Several people connected to El Mercúrio and other companies had a direct participation in the coup, as shown by
Davies (1999), Valdés (2008) and Fischer (2009).
