    Credit constraints and taxes: misallocation in a two-sector
                             economy

                                                Julia P. Araujo†
                                                     July 2016



ABSTRACT
Effects of misallocation in a two sector economy with different capital intensity technologies can be
particularly large. This article proposes a model of occupational choice based on wealth and
entrepreneurial talent in which individuals are subject to credit constraints and different tax-rates.
Agents must choose between opening a business in a more, or less, capital intensive sector or being
a wage worker. The model is calibrated to the Brazilian economy between 2000-2013. Regarding
the effects of financial frictions, limiting credit availability to a less capital intensive sector can be
worse in terms of efficiency, but less distortive in terms of income inequality. Taxation over a more
capital intensive sector worsens aggregate productivity, although it can improve income
distribution. Taxing wage workers have a lower impact on efficiency, but will be severely worse on
equality.
Keywords: Capital intensity, credit frictions, taxation, entrepreneurship, misallocation


RESUMO
Distorções geradas pela má alocação de recursos podem ser particularmente grandes. Este artigo
propõe um modelo de escolha ocupacional baseado em riqueza e talento empresarial no qual
indivíduos estão sujeitos a restrições de crédito e diferentes alíquotas de impostos. Agentes devem
escolher entre abrir um empreendimento em um setor mais, ou menos, intensivo em capital ou ser
um trabalhador assalariado. O modelo é calibrado para a economia brasileira entre os anos de 2000
e 2013. Sobre os efeitos de restrições financeiras, limitar crédito para o setor menos intensivo em
capital pode ser pior em termos de eficiência, mas pode gerar menos desigualdade de renda.
Tributos sobre um setor mais intensivo em capital piora a produtividade agregada na economia,
mas melhora sua distribuição de renda. Por fim, impostos sobre ganhos dos trabalhadores possuem
menor efeito sobre eficiência, mas impactam severamente a desigualdade de renda.
Palavras-chave: Intensidade de capital, restrições de crédito, impostos, empreendedorismo


JEL CLASSIFICATION: L26, O11, O14, O41


                            Área 4 - Macroeconomia, Economia Monetária e Finanças


†
    PhD student, Department of Economics, University of São Paulo, Brazil. E-mail: julia.araujo@usp.br.
1     Introduction

Countries with less developed financial markets may be particularly unproductive
because credit constraints exclude talented entrepreneurs from opening a business
at profitable scales. Financial frictions distort investments allocations, affecting
entry and exit decisions of high ability but poor individuals. Taxation constitutes
another possible disturbance in first-best decisions. The effect of misallocation can
be specially large in developing countries.

A quantitatively-oriented framework is developed to understand how sectors that
differ primarily in their capital intensity may affect aggregate efficiency. More
specifically, the focus is on a two sector economy where individuals can choose to be
entrepreneurs on a more, or less, capital intensive sector (service vs. manufacturing,
for instance) or to be a wage worker. The M-sector is more capital intensive than the
S-sector. The selection of entrepreneurs is based on the individuals’ wealth, which
affect their self-financing or borrowing capability, as well as their entrepreneurial
talent. Both credit and tax-specific policies are considered.

To shed light on how market imperfections misallocate capital and labor, comparative
statics with respect to a credit constraint parameter and different tax-rates are
performed. Financial frictions over a less capital intensive sector may affect aggregate
economic efficiency in a larger scale than credit constraints over business that requires
more capital to be profitable. Individuals at the S-sector are poorer and constraining
access to credit for these entrepreneurs worsens the aggregate productivity. They
are also the majority of entrepreneurs in the population. Individuals cannot afford
to migrate to the M-sector since credit necessities are even higher there.

Based on this quantitative framework, it is also possible to demonstrate a set of
combinations of credit constraints between sectors that ensure a constant efficiency
gap at a desired level - with stability, losses or gains in terms of output. Other
exercises investigating the effects on structural transformations on the share of
each sector resulting from various credit simulations are also performed. Regarding
income inequality, measured by an income Gini coefficient, both credit constraints
are relevant, with a higher impact arising from relaxing financial frictions on the
more capital intensive sector.

The effect of borrowing constraints in sector S is more relevant to efficiency. On
the other hand, when considering taxes, the effect goes at the opposite direction.
Taxing entrepreneurs on a more capital intensive sector is highly unproductive,
adversely affecting efficiency. Finally, while taxing wage workers generates relatively
low efficiency losses, the effect on income distribution can be particularly distortive.
Taxation on output worsens a Gini coefficient of income distribution if the taxes are
in a less capital intensive sector, but can actually improve income equality if on the
other sector, where the richer and more talented entrepreneurs are.



                                           1
An important distinction among sectors can also be their average establishment size.
Bigger enterprises may have more financing needs and therefore are potentially more
affected by financial frictions. This affects the aggregate productivity by distorting
the allocation of capital between firms. There are three sources of misallocation here:
agents operate in their desired sector, but with less than optimal capital, agents
migrate to another sector which is less capital intensive, or they can no longer open
a business and become a wage work.

This article relates to a recent literature focused on misallocation and credit imperfec-
tions. Financial frictions are often viewed as a central issue on economic development.
This area is approached by constructing a model and then empirically analysing its
implications. Jeong and Townsend (2007), Hsieh and Klenow (2007), Restuccia and
Rogerson (2008) and Banerjee and Moll (2010) are some of the works that also have
this related interest.

There is a large group of studies on macro-implications of credit market imperfections
[Banerjee and Newman (1993), Blanchflower and Oswald (1998), Townsend and
Ueda (2006) and Buera, Kaboski and Shin (2011), for instance]. Also, a growing
literature is interested in the effects of misallocation on aggregate output, Total
Factor Productivity and inequality (see Paulson and Townsend (2004), Banerjee
and Duflo (2005), Restuccia and Rogerson (2008) and Hsieh and Klenow (2007) for
instance). Regarding the effect on inequality, our work relates particularly to Cagetti
and De Nardi (2006).

Some empirical facts motivate our study. The Brazilian service sector corresponds
for more than two thirds of its GDP, yet the literature for this subject is still very
incipient. The share of the service sector in value-added terms has grown persistently
in the last 50 years. Between 1950 and 2013 its share went from 53.3% to 69.3% of the
total GDP (IBGE data). Earlier discussions on structure of production and growth
of the service sector can be found in Stigler (1956), Baumol (1967) and Maddison
(1987). A more recent literature includes Ngai and Pissarides (2007), Acemoglu and
Guerrieri (2008) and Buera and Kaboski (2012).

This article focus on labor and capital reallocation between sectors facing different
constraints and different technological production functions. Ferreira and da Silva
(2015) show the importance of labor reallocation and the persistence of low produc-
tivity in countries facing a structural transformation. According to them, the poor
performance of the traditional and less productive service sector may explain the
slowdown in productivity growth observed in Latin America after the mid-1970s.
Buera and Kaboski (2012) also highlight the importance of the service economy in
order to understand certain aspects of economic development.

Imperfections in the credit market are quantitatively very important, particularly
for poor people living in developing countries. A country’s Total Factor Productivity
may be low not only because it is low at the individual level but mainly because
inputs are misallocated across heterogeneous production units. This paper relies


                                           2
heavily on numerical simulations. The main methodological contribution is to provide
non-intuitive analytic results in a simple model with two sectors, different capital
use and different credit and tax policies.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the model; Section
3 is dedicated to the calibration procedure; Section 4 presents simulations regarding
the credit parameters; Section 5 extends the model allowing sector-specific tax rates;
Section 6 concludes.



2       Model

A simple model can be very useful to illustrate the concept of misallocation. The
economy is modelled with two coexisting sectors: M (more capital intensive - man-
ufacturing) and S (less capital intensive - services). They differ in technology and
access to external financing. Individuals are constrained by their available wealth.
Financial frictions appear in the form of collateral constraints on capital rental
(imperfect enforceability of contracts). A more capital intensive sector will be more
affected by the degree of the credit constraint.

The model is static. Individuals are heterogeneous in two endowment dimensions:
entrepreneurial ability, θ, and wealth, z. They may choose either to be an entrepreneur
or a wage worker. If they decide to open a business, it can be in a sector more or
less capital intensive. Entrepreneurs hire workers in a competitive labor market.

The entrepreneurial ability will affect the individual’s capacity to run a business.
Also to become an entrepreneur, the individual may need to borrow resources. The
possibility of heterogeneous access to external financing is allowed. Different sectors
will face different levels of financial constraints. The interest relies on how sector-
specific credit policies may affect efficiency and inequality. Later, the introduction of
heterogeneous sector related taxes will be briefly approached.


2.1     Preferences

There is a representative household in this economy populated by a continuum of
mass 1 of individuals heterogeneous in two dimensions: entrepreneurial ability -
θ ∈ [0; ∞) - and wealth - z ∈ [0; ∞). They are deterministic and distributed across
the population according to the pdf f (θ; z). The occupational decision is based on
both ability and capital resources1 .

If one decides to be an entrepreneur all her labor endowment must be devoted to
    1
    Due to heterogeneous individuals and credit market imperfections, the representative agent
framework is invalid. See Banerjee and Duflo (2005) for a review of this literature.


                                              3
run a business, i.e. occupations are indivisible (specializing in one activity is more
productive). In a risk neutrality environment, the decision is towards the more
profitable occupation. Entrepreneurs in both sectors demand workers. Wage will be
endogenous and set according to a market clearing condition.


2.2    Technology

There are two sectors (j) in which the individual can open a business, j = M, S.
An entrepreneur with inherent ability θ combines capital (Kj ) and labor (Lj ) to
generate output using a sector-specific technology. At the M-sector, more capital
intensive, as follows:

                                         α 1−α γ
                                 YM = θ(KM LM )


γ ∈ (0; 1) is a span of control parameter, as in Lucas (1978), that ensure the
coexistence of sectors by a decreasing returns to scale function. For this same
entrepreneur, production in the S-sector is given by:


                                  YS = θ(KSβ L1−β
                                              S )
                                                  γ




The crucial assumption is that β < α, i.e., production in the S-sector is less capital
intensive. As argued, one can think about M-sector as an industrial and more
sophisticated kind of production. The S-sector turns out to be more similar to the
services sector.


2.3    Credit market

The credit market, due to imperfections such as limited enforceability of contracts, is
set as follows: in a sector j = M, S individuals can only borrow up to a multiple λj
[as in Evans and Jovanovic (1989), Paulson and Townsend (2004) and Buera, Kaboski
and Shin (2011)]. The amount of capital invested in a business is constrained by the
owner’s wealth. More specifically, an individual with wealth z is able to borrow up to
(λj − 1)z, where λj ∈ [1; ∞) is a parameter that measures how lax is the borrowing
constraint in a j-sector.

That said, the amount available for investment is given by this amount added to the
agent’s own wealth: (λj − 1)z + z = λj z. The capital stock employed by a firm in
sector M (KM ) cannot exceed λM z, and in sector S (KS ) the restriction is up to λS z.
Intuitively, agents of a given entrepreneurial ability choose to open a business if they
are wealthy enough to run it at a profitable scale.

                                           4
Sector-specific credit policies might be implemented by governments wishing to
foment asymmetrically different activities. The credit parameter on sector M -
λM - is potentially different for the one on sector S - λS . The interest rate is
exogenously determined, as in a small open economy hypothesis. Financial frictions
will have different impacts on sectors because the capital intensity (establishment
size) translates directly into financing needs.


2.4    M - The more capital intensive sector

Net earnings of an entrepreneur operating in the M-sector with wealth z and talent
θ is set as follows:

                          α 1−α γ
      πM (θ, z) = max {θ(KM LM ) − wLM − r(KM − z) : 0 ≤ KM ≤ λM z}
                    KM ,LM


Where w is the endogenous wage rate and (r − 1) is the real interest rate (assumed
to be exogenous and equal between sectors). If the amount required to finance the
desired business capital optimum is less than the individual’s wealth, the remaining
of it will be invested at the same rate r. If the borrowing constraint does not bind
(i.e. unconstrained entrepreneur), optimality conditions imply that:

                "                                        1
                                                      # 1−γ               "                       1
                                                                                               # 1−γ
        ∗                      γθ                                                    γθ
       KM u =                                                 ; L∗M u =
                    r 1−(1−α)γ       w (1−α)γ                                 r αγ    w 1−αγ
                                                                                      
                    α               1−α                                       α      1−α


                                    ∗                  ∗
Where the amounts of capital (KM      u ) and labor (LM u ) do not depend on wealth.
Quantities are efficient and the credit constraint is irrelevant. No missalocation in
this scenario. On the other hand, if the entrepreneur wishes to invest more than
λM z (i.e. constrained entrepreneur):

                                                                                    1
                                                  γθ(1 − α)(λM z)αγ
                                                                               1−α(1−γ)
                     ∗
                    KM c   = λM z ;     L∗M c   =
                                                          w

The optimal choice of inputs by an entrepreneur in the more capital intensive sector
can then be expressed as:

                                                        ∗
                                        
                              ∗             λM z, if KM   u > λM z
                             KM     =        ∗
                                            KM u ,  otherwise

                                                        ∗
                                            L∗M c , if KM
                                        
                                                          u > λM z
                             L∗M    =
                                            L∗M u , otherwise

                                                       5
2.5      S - The less capital intensive sector

The entrepreneur in the less capital intensive sector faces an analogous problem, with
two key differences: she is credit constrained in a potentially different degree and
operates with a different technology. Entrepreneurs also hire workers in a competitive
labor market at the same wage w. Net earnings are therefore given by:

         πS (θ, z) = max {θ(KSβ L1−β γ
                                 S ) − wLS − r(KS − z) : 0 ≤ KS ≤ λS z}
                     KS ,LS


Individuals can operate credit unconstrained (optimum inputs quantities that do not
depend on their wealth) or constrained. The optimal decision of an entrepreneur in
this sector can be summarized by:

                                                       ∗
                                        
                                             λS z, if KSu > λS z
                              KS∗   =          ∗
                                             KSu , otherwise

                                                        ∗
                                             L∗Sc , if KSu
                                        
                                                           > λS z
                              L∗S   =          ∗
                                             LSu , otherwise

Where:
                                                     1
                                                    1−γ                               1
                                                                                      1−γ
       ∗                γθ                                                   γθ
      KSu =   1−(1−β)γ                                 ; L∗Su =   βγ 
                                                                                   
                                        (1−β)γ                                1−βγ 
                 r                w                                   r        w
                 β               1−β                                  β       1−β


                                                                           1
                                               γθ(1 − β)(λS z)βγ
                                                                      1−β(1−γ)
                      ∗
                     KSc   = λS z ;   L∗Sc   =
                                                      w


2.6      Wage worker

Individuals with less entrepreneurial ability will chose to be a wage worker. Each
one of them supplies 1 unit of time inelastically. She will receive a wage set by a
market clearing condition: work supply must be equal to its demand. Labor income
does not depend on entrepreneurial talent. Therefore, net earnings of a wage worker
with wealth z are then:

                                         πW (z) = w + rz

Individuals also receive interest on their wealth, which in lent to an entrepreneur
(M or S sector) that need external financing. For simplicity, wages equalized across
sectors, so there is no segmentation in the labor market.

                                                    6
2.7    Market clearing and equilibrium

An equilibrium in this economy follows an usual way. The occupational decision is
a static one. Given talent and wealth, an individual chooses the occupation which
gives her the highest net income: wage worker, entrepreneur in the manufacturing
(M) sector, or entrepreneur in the service (S) sector. This can be seen in a simple
policy function, as follows:


                       π(θ, z) = max [πM (θ, z), πS (θ, z), πW (z)]


The share of agents opting for each form of occupation n ∈ {M ; S; W } is:

                             RR
                      On =        1{π(θ, z) = πn (θ, z)}f (θ, z)dθdz


Where the subscripts M , S and W stand for entrepreneur in the M or S-sector and
wage worker, respectively. The equilibrium wage is such that the supply of labor
from wage workers is equal to its demand from entrepreneurs in both sectors.


                                   OM + OS + OW = 1


Equivalently:


                      1{π(θ, z) = πM (θ, z)}L∗M f (θ, z)dθdz +
                 RR                                              RR
         OW =                                                          1{π(θ, z) =
                                πS (θ, z)}L∗S f (θ, z)dθdz


An equilibrium for this model, given the factor prices [wt ; rt ] and credit constraints
parameters [λK ; λL ], is such that every agent solves its problem, chooses a occupation
and the labor market clears.



3     Calibration

Our main goal is to understand the effects of borrowing constraints, and later,
taxation, on occupation choices, aggregate efficiency and inequality. The model is
calibrated to mimic some features of the Brazilian economy, also according to the
related literature. Functional forms for the distributions of wealth and entrepreneurial
talent also need to be assumed.


                                             7
3.1     Parameters values

In order to quantify our theoretical model, a set of parameters values [θ, z, λM , λS , α, β, γ]
need to be assigned. Table 1 presents the baseline calibration. The starting point
assumes λi = 2, with i = M, S, i.e. the amount borrowed by entrepreneurs in both
sectors cannot be larger than the value of her own wealth. This value is used in
Paulson,Townsend and Karaivanov (2006) on the Thai economy. Also, Buera (2008)
and Evans and Jovanovic (1989) use a similar value for the U.S. economy. This
hypothesis will be relaxed later.

                               Table 1: Parameters values

 Parameter    Description                   Value    Source

    λM,S      Borrowing constraint           2.0     Paulson et al. (2006)
     r        Real interest rate (plus 1)   1.072    Average for Brazil (2000–2013)
     γ        Span of control                0.65    Hsieh and Klenow (2007)
     α        M-sector technology            0.4     Data on labor share and manufaturing output
     β        S-sector technology            0.2     Data on labor share and service output


Regarding the interest rate, r will be given by the average Brazilian real interest rate
(Short-term nominal interest rate - SELIC - minus the annual rate of CPI inflation
-IPCA) between 2000 and 2013 (r = 1.072). The span of control parameter, γ, is
set to be 0.65, which is the value used in Hsieh and Klenow (2007). As for the
production parameters, α = 0.4 and β = 0.2. In this particular model, the labor
share is given by:


                              γ(1 − α)YM % + γ(1 − β)YS%


Where YM % is the share of manufacturing output on total output (27.6% on average
between 2000-2013) and YS% is the share of the service sector (66.4% on average for
the same period. Both suppressing the agricultural sector (6% of total GDP) for the
simplicity of the model). The weighted average of sectorial labor shares gives the
economy wide labor share. According to Brazil’s National Accounts, between 2000
and 2013, compensation of employees is 49% of GDP. α and β, therefore, were set to
match this amount.


3.2     Distribution of wealth and entrepreneurial talent

The model is calibrated to reproduce two statistics of the Brazilian economy: (i)
the share of service output in total GDP – 69.4% according to Brazil’s National
Accounts (excluding agricultural output, as said); and (ii) the share of wage workers

                                             8
in total employment – 72% according the Brazilian Household Survey (average for
the 2000–2013 period).

Wealth and talent are independently distributed and follow a log-normal distribution,
i.e. logz ∼ (µz , σz ) and logθ ∼ (µθ , σθ ). The standard deviation of the wealth
distribution can√be mapped into the Gini coefficient through the following formula:
Gini = 2Φ(σz / 2) − 1. Where Φ(.) is the cdf of the normal distribution. Davies
et al. (2011) provide an estimation of the Brazilian wealth Gini coefficient (0.784),
which is used to calibrate σz in 1.75. The same dispersion in entrepeneurial ability is
assumed, i.e. σθ = 1.75 as well.

For each pair [z; θ] we simulate the model following the market clearing condition at
the labor market and compute (i) and (ii). We choose the pair which minimizes the
sum of the squared difference between each of these statistics and their corresponding
values in the Brazilian data. Specifically, µz = 0.005 and µθ = 0.1, which approximate
properly the observed data. The simulations are based on a random draw of 100,000
individuals. See Figure 1 for the occupational choices in a wealth and entrepreneurial
talent diagram.




                           Figure 1: Occupational choice

As can be seen, if the entrepreneurial ability is sufficiently high, the individual
becomes an entrepreneur. Under a value of, approximately, θ = 8 she always choose
to be a wage worker. For low levels of wealth, the credit constraint will be binding.
Talented but poor agents will opt to be constrained at the less capital intensive

                                          9
sector S. Increases in wealth will shift their choice to the M sector. Entrepreneurs
in sector M are slightly more talented than others. Above a certain level of wealth
agents are free from financing frictions and will be able to fully invest their desire
capital: unconstrained entrepreneurs. The combination of entrepreneurial ability and
wealth will determine the individual’s occupation choice, given the market clearing
condition at the labor market.



4     Simulations

The presented model will be used to provide a quantitative analysis of misallocation
of capital and labor in this simplified two sector economy. The process of choosing
occupational choices allows for an endogenous mechanism of entry and exit from
the production sector. This is an important channel for resources reallocation and
structural transformation. First, the impacts of changing borrowing constraints
parameters on efficiency and sectorial allocation will be addressed.


4.1     Efficiency

To measure efficiency, the model’s total output in both sectors is compared to that of
the calibrated economy. The starting point is a perfect-credit benchmark environment.
With no financial frictions and no other distortion, sectorial and occupational choices
result uniquely from comparative advantage: the more talented become entrepreneurs
and the marginal product of capital equalizes between sectors and firms. To measure
efficiency, the model’s total output in both sectors is compared to that of an economy
with no credit distortions.

The initial efficiency gap is given by 1 − Y (λM , λS )/Y (∞, ∞). The total output in
this scenario is 32% higher than in the calibrated economy where λM = λS = 2. Our
starting point is already inefficient. It is also possible to measure the effect of each
credit constraint individually. The effect of λS is deeper. The efficiency gap when
λS = 2 and λM = ∞ is 9%, meanwhile the efficiency gap when λS = ∞ and λM = 2
is 23%.

Figure 2 displays the efficiency gap for combinations of the borrowing constraints
parameters: [(λM ), (λS )] = [(1 : 5), (1 : 5)]. In this 3D graphic, point (λS ; λM ) = (2; 2)
is equivalent to our benchmark output, with zero efficiency gap. The starting point
is the case where only the agent’s wealth is available for investment, with no access
to credit markets (λM = λS = 1). The output is 8.4% lower in this scenario than in
our baseline economy (λM = λS = 2).

Increasing λi , i = M, S, implies that individuals at the i-sector have more access
to credit and can, therefore, invest in a more profitable scale. The sector becomes

                                             10
                               Figure 2: Efficiency gap

more attractive, leading to an increase in their share on aggregate production. Total
output may increase due to two complementary channels: (i) intensive margin (agents
maintain their chosen sector but will expand in scale), and (ii) extensive margin
(individuals switch sectors). Both effects are relevant and have different implications
in efficiency and economic structural composition.

In this model, more credit always induces higher levels of output, but the effect
is quantitatively different depending on the boosted sector. Relaxing the credit
constraint over sector S is significantly more efficient in terms of increasing the
aggregate output. Increasing λS from one to five can improve the efficiency gap from
a loss of 8.4% to a gain of 9.7%, holding λM = 1. On the other hand, the same
exercise generates losses from 8.4% to 2.3% varying λM , but fixing λS = 1. Therefore,
if the less capital intensive S sector is completely credit constrained, not even an
increase in the credit availability to five times the agent’s wealth in sector M will be
enough to at least generate the same output level as in the calibrated economy. A
talented but poor individual will not find it worthwhile to migrate to the M sector
and we experience losses.

This result is somewhat non intuitive. Since the M sector is more capital intensive,
one might expect a higher output loss due to tightening financial frictions over this
choice. But sector S is larger in this economy and the following effect will dominate
in aggregate terms: is better for some poor individuals to remain at the S sector
completely credit constrained than to migrate to a more capital intensive. They
are poor and even with a higher λM the necessities of capital in this sector are so
relatively high that they cannot afford to open a business there. There are some
migrations (extensive margin) since higher λM generates lower efficiency gaps, but
the effect of remaining in a sector more credit constrained (λS = 1) dominates.


                                          11
It is interesting to see that the mechanism exposed above changes when the possibility
of sector-specific taxes rates are added in the next section. In this case, distorting
the decision towards the S sector will cause a larger impact in terms of output losses.
In a nutshell, different combinations of λi , i = M, S, will result in different levels
of output losses or gains. This will have important implications in terms of credit
policies that desire to boost a sector by penalizing another, since resources are scarce.

In this framework, a set of combinations (λM ; λS ) that generates the same efficiency
gap can be computed. For example: if we increase the credit constraint parameter
in sector M (λM ), how much we need to decrease the credit available for sector S
(λS ) to produce the same output as in baseline scenario? A selection of certain
combinations is displayed in Figure 3. For instance, to achieve the same output as
in our baseline scenario of λS = λM = 2 (a 0% efficiency gap) the following pairs
of (λS ; λM ) are possible: (1.5;4.2); (1.6;3.8); (1.8;3.0); (2.1;1.3). Combinations with
positive and negative efficiency gaps are displayed. The credit constraint sensitive
differ in both sectors, having different implications in terms of public policies aiming
economic efficiency. Sectors demand for credit and their shares in total output will
affect the final results.




                  Figure 3: Credit constraints - indifference curves

An important part of the model mechanism is the structural transformation induced
by credit policies. In the calibrated economy, sector S responds for 69.6% of total
output, very close to the Brazilian economy (64.4%). Reducing completely the
credit availability (λS = λM = 1) shrinks sector S to 54.9% of the GDP and inflates
sector M to 45.1%. On the other hand, with more credit available, for instance with
(λS = λM = 5), sector S is up to 82.3% of the total GDP and sector M falls to the
remaining 17.7%.

Relaxing the credit constraint in sector S increases its share on the total output up to
92% if λS = 5 and λM = 1. At the opposite way, if there is no credit to sector S, i.e.
λS = 1, and investments in sector M can go up to five times the entrepreneur’s wealth,

                                           12
                    Figure 4: Shares (a) Sector S; (b) Sector M

i.e. λM = 5, the share of sector M in total output grows in a smaller magnitude, to
60.7%. Finally, it is interesting to see that when the credit constraint is completely
relaxed at the S sector, λS = ∞, holding λM = 2 still guarantees the coexistence of
sectors. Some individuals continue to find it profitable to open a business in the
more capital intensive sector. The opposite happens when λM = ∞ and λS = 2. The
service sector disappear at this case.


4.2    Inequality

After measuring the effects in efficiency, we shall see how the distribution of wealth
will be affected based on different credit scarcity scenarios. To measure inequality, we
compute the income Gini coefficient, which is equal to 0.445 in our baseline economy.
The model reproduces considerable inequality. In the data, the average Brazilian
Gini is equal to 0.559 during the 2000-2013 period.

Eliminating both credit constraints in the model (λS = λM = ∞) generates a
Gini coefficient of 0.403. Dropping each distortion separately would also reduce
inequality: Gini = 0.418 when λS = 2 and λM = ∞; Gini = 0.421 when λS = ∞
and λM = 2. Figure 5 plots different levels of the Gini coefficient computed for the
same simulation, [(λM ), (λS )] = [(1 : 5), (1 : 5)]. Lower credit availably implies a
worse income distribution. When λS = λM = 1, Gini=0.458. When λS = λM = 5,
Gini=0.429.

The relationship is not linear. Holding λS = 1, the Gini ranges from 0.458 to 0.433
by relaxing λM from one to five. At the same time, with λM = 1, the Gini ranges
from 0.458 to 0.436. Both distortions are important in income distribution, but the
credit parameter in sector M (λM ) have a marginal larger effect.




                                          13
                                Figure 5: Gini coefficient

5     Taxes

This section includes the possibility of taxation in both sectors. Workers will also
pay taxes. Now there is another source of misallocation, with different final effects
on efficiency and inequality. Entrepreneurs in the M-sector will pay a τM tax rate on
output. Analogously, in the S-sector, the tax rate will be τS . Wage workers pay a
τW tax rate.

Net earnings of an individual operating in the M-sector and S-sector are respectively:

                              α 1−α γ
 πM (θ, z) = max {θ(1 − τM )(KM LM ) − wLM − r(KM − z) : 0 ≤ KM ≤ λM z}
              KM ,LM


    πS (θ, z) = max {θ(1 − τS )(KSβ L1−β γ
                                     S ) − wLS − r(KS − z) : 0 ≤ KS ≤ λS z}
                 KS ,LS


Net earnings of a wage worker with wealth z are:


                                 πW (z) = (1 − τW )w + rz


Sector-specific tax rates can also be viewed as a source of heterogeneous productivity
levels between sectors. Increasing a tax-rate may be seen as reducing a sector total
productivity, a negative shock. Taken together, credit constraints and taxes can
generate substantial inefficiency. Note that in this case the efficiency gap is given
by 1 − Y (λM , λS , τW , τM , τS )/Y (2, 2, 0, 0, 0). The effects on efficiency and inequality


                                             14
                            Figure 6: Taxes and efficiency

from individual simulations in tax-rates are computed holding the credit constraint
λi = 2, for i = M, S.

A 0 to 30% range is simulated for all tax-rates. Regarding the efficiency gap, τM has
a larger effect. Increasing τM from o% to 1% generates a loss of 0.3% in total output.
The impact is monotonically decreasing until τM = 8.0%, when this occupation is no
longer profitable and no one chooses to open a business at the M-sector.

A smaller, but also significant effect, comes from variations on τS . When τS goes
from 0% to 5% the efficiency gap oscillates around 0.1%, with no clear direction. It is
only at 6% that the impact turns out to be significantly negative. When τS = 21.0%
the S-sector disappear. In summary, τM has a larger adverse impact on efficiency
than τS .

Taxing wage workers generates less output losses. Workers are poorer and less
talented. The decision towards this occupation is less sensitive to taxation in terms of
efficiency gap, but the opposite conclusion is arrived in terms of inequality, when τW
will be highly distortive. Taxing wages monotonically worsens income distribution.
See Figure 7.

Taxes on production go different ways. Increasing τM can actually improve income
distribution. Entrepreneurs at M-sector are richer and, therefore, taxing this sector
makes the Gini coefficient more equal across the population. The income disparity is
reduced. On the other hand, higher taxes in Sector S amplify inequalities, although
not as much as increasing τW .




                                          15
                           Figure 7: Taxes and inequality

6    Concluding remarks

A large literature investigates the relationship between credit frictions and en-
trepreneurship to development and aggregate productivity. We model an economy
with two sectors - M and S - where the former is more capital intensive. Individuals
must choose an occupation: whether to work for a wage or to open a business in one
of either sectors. They decide based on entrepreneurial ability, wealth and access to
capital. Imperfections at the financial market are modeled with a collateral constraint
on capital rental. Constrained individuals are limited to borrow up by a multiple of
their own wealth. This rental limit is potentially different between sectors. Different
tax-rates across sector M and S, as well as in labor income, are also included.

The model is calibrated to approximate features of the Brazilian economy between
2000-2013. the main goal is to quantify the role of financial frictions and taxes
as a source of misallocation in economic development. Financial frictions in a less
capital intensive sector (S) may have a larger impact on economic efficiency. This
happens because poor entrepreneurs are constrained in this sector and reducing
credit availability worsens their productivity. They cannot migrate to the M-sector
since credit necessities are even higher there.

More broadly, our quantitative framework is also able to demonstrate a set of
combinations of credit constraints that hold the efficiency gap constant, as well as
investigate the structural transformation resulting from various credit simulations.
The effect of borrowing constraints in sector S is more relevant. On the other hand,
when considering taxes, the effect is at the opposite direction.

Increasing taxation on sector M can be highly distortive. This affects the richer and
more talented individuals on this economy, with a non-negligible impact on total

                                          16
productivity and output. Albeit very inefficient, this can improve income inequality
by generating a more equal distribution, measured by an income Gini coefficient.
Taxing wage workers has a lower impact on efficiency, but will be severely worse for
equality. Finally, these effects can be larger than in a model with a single sector,
since changes in parameters may induce individuals to switch sectors with different
technologies and constraints.

The present framework enables us to determine the loss of efficiency associate with
different levels of credit constraint and sector-specific tax-rates. It is also possible to
investigate impacts on income distribution and, therefore, inequality and poverty
reduction. This structure can be expanded to consider multiples periods incorporating
intertemporal investment decisions and the possibility of agents saving their way to
entrepreneurship.



7     References

Acemoglu, D.; Guerrieri, V. (2008). “Capital Deepening and Non-balanced Economic
Growth”. Journal of Political Economy 116(3): 467-498.

Atkeson, A.; Kehoe, P. J. (2005). “Modeling and measuring organization capital”.
Journal of Political Economy 113(5) 1026-1053.

Banerjee, A. V.; Duflo, E. (2005). “Growth Theory through the Lens of Development
Economics”. In Handbook of Economic Growth 1: 473–552.

Banerjee, A. V.; Moll, B. (2010). “Why does misallocation persist”. American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2: 189-206.

Banerjee, A. V.; Newman, A. F. (1993). “Occupational Choice and the Process of
Development”. Journal of Political Economy 101(2): 274–98.

Baumol, W. J. (1967). “Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: the Anatomy of
Urban Crisis”. The American economic review 57(3): 415-426.

Blanchflower, D.; Oswald, A. J. (1998). “What makes an entrepreneur”. Journal of
Labor Economics 16: 26-60.

Buera, F. J. (2008). “Persistency of poverty, financial frictions and entrepreneurship”.
Mimeo.

Buera, F. J.; Kaboski, J. P. (2012). “The Rise of the Service Economy”. American
Economic Review 102(6): 2540-2569.

Buera, F. J.; Kaboski, J.; Shin, Y, (2011). “Finance and development: A tale of two
sectors”. American Economic Review 101(5): 1964-2002.

                                            17
Cagetti, M.; De Nardi, M. (2006). “Entreprenuership, frictions and wealth”. Journal
of Political Economy 114: 835-870.

Evans, D.; Jovanovic, B. (1989). “An estimated model of entrepreneurship choice
under liquidity constraints”. Journal of Political Economy 97: 808-827.

Ferreira, P. C.; da Silva, L. F. (2015). “Structural transformation and productivity
in Latin America”. The BE Journal of Macroeconomics 15(2): 603-630.

Hsieh, C.; Klenow, P. (2007). “Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in China and
India”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 124: 1403-1448.

Jeong, H.; Townsend, R. M. (2007). “Sources of TFP growth: occupational choice
and financial deepening”. Economic Theory 32: 179-221.

Lucas, R. (1978). “On the size distribution of business firms”. The Bell Journal of
Economics 9: 508-523.

Maddison, A. (1987). “Growth and Slowdown in Advanced Capitalist Economies:
Techniques of Quantitative Assessment”. Journal of economic literature 25(2) 649-
698.

Ngai, L. R.; Pissarides, C. A. (2008). “Trends in Hours and Economic Growth”.
Review of Economic Dynamics 11(2) 239-256.

Paulson, A. L.; Townsend, R.M. (2004). “Entrepreneurship and financial constraints
in Thailand”. Journal of Corporate Finance 10: 229-262.

Restuccia, D.; Rogerson, R. (2008). “Policy distortions and aggregate productivity
with heterogeneous plants”. Review of Economic Dynamics 11: 707-720.

Stigler, G. J. (1956). “Trends in employment in the service industries”. NBER
Books.

Townsend, R. M. ; Ueda, K. (2006). “Financial deepening, inequality, and growth:
a model-based quantitative evaluation”. The Review of Economic Studies 73(1):
251-293.




                                        18
