                 Sectoral capabilities and productive structure:
        An input-output analysis of the key sectors of the Brazilian economy
                                                                                                 Nelson Marconi1
                                                                                                  Igor L. Rocha2
                                                                                          Guilherme R. Magacho3

Abstract

        The complex relationship between production structure and economic growth has been the subject
of considerable debate among Brazilian economists. This debate resounded after the 2000s, when Brazil
experienced a period of growth from the rise of commodity exports, which contrasted with the stagnation
observed in the previous two decades. To analyse the capacity of commodity exports to generate long-
term economic growth, this paper assesses this sector’s performance and its effects on related sectors in
the upstream supply chain through input-output tables. These analyses lead to two main conclusions.
First, exports of agricultural and mineral commodities exhibited little capacity to boost the economy
because they have the lowest linkage indices. Second, a development strategy should consider
comparative advantages in the economy while considering the advantages of a production structure
oriented toward expanding manufacturing. The analysis of the Brazilian production structure
demonstrated that sectors related to manufacturing can stimulate other sectors, such as sophisticated
services, because of their high linkage effects on other sectors.

Keywords: Commodities, manufactured products, production structure, economic growth, development,
input-output model, growth models.

JEL CODES: C67, L16, O11

Área 6 - Crescimento, Desenvolvimento Econômico e Instituições




1
  Professor at the São Paulo School of Economics, Getulio Vargas Foundation (EESP/FGV) and Vice President of Brazilian
Keynesian Association, Brazil. E-mail: nelson.marconi@fgv.br.
2
  Ph.D. student at the University of Cambridge, UK. E-mail: ilr23@cam.ac.uk.
3
  Ph.D. student at the University of Cambridge, UK. E-mail: grm35@cam.ac.uk.
    1. Introduction

    After at least two decades of slow economic growth, the Brazilian economy gained momentum in the
early 2000s. The growth cycle that followed, especially after 2003, was characterised by income
redistribution, a steady decrease in unemployment, and increases in investments. This scenario led to
intense economic growth in the following years. Given the importance of this economic growth to policy
making, researchers put forth a vast range of interpretations that sought to determine the factors and
instruments that triggered this process.4 Over the last decade, changes in the intensity of trade flows
began to be observed more clearly. Strong economic performance and intense international trade were
accompanied by an increase in commodity prices that increased Brazilian exports by approximately
262%, almost twice the global average of 135%. This new economic reality resulted in an increase in
Brazilian exports that rose from 10% of the gross domestic product (GDP) in 2000, peaking to 16.4% in
2004 and dropping to 11.2% in 2010 due to the global financial crisis. Despite this decrease in exports,
Brazilian commodities played a key role in the economy’s dynamism that was highly associated with
Asian demand, most notably in China (Prates, 2006 and Rocha, 2011).5
        Once the international market began to demand Brazil’s main export products, economic growth
led by exports of primary products, especially commodities, assumed a prominent position in
interpretations of the growth experienced during that period. Some economists suggested that expansion
based on the production and export of commoditised sectors do not have a negative effect on the
economy. In addition to being capable of generating income in export sectors, primary sectors have
indirect effects on other productive chains. Primary sectors also have the capacity to generate income
beyond consumption that could resupply the domestic production and related services (Schultz, 1964;
Lipton, 1968; Chayanov, 1966). This line of thought has regularly refuted the necessity of industrial and
foreign trade policies. These economists note that state intervention of industrial sectors would promote
an “artificial” industrialisation incompatible with international patterns based on a competitive free
market.
        In contrast, several studies have attempted to demonstrate the limitations of promoting a country’s
productive and international trade structure based on a free-market strategy. Both classic Kaldorian
interpretations (Kaldor, 1966, 1981; Cornwall, 1977, Thirlwall & Hussein, 1982; McCombie & Thirlwall,
1994a, 1994b; Verdoorn, 1949; Thirlwall, 1979; Dasgupta & Singh,2006; Dixon & Thirlwall, 1975,
Moreno-Brid, 2003) and those based on the structuralist approach of Latin American thinking (Prebisch
1986, Singer, 1950; Furtado, 1961 and Tavares, 1998) have emphasised the limitations of promoting
economic development based on a productive trade structure of low-value-added products. This school of
thought is commonly referred to as developmental theory. Developmental theorists observe the negative
effects of currency appreciation in the manufacturing sector caused by exports of commodities, a process
known as the “Dutch disease”. These theorists argue that the existence of comparative advantages in
natural resources would significantly increase the exports of low-value-added products, such as
commodities, in turn resulting in a major inflow of foreign currency into the domestic economy and the
appreciation of the domestic currency in real terms. Traditional service sectors are less affected by these
events because manufacturing and more sophisticated services are tradable and their corresponding
demand is partially supplied by imported goods (causing a demand leakage). If commodity prices rise, the
implications would be more serious for the domestic industry than for non-tradable sectors. The exchange
rate would continue to appreciate, and the competitiveness of higher-value-added products would be
reduced, possibly triggering a process of “deindustrialisation” of the economy.6



4
  The growth rate has decreased since 2011 in Brazil (Ipeadata).
5
  Regarding the recent rise in commodity prices, see Prates (2007).
6
  See Corden and Neary (1982), Palma (2005) and Bresser-Pereira (2008). The exchange rate appreciation can also occur
    because of capital inflow.
       The main argument of those who criticise economic growth based on primary product exports is
that manufacturing is the main engine of economic development7. Rosenstein-Rodan (1943), Prebisch
(1949), Lewis (1954), Rostow (1956), Furtado (1961) and Kaldor (1966) were some of the first
intellectuals to emphasise the importance of manufacturing for economic development. According to
these scholars, development is essentially a process of structural change. Sustained economic growth is
associated with the diversification of domestic production, i.e., the generation of new activities to expand
the possibilities of production, linkages and higher-value-added goods by providing incentives to
manufacturing. Similarly, Chenery et al. (1986) argue that economic development is triggered by
productive transformations induced by an increasing demand for product diversity and technological
progress. These transformations would also lead to a more productive use of inputs and increased
productivity. The industrialisation process feeds itself and diversifies the production structure. These
changes in demand resulting from growth entail a dynamic element that transforms the production
structure. These changes create a shift in the composition of production and supply that requires new
investments, which produce technological improvements that further stimulate demand.
        Hirschman (1958) has studied the impacts of stimulating certain sectors in detail and argues that a
development strategy should focus on ensuring investment in sectors that can generate backward linkages
(BLs) and forward linkages (FLs). Examples include stimulating the production of inputs used in
production and generating economies of scale inside a sector or the production of intermediate goods that
can be used as inputs in other sectors. These strategies also lead to productivity gains and cost savings in
sectors in the later stages of the production chain. Thus, this paper evaluates the dynamic effects of a
development strategy based on commodity exports, such as the strategy adopted by Brazil in recent years.
This evaluation compares possible production linkages that can be created by stimulating the sectors in
which Brazil enjoys comparative advantages in production with linkages that could be generated by
providing incentives to manufacturing. This paper also assesses whether this strategy can be successful
considering production diversification and thus whether it can promote economic growth.
        Both strategies increase the demand for services. In the primary export-led strategy, the increase in
demand for services is explained by income gains because of increased export revenue and the
appreciation of the exchange rate, as noted by Corden (1982) and Bresser-Pereira (2008). The increased
demand can target traditional services, such as personal services, or modern services, such as logistics or
consulting (Rowthorn and Coutts, 2004; Palma, 2005; Dasgupta and Singh, 2006). In the manufacturing-
led strategy, the increase in demand for services results from income services and servitisation, which is
defined as the expansion of more sophisticated and high-value-added service activities related to
manufacturing, such as marketing, design and software (Lodefalk, 2010; Nordås and Kim, 2013).
Therefore, we will also analyse the linkages of the service sectors.
        For this purpose, this paper will adopt a methodology based on input-output tables. The remainder
of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 provides a brief analysis of the main features of the post-
1990s Brazilian development model. Then, the input-output methodology adopted in this analysis is
presented is presented in Section 3. Production multipliers, Hirschman-Rasmussen backward and FL
indices, and pure normalised backward and FL indices comprising all productive sectors are calculated in
Section 4. Finally, concluding remarks are provided in Section 5

      2. The Brazilian development model from the lost decade to post-1990s

        The crisis of the 1980s disrupted the economic growth-promoting mechanisms adopted by Brazil
in previous decades. This crisis occurred because of a marked contraction in international credit markets
and a repatriation of capital flows to central economies. The state apparatus was weakened by the
deterioration of the global macroeconomic environment, high government indebtedness in the 1970s, and
the debt nationalisation process, which forced the government to bear the burden of private decisions. The

7
    Rodrik (2007), Szirmai (2009, 2012) and Fagerberg & Verspagen (1999) also support this argument.
government also experienced a fiscal and financial crisis because these difficulties undermined its ability
to promote investment and development to the same degree as in previous decades.
        Under these circumstances, the Brazilian development model began to be strongly criticised.
Heavy criticism developed regarding both the conduct of Brazil’s economic policy in the previous decade
and the limits of the model applied to the Brazilian economy since the 1930s. According to Bacha and
Bonelli (2005), economic stagnation in the 1980s was a consequence of not only macroeconomic
imbalances but also a greater structural crisis. This crisis arose from the exhaustion of a development
model built on a closed economy marked by strong state intervention and based on the import substitution
industrialisation (ISI) model. It was argued that a radical shift in Brazil’s economic policy was required
and that the foundations of the development model based on ISI should be replaced. ISI provided to be an
incentive to a Chenery-style industrial development model (strengthening the industry of intermediate
inputs with major linkages in the production structure). However, free-market economists argued that ISI
was based on protectionist policies that would give rise to distortions in relative prices and in the
allocation of resources in the economy, thus causing inefficiency (Bonelli, 2005).
        However, the ISI process in the Brazilian economy began to show signs of exhaustion in the
1980s as the import coefficient decreased drastically. The average import coefficient (calculated at
constant prices) was 25.3% in the 1920s, decreasing to 11.7% in the 1950s, 5.6% in the 1960s and 4% in
the 1980s8. The transformation of the Brazilian economy’s production structure reached a level of
diversification that made domestic demand less dependent on global production, thus bringing the ISI
implementation cycle to an end.
        Meanwhile, in the mid-1960s, the development strategy applied to the Brazilian economy led to a
marked increase in the exports of manufactured goods. This increase was supported by an industrial
policy based on high foreign trade tariffs and high subsidies to neutralise the Dutch disease (Bresser-
Pereira, 2008)9. Manufactured goods comprised only 6.2% of exports in 1964 (initial available data) and
reached an average of 54.1% in the 1980s. This number only began to decrease in the second half of the
2010s, after production started to meet the external demand for commodities (averaging 37.8% from 2010
to 2011).10
        The combination of this previous import substitution process and a subsequent increase in the
exports of manufactured products (always supported by industrial policies that favoured both a managed
exchange rate and a public spending scheme promoting the development of strategic sectors) contributed
significantly to Brazil’s industrialisation process. The share of manufacturing in value-added products
rose from 15.1% in 1947 (initial available data) to 21.2% in the 1970s11, during the import substitution
phase, and remained relatively high at the time that the relative share of exports of manufactured goods
were increasing. The share of manufacturing in value-added products started to decrease in the 1980s
because of the aforementioned crisis and continued to drop in the following decades when the
government ceased the neutralisation of the Dutch disease and most industrial policies. The exchange rate
chronically appreciated, and commercial and financial openness were implemented. The share of
manufacturing in value-added products decreased to 16.8% in the 2000s and 15.8% in the 2010s.
        Therefore, since the 1970s, economic development in the Brazilian economy had been geared
toward foreign trade, particularly the export of manufactured goods associated with the end of the import
substitution process. Thus, it did not appear that production conditions were deteriorating or that the
production structure was inefficient because, among other factors, a substantial percentage of
manufacturing production was facing international competition. However, the country’s fiscal situation

8
  Source: IPEADATA.
9
  According to Bresser-Pereira (2009: 144), to neutralise the Dutch disease, “the government did not levy a tax on the exports
of commodities because it felt it lacked the political capital to do so, but the tax was adopted in practice through a ‘confisco
cambial’ implied in import tariffs and subsidies to manufactured goods exports”. This was an “industrial policy” that involved
a macroeconomic policy: the determination of the effective exchange rate after tariffs and subsidies.
10
   Source: Department of Planning and Development of Foreign Trade – DEPLA (Brazil).
11
   Source; IPEADATA. The shares were calculated based on the series at constant prices.
and external accounts deteriorated, partially due to the financing of these strategies. This deterioration and
the weakening ability of the state to continue this process contributed to the revival of arguments in
favour of free market ideology, in line with the Washington Consensus.
        A lower participation of the state in the economy and the promotion of competitiveness as the
main engine of productivity growth were the basis of the new development model established in the
1990s. These principles were based on the Washington Consensus (Williamson, 1989)12 to install a
market economy that would promote greater productivity through specialisation in production and by
targeting investments to sectors in which Brazil enjoyed comparative advantages. Policies designed to
promote the manufacturing sector lost strength during this period and were virtually abandoned as a result
of the then-prevailing maxim that “the best industrial policy is no industrial policy” (Stallings & Peres,
2000). Therefore, as a result of market forces, the 1990s were marked by major economic changes that
resulted in a productive restructuring of the Brazilian economy. According to Franco (1998), this model
would spearhead a process of industrial restructuring that would increase the competitiveness of the
Brazilian economy. This model would eliminate less efficient companies and sectors and induce new
technologies so that the country would be able to compete in the international arena.
        In Brazil, this strategy took form through reductions in quantitative controls and import tariffs and
through the absence of public policies focused on promoting growth in strategic sectors for the country’s
development. The trade liberalisation process focused on increasing imports without providing incentives
for exports. This model virtually eliminated non-tariff barriers to trade, 13 and custom tariffs were reduced
considerably based on the country’s structure of comparative advantages14. This environment, combined
with currency appreciation, resulted in a second large wave of reductions in the share of manufacturing in
value-added goods in the second half of the 1990s15.
        The trade liberalisation process focused more on imports because better conditions were not
created to improve exports, such as changes in financing and logistics, and previous policies to stimulate
exports were abandoned. Moreover, the domestic currency appreciated in real terms—a long-term
appreciation caused by the fact that the industrial policy that neutralised the Dutch disease ceased with
trade liberalisation (Bresser-Pereira 2009). These factors constrained access to foreign demand and
investments. Thus, investments increased to a lesser extent than expected in both the public and private
sectors during this period, decreasing from an average rate of 19.4% between 1990 and 1994 to 17.1%
between 1995 and 199916. This decrease was reflected in an average annual growth rate of 2.9% in the
1990s, significantly contrasting with the average annual growth rate of 8.7% in the 1970s17.
        To face the challenges of the new economic environment, companies began to take strict
adjustment measures during the 1990s to rationalise their production by replacing imported inputs with
local inputs18. Import penetration coefficients increased significantly between 1990 and 1998. Thus, as
argued by Belluzzo and Almeida (2002), there was a “shrinking” of supply chains, which were also
affected by “predatory” imports. Industrial companies began to look for ways to improve their
competitiveness by cutting costs, replacing local products with imported inputs and reducing inter-

12
   The ten prepositions were the following: (1) fiscal discipline, (2) reduction of public spending, (3) tax reform (4) interest
rates determined by the market, (5) exchange rates determined by the market, (6) liberalisation of imports, (7) liberalisation of
foreign direct investment flows, (8) privatisation of state enterprises, (9) economic and labor deregulation, and (10) respect for
intellectual property.
13
    According to Carneiro (2002), nontariff barriers to trade, which many saw as the main protectionist instrument, were
completely removed after Annex C (a list of 1,300 products whose imports were forbidden because similar domestic products
were available) was abolished.
14
   Nominal import tariffs were reduced by 55.3% between 1990 and 1994, with the maximum tariff not exceeding 40%.
15
   The first phase of the Brazilian deindustrialisation process was in the 1980s, and it might be associated with significant
macroeconomic imbalances—fiscal crisis, high foreign debt and inflation—observed during that period.
16
   There was a 7.4% annual reduction in investment in the productive state sector between 1981 and 1989; the investment rates
in the private sector remained unchanged in real terms (data extracted from Carneiro, 2002).
17
   The data presented here were calculated by IBGE.
18
   See Rocha (2011), Marconi and Rocha (2012) for more information on the imported input coefficients.
sectoral linkages still under development (Rocha, 2011). According to the Brazilian Institute for
Geography and Statistics (IBGE)19, the penetration coefficient for intermediate goods rose from 2.7% in
1990 to 10.5% in 1998. The substitution process was even more pronounced for manufactured
intermediate goods: whereas the penetration coefficient was 6.1% in 1990, it increased to 21.9% by 1998.
Thus, as local inputs were largely replaced by imports, the process of developing domestic production
required an increasing amount of foreign currency, which made it increasingly difficult to employ the
same growth strategy20. As argued by Laplane and Sarti (2006, p. 276), from a trade balance perspective,
this process “turned the surplus in the trade in manufactured goods registered in the first half of the
decade into a deficit from 1995 on, clearly indicating that it would be difficult to keep the economy on a
growth path. The trade balance was more significantly negative precisely in 1997, when industrial
production was growing at the highest rates, reinforcing the interpretation that the increasing imported
contents of local products were generating an even more pronounced deficit.” Exports of manufactured
products recovered for several years in the 2000s, possibly because of the depreciation of the national
currency and the growth of world demand. However, this movement was interrupted by changes in the
global commodity market, when the 2008/2009 financial crisis took place.
        As a result of an extremely weakened production structure resulting from over a decade of
strongly market-oriented policies, production and exports of primary products became the engine of
Brazil’s growth. A new cycle of economic expansion began in 2002 with the so-called boom of
commodity prices. In mid-2004, global demand began to rise more intensely because of the growth of the
Asian economies, particularly that of China. This shift (along with a monetary policy that caused a
significant increase in the differential between domestic and external interest rates) resulted in a strong
appreciation of the domestic currency. Additionally, this shift caused a consequent increase in imports of
manufactured goods, which increased by 155% at constant prices between 2002 and 200821, and a
reduction in the manufacturing of value-added products22.
        This scenario contributed to the third phase of reductions in the share of manufacturing in value-
added goods in the Brazilian economy after 2002. At this time, the appreciation of the local currency
undermined the competitiveness of Brazilian manufactured products abroad. At the same time, there was
an increase in exports of Brazilian primary products to Asia, which also caused commodity prices to
increase. The trend of rising commodity prices was only reversed in 2009 because of the 2008/2009
financial crisis; however, these prices still remained comparatively high.
        As a result of this new dynamic, many questions emerged regarding the composition of the
domestic production structure, specifically concerning the sectors that boosted the economy. The share of
the services sector in value-added products increased by 4.1% between 1995 and 200923. The shares of
mineral and agricultural commodities also increased in that period (12.1%), whereas the share of the
industrial sector decreased by 12.6%. The share of the manufacturing sector increased to 17%. Growth in
the commodities sector stimulated services activities, including both traditional and modern services.
Shares of sales and transports decreased by 2.4% and 2.3%, respectively. Real estate and financial
intermediation shares increased by 9.4% and 18.4%, respectively. Business services (includes traditional
and modern services) increased by 20.9%. Community, social and personal services decreased by 7.7%.
        In the past, the Brazilian economy adopted a development strategy based on the manufacturing
sector. In more recent years, Brazil has turned to a primary export-led strategy. In the next sections, we

19
   Extracted from Carneiro (2002).
20
   As discussed in Rocha (2011, p. 55), “substituting local inputs with imported ones was seen as the easiest way to meet
demand and revealed the contradiction between striving for efficiency gains at the microeconomic level and the sustainability
of the process at the macroeconomic level, i.e. the contrast between competitive pressure and the weakening of industrial
chains.”
21
   Calculated by the authors based on information from FUNCEX (Foreign Trade Study Center Foundation).
22
   Exports of manufactured products increased by 80.5% on the same comparison basis, with nearly half of the variation
    observed for imports.
23
   We considered the period for which data for National Accounts were available under the same methodology and
    disaggregation.
will evaluate the capacity of both strategies to increase economic growth using indicators that measure the
impact of the production of one sector over another sector.


   3. Theoretical foundations of the input-output model

        This study used input-output analyses to analyse the capacity of commodity production to improve
the Brazilian economy vis-à-vis manufactured goods because these models can incorporate inter-
relationships between various industries in the Brazilian economy. Using this methodology, it is possible
to empirically investigate the economic role of a productive sector without restricting the analysis to its
“direct effects” on the economy regarding generating production, employment, value-added products, tax
revenue, and exports. With this method, it is possible to also investigate the “indirect effects”, i.e., the
effects that a sector can have on other sectors through channels established by input/output transactions
between different economic sectors.
        To calculate these indices, input-output matrices from 2000 to 2008 were used (55 sectors) based
on the National Accounts published annually by the Brazilian Institute for Geography and Statistics
(IBGE). Because of the non-linear periodicity of the information contained in this publication, Brazilian
matrices were estimated for each year of the study period according to the methodology presented by
Guilhoto and Sesso Filho (2005) based on preliminary data of Brazil’s National Accounts. This
methodology consists of a procedure for combining information from the Table of Resources (V) and the
Table of Use of goods and services at consumer prices (U) published by the IBGE for the Brazilian
economy. Next, to reduce the number of sectors required to assess the differences among manufactured
products, commodities and non-tradables, the matrix was aggregated into 18 sectors distributed in these
two groups based on the proximity of their production structures. The correspondence between the sectors
of the initial matrix (55 sectors) and the resulting matrix (18 sectors) is shown in Annex 1.

   3.1.Theoretical foundations

         The theoretical approach adopted in this study is based on the input-output model, which was
originally developed by Leontief (1951). The economy’s total production (X) is the result of the sum of
the production intended for intermediate consumption by different sectors (Z) and the final demand. The
economy’s total production (X) also represents the extent to which sector j used goods produced by sector
i in its total production and indicates the percentage of inputs sold to industry j by sector i in relation to
the total production of sector j.

                                                       Z ij
                                               aij =
                                                       Xj
                                                                                                (1)
       z ij                                                         xj
where     is the inter-sectoral sales of sector i to sector j and        is the total production of sector j. Thus,
we obtain

                                               X = AX + Y                                       (2)

       By solving this equation, the total output required to meet the final demand can be expressed as

                                               X = (I − A ) Y
                                                              −1
                                                                                                (3)
               −1
where ( I − A) = L is the inverse of Leontief’s matrix.
       Using Leontief’s model, various analyses can assess the impact of demand variation on
production, employment and value-added goods, among other variables. Based on the ratio between the
value of the variable K employed and the production of the corresponding sector, the direct coefficient (k)
is calculated for each variable (e.g., employment, value-added goods, wages) as follows:

                                                            Kj
                                                     kj =
                                                            Xj
                                                                                                         (4)

       Once k is calculated, along with Leontief’s inverse matrix (L), it is possible to calculate the
amount of K directly and indirectly generated for each monetary unit produced for the final demand for
each sector. This value is referred to as the generator, which relates production for final demand to a
given variable of the economy. Thus, the generator of a variable K for each sector can be calculated by
summing each column of matrix GK as follows:

                                                              n
                                                     GK = ∑ kˆi ⋅ Lij
                                                             i =1                                        (5)

        With the quotient between the generator and respective direct coefficient, it is possible to obtain
the multiplier of variable K that associates the direct effect of a variable regarding its total (direct and
indirect) effect on the economy as follows:

                                                     MK j = GK j k i
                                                                                                         (6)

        In this manner, multipliers for employment and production can be obtained24. In addition, the
input-output methodology allows other indicators of economic importance to be calculated. The seminal
works of Hirschman (1958) and Rasmussen (1956) allow one define the interrelationships between the
sectors and the power of each sector in the economy to establish linkages. The Hirschman-Rasmussen BL
indices determine the demand of a sector for other sectors, and the FL indices determine the degree to
                                                                                                      l
which this sector is demanded by other sectors. To calculate the Hirschman-Rasmussen BL index, ij is
                                       *                                       L
defined as the elements of matrix L, L is the average of all elements of L and * j is the sum of a column
of L. The BL is expressed as follows:

                                                     BL j = (L* j n ) L*
                                                                                                         (7)

       The Hirschman-Rasmussen FL index is calculated from the matrix of coefficients in row (F)
obtained from the intermediate consumption matrix (Z) and is expressed as
                                          F = xˆ −1 ⋅ Z                        (8)

        As in Leontief’s inverse matrix, the matrix of Ghost is deduced with                  as follows:
                                              G = ( I − F ) −1                                           (9)
                           *                                    G
       Considering G as the average of all elements of G and i* as the sum of the elements in each
                                                              25
row, the Hirschman-Rasmussen FL index is obtained as follows:

24
   This paper used type I multipliers, which only consider multiplicative effects restricted to demand for intermediate inputs,
without making household demand endogenous to the model. If household demand were endogenised in the system, the
induced effect would be considered, and type II multipliers would be used (Guilhoto, 2009).
25
   For more details, see Miller and Blair (2009).
                                                     FLi = (Gi* n ) G *                             (10)

       Sectors can be classified into the following four groups depending on their index values: (i)
independent from (or not highly related to) other sectors if both linkage indices are less than 1; (ii)
dependent on (or strongly related to) other sectors if both linkage indices are greater than 1, denoting
sectors that play a key role in the economy; (ii) dependent on intersectoral supply (or stimulates
production in other sectors) if only the BL index is greater than 1; and (iv) dependent on intersectoral
demand (or dependent on the production of other sectors) if only the FL index is greater than 1. However,
as observed by Cella (1984) and Clements (1990), these indices do not consider the production levels of
each analysed sector.
       To correct and refine the solutions presented by Cella (1984) and Clements (1990), Guilhoto et al.
(1994) introduced the first version of what would be considered a pure linkage index, which later became
known as the GHS methodology. Guilhoto, Sonis and Hewings (1996) present decompositions of
Leontief’s inverse matrix that integrate the main techniques used in input-output structures to decompose
and distinguish the impact of an economic sector on its various components. The consolidated GHS
methodology is based on a block matrix of technical coefficients (A):


                                                        A jj         A jr 
                                                     A=                   
                                                        Arj         Arr 
                                                                                                    (11)

where A is composed of square and rectangular matrices. A and A represent square matrices of the
direct technical coefficients of sector j and the remainder of the economy (entire economy minus sector j),
respectively. A and A represent rectangular matrices of direct inputs purchased by sector j from the
remainder of the economy and direct inputs purchased by the remainder of the economy from sector j,
respectively.

       Based on matrix A in (11), a triple multiplicative decomposition of Leontief’s inverse matrix can
be expressed as follows:

                           L jj   L jr  ∆ jj      0  ∆ j        0  I            A jr ∆ r 
        L = ( I − A) −1 =               =
                           Lrj    Lrr   0      ∆ rr   0
                                                                           
                                                                    ∆ r   Arj ∆ j      I 
                                                                                                    (12)
where
                                           ∆ j = ( I − A jj ) −1
                                                                                                    (13)
                                                               −1
                                           ∆ r = ( I − Arr )                                        (14)
                                                                               −1
                                           ∆ jj = ( I − ∆ j A jr ∆ r Arj )
                                                                                                    (15)
                                                                             −1
                                           ∆ rr = ( I − ∆ r Arj ∆ j A jr )                          (16)

        From Leontief’s model in (3) and Equation (12), we obtain the following:

                                    X j   ∆ jj      0  ∆ j Y j + ∆ j A jr ∆ r Yr 
                                     =                                            
                                    Xr   0         ∆ rr  ∆ r Arj ∆ j Y j + ∆ r Yr 
                                                                                                    (17)
        Through this process, pure BL (PBL) and pure FL (PFL) indices can be deduced in their new
definition as follows:

                                             PBL = ∆ r Arj ∆ j Y j
                                                                                         (18)
                                             PFL = ∆ j A jr ∆ r Yr
                                                                                         (19)

        In Equation (18), the index indicates the impact of the value of the total output of sector j on the
remainder of the economy, the net of demand for inputs that sector j produces for itself and the returns of
the remainder of the economy for sector j and vice versa. The PFL in Equation (19) indicates the impact
of the value of the total production of the remainder of the economy on sector j. The PBL and PFL are
summed to calculate the pure total linkage (PTL) index for each sector of the economy, expressed in
current values:

                                             PTL = PBL + PFL                             (20)

        However, because these indices do not consider the size of the sectors, which is an important
aspect for identifying key sectors of the economy, a “normalisation” procedure should be applied to these
indices based on the approach of normalised pure linkage indices. For this purpose, the pure indices of
each sector are divided by the average of pure indices for the economy as a whole. Thus, the normalised
PBL (PBLN) index, the normalised PFL (PFLN) index and the normalised PTL (PTLN) index can be
represented as follows:

                                                   n        
                                     PBLNi = PBLi  ∑ PBLi n 
                                                   i =1                                (21)
                                                         n
                                                             
                                     PFLNi = PFLi  ∑ PFLi n 
                                                   i =1                                (22)
                                                         n
                                                              
                                     PTLN i = PTLi  ∑ PTLi n 
                                                    i =1                               (23)

   4. Results

        In this section, the results obtained using the proposed methodology based on the input-output
analysis are presented in the following order: output multipliers, Rasmussen-Hirschman indices, PBLN
indices, and PFLN indices.
        The output multiplier indicates how much is produced for each monetary unit spent on final
consumption. These multipliers incorporate direct and indirect effects to measure the impacts of a demand
shock on the economy. Type I multipliers are used in this analysis. As seen from the first two columns of
Table 1, the greatest multipliers of the Brazilian economy (greater than 2.0 for most years) were identified
in six sectors: food/beverages, transportation equipment, chemical products, apparel/leather/footwear,
petroleum, and metal products, with food/beverages and transportation equipment being the two most
prominent sectors. Transportation equipment includes the auto industry. The apparel/leather/footwear
sector also has a high multiplier effect and is labour intensive, making it important for the development of
productive chains that employ large numbers of people. The three lowest multipliers in the tradable
sectors are miscellaneous, mineral commodities and agricultural commodities. The miscellaneous and
mineral commodities sectors are associated with a strong bias toward Brazil’s comparative advantages.
Finally, the analysis of the non-tradable sector shows that services have little capacity to stimulate the
economy, exhibiting the lowest ranks. Although construction and utilities appear with the highest
multipliers among services, they are still lower than commodities’ output multipliers.
        The results of the analysis of multipliers can be complemented by Hirschman-Rasmussen FL and
BL indices (columns 3-6 of Table 1). The BL index indicates the extent to which the output of a particular
sector stimulates the production of its inputs. The FL index allows one to analyse the importance of a
given sector as an input supplier. These indices allow one to investigate behaviour of the economy’s
internal structure and identify key sectors that depend on inter-industrial supply and inter-industrial
demand or are relatively independent from the other sectors.
        Located in the upper-right quadrant, the key sectors of the Brazilian economy in the 2000s were
petroleum and chemical products. These sectors exhibited a high potential to boost other sectors of the
economy in addition to being major input suppliers. The petroleum sector had the greatest capacity to
supply inputs to the remaining sectors. Although it falls under the commodity category, petroleum is
characterised by a high production rate for each monetary unit spent on final consumption. The petroleum
sector is a supplier of inputs for manufacturing, the main industrialised products of the chemical products
and synthetic materials sectors and the apparel sector 26. The petroleum sector is not exported as a raw
material, as are mineral commodities27.

Table 1 - Output Multipliers and Linkage Indices – Average 2000-2009
                                        Output             Linkage indexes               Normalized pure linkage
Sectors                               Multipliers     Backward          Forward         Backward        Forward
                                     Avg Rank Avg Rank Avg Rank Avg Rank Avg Rank
Agricultural commodities             1.77      10    0.97     10      1.14     7      0.81     8      1.98      2
Petroleum                            2.18       3    1.19      3      1.45     1      0.37    16      1.36      7
Mineral commodities                  1.97       8    1.07      8      1.21     5      0.48    14      1.31      8
Food and Beverages                   2.35       1    1.29      1      0.86    13      2.51     1      0.65     10
Textiles and footwear                2.01       5    1.10      5      0.87    12      0.53    13      0.17     16
Miscellaneous                        1.83       9    1.00      9      1.04     8      0.39    15      0.39     12
Chemical products                    2.06       4    1.13      4      1.33     2      0.54    12      1.74      4
Metal products (incl. machinery)     1.97       7    1.08      7      1.00     9      0.70     9      0.59     11
Electric mat. and communic.          1.99       6    1.09      6      0.90    11      0.66    10      0.32     14
Transportation equipament            2.24       2    1.23      2      0.82    15      1.28     6      0.25     15
Utilities                            1.70      12    0.93     12      1.29     4      0.23    17      1.06      9
Construction                         1.75      11    0.96     11      0.67    16      1.55     5      0.33     13
Sales                                1.42      18    0.78     18      0.95    10      0.91     7      1.68      5
Traditional services                 1.51      17    0.82     17      0.84    14      2.41     2      1.90      3
Modern services                      1.59      13    0.87     13      1.15     6      0.64    11      2.44      1
Business services                    1.57      14    0.86     14      1.33     3      0.18    18      1.63      6
Health and education                 1.51      16    0.83     16      0.57    18      1.79     4      0.06     18
Public admin.                        1.52      15    0.83     15      0.58    17      2.03     3      0.11     17
Source: Elaborated by the authors based on the estimated Brazilian input-output tables.

       There are no tradable sectors of the Brazilian economy in the group that are relatively independent
from the other sectors (lower-left quadrant), indicating that there is a significant degree of dependence
between several industrial sectors of the economy. This result may have been caused by the development
process of Brazilian industry during the ISI period, when input production and inter-industrial demand
were strongly stimulated. Located in the lower-right quadrant, the food/beverages and transportation

26
   The highest increase in linkage indices in this sector was registered from 2004-2006, during which Brazil became self-
    sufficient in oil production.
27
   According to the National Accounts, Brazilian exports of petroleum and natural gas were 21.3% of the total production in
    2009, whereas 90.2% of the total production of iron ore was exported.
equipment sectors are strongly dependent on inter-industrial supply and stimulate production in other
sectors. These data demonstrate the importance of these sectors and their ability to increase production in
other sectors. In the upper-left quadrant, agricultural commodities, modern services, business services and
utilities are the sectors with the largest inter-industrial demand dependence. These sectors present the
lowest capacity to increase production in other sectors of the economy; they actually depend on the
production of other sectors. This result is expected for the services sector. Moreover, traditional services
are in the lower-left quadrant, which indicates the sector’s lack of dynamism. Therefore, the growth rates
of the economy would likely be lower if increases in income stimulated the production of these types of
services.

Graph 1 - Hirschman-Rasmussen BL and FL indices – Average 2000-2009
                            1.60



                            1.40                                                                                    Petroleum
                                       Business services           Utilities
                                                                                                           Chemical products
                                                                    Agricultural
    Forward Linkages (FL)




                            1.20          Modern services                                 Mineral
                                                                    commodities
                                                                                          commodities
                                                                                                  Metal products
                            1.00
                                                                     Miscellaneous                (incl. machinery)
                                                                               Electric materials              Transportation
                                        Sales                                  and communication               equipament
                                                        Traditional services
                            0.80                                                                  Textiles and
                                                                                                                            Food and
                                                                                                  footwear
                                                                                                                            Beverages
                                                               Construction
                                            Public admin
                            0.60

                                                       Health and education

                            0.40
                                0.70            0.80              0.90             1.00             1.10           1.20          1.30

                                                                         Backward Linkages (BL)
Source: Elaborated by the authors based on the estimated Brazilian input-output tables.

        However, the Hirschman-Rasmussen index does not consider the size of sectors in the economy,
which helps to identify key sectors. Thus, Table 1 (columns 7-10) includes these indices normalised by
the sector size. The first index assesses the pure impact of a sector on its chain, and the second index
measures the sector’s capacity to supply inputs to the domestic industry. Food/beverages, traditional
services, public admin, health/education, construction and transportation equipment occupy the first six
positions of the BL indices. The food/beverages sector has the highest index because of the importance of
its demand from other industrial complexes and its size compared with the other sectors. In addition, the
transportation equipment sector’s output has a rising pure impact and has demanded inputs from the other
sectors of the economy over time. Moreover, traditional services and construction appear as sectors with a
high demand from other sectors in the economy because of their relative importance to the economic
structure. Services represent nearly two thirds of the Brazilian economy, and these two groups are the
most relevant.
        As expected, products with a lower degree of processing that are employed in the production of
other goods exhibited relatively high FL indices. The transportation equipment and electrical
materials/communications equipment sectors, whose degree of processing is higher and whose chain is
closer to final goods, ranked 14th and 15th, respectively. Agricultural commodities, some services and
chemical products present high FL indices because they are important suppliers for the economy as a
whole. Moreover, although mineral commodities have a low degree of processing, they are ranked only
8th. This position is due to the low significance of this sector as a domestic supplier because of the high
volume of raw mineral exports.

   5. Concluding remarks

        Although the Brazilian development model adopted since the Plano Real in 1994 was able to
guarantee price stabilisation, it failed to promote economic growth during the 1990s. The national
economy resumed a growth path with improvements in external demand for Brazilian products only in the
early 2000s. Given this joint process, most interpretations of the recent expansion of the Brazilian
economy identified commodity production and its exports as the main drivers of this growth pattern.
        To assess this phenomenon, this study analysed the abilities of various sectors to boost the
Brazilian economy. Input-output matrices were used to quantify the potential of commodities,
manufacturing and services to leverage demand from other sectors and to identify key input-supplying
sectors. Agricultural and mineral commodities and non-tradable sectors exhibited little capacity to boost
the economy. In addition to their low multipliers, BL indices for these sectors were low because their
supply chains are not large. In contrast, the FL indices of the most modern and dynamic service sectors
are high, and these sectors can stimulate general output when associated with manufacturing production,
especially production that is more sophisticated and that demands high-value-added services.
        Although it also falls under the commodity category, the petroleum sector has notably different
characteristics than the other sectors. In addition to the relative importance of petroleum as a demand
sector and thus as a booster of other supply chains, this sector is the leading supplier of inputs for the
economy. The petroleum sector is a provider of inputs used for manufacturing, the main industrialised
products produced by the chemical products sector and the synthetic materials produced by the apparel
sector. The petroleum sector is also an indirect supplier of the transportation equipment and electrical
materials/communications equipment sectors and several other industries. Thus, the contrasting behaviour
of the petroleum sector compared to the other sectors clearly demonstrates the importance of adding value
to commodities rather than simply exporting raw or semi-manufactured goods.
        The analysis of multipliers and linkage indices also emphasised the importance of transportation
equipment and food\beverages as sectors that are highly dependent on inter-industrial supply. These
sectors have a high potential to turn final demand into production both within themselves and in their
upstream supply chain. These results emphasise the importance of focusing development strategy on
consolidating a production structure in which supply chains are organised so that final demand can boost
the remainder of the economy.
        Therefore, the analysis of the Brazilian production structure clearly showed that sectors related to
manufactured products can boost the economy to a greater extent than other sectors due to their linkage
effects on other sectors of the economy. Efforts to promote a dynamic production structure must be
associated with a development strategy that considers comparative advantages in the economy while
considering the advantages of a production structure oriented toward expanding manufacturing.
Interpretations of the recent growth of Brazil’s economy that explain it based on the expansion of
“commoditised” and non-tradable sectors or on the country’s comparative advantages limit the
understanding of the complex factors that boost an economy. Therefore, a development strategy that
guarantees high growth rates over the long term should recognise the importance of a productive structure
oriented toward manufacturing, even if this sector is boosted by primary commodities, such as the
petroleum industry.



References
BACHA, E. & BONELLI, R. (2005), Uma interpretaçãos das causas da desaceleração econômica do Brasil.
Revista de Economia Política, v. 25, n. 3 (99), p.163-189, jul./set.
BARROS, J. R. M. & GOLDENSTEIN, L. (1997), Reestruturação Industrial e Reordenação Financeira: um
novo balanço. Mimeo.
BELLUZZO, L. G. M. & ALMEIDA, J. G. (2002), Depois da Queda. Rio de Janeiro, RJ: Civilização
Brasileira publishing house.
BONELLI, R. (2005). Industrialização e desenvolvimento (notas e conjecturas com foco na experiência
do Brasil). Paper prepared for the Seminar “Industrialization, Deindustrialization and Development,”
sponsored by FIESP (Federation of Industries of the State of São Paulo) and IEDI (Institute for Studies
for Industrial Development). São Paulo, SP, November 28, 2005.
BRESSER-PEREIRA, L.C. (2008), The Dutch disease and its neutralization: a Ricardian approach.
Revista de Economia Política, v. 28, n. 1, pp. 47-71.
BRESSER-PEREIRA, L.C. (2009) Developing Brazil: Overcoming the Failure of the Washington
Consensus, Boulder: Lynne Rienner Publishes.
BRESSER-PEREIRA, L.C. (2012), “Structuralist macroeconomics and the new developmentalism”.
Revista de Economia Política, v. 32, n. 3, pp. 347-366.
CARNEIRO, R. (2002), Desenvolvimento em Crise: a economia brasileira no último quarto do século
XX. Campinas: UNICAMP, Institute of Economics; São Paulo: Editora UNESP publishing house, 2002.
CANUTO, O., CAVALLARI, M & REIS, J.G. (2013), Brazilian Exports, climbing down a
competitiveness cliff. The World Bank. Poverty Reduction and Economic Management Network. January
2013.
CELLA, G. (1984), The input-output measurement of interindustry linkages. Oxford Bulletin of
Economic and Statistics, v. 46, pp. 73-84, 1984.
CHAYANOV, A.V. (1966) The theory of peasant economy, in D. Thorner, B. Kerblay and R.E.F. Smith,
eds. Homewood, IL: Richard D. Irwin, Inc.
CHENERY, H.; SHERMAN, R.; MOSHE, S. (1986), Industrialization and growth. Oxford University
Press, published for the World Bank, 1986.
CLEMENTS, B.J. (1990), On the decomposition and normalization of interindustry linkages. Economics
Letters, v. 33, n. 4, pp. 337-340, Aug. 1990.
CORDEN, W. M.; NEARY, J. P. (1982). Booming Sector and De-Industrialisation in a Small Open
Economy, The Economic Journal, Vol. 92, No. 368. (Dec., 1982), pp. 825-848.
CORNWALL, J. (1977), Modern Capitalism. It’s Growth and Transformation, New York, St. Martin’s
Press.
DASGUPTA, S. & SINGH, A, (2006), Manufacturing, Services and Premature Deindustrialization in
Developing Countries: A Kaldorian Analysis. Working Papers RP2006/49, World Institute for
Development Economic Research (UNU-WIDER).
DIXON, R.; THIRLWALL, A. P. (1975), A model of regional growth-rate differences on Kaldorian
lines. Oxford Economic Papers.
FAGERBERG, J. & B. VERSPAGEN (1999). Modern Capitalism in the 1970s and 1980s. , table 9.1, Iin
M. Setterfield ed., Growth, Employment and Inflation, Houndmills, Basingstoke, MacMillan.
FRANCO, G. (1998), A inserção externa e o desenvolvimento. Revista de Economia Política, v. 18, n. 3,
Jul./Sept. 1998.
FURTADO, C. (1961), Desenvolvimento e Subdesenvolvimento (3rd ed.). Rio de Janeiro, RJ: Editora
Fundo de Cultura publishing house, 1965.
FURTADO, C. (1961), Elementos de uma teoria do subdesenvolvimento. , 1961, I.i.n: Bielschowsky,
Ricardo, org., Cinquenta anos de pensamento na CEPAL, Ed. Record publishing house, vol. 1, 2000.
GUILHOTO, J. (2009). Análise de Insumo-Produto: teoria, fundamentos e aplicações. Book in
preparation. Department of Economics, FEA-USP.
GUILHOTO, J.J.M. & U.A. SESSO FILHO. (2005), “Estimação da Matriz Insumo-Produto a Partir de
Dados Preliminares das Contas Nacionais”. Economia Aplicada. Vol. 9. 18, n. 2, pp. 277-299. April-June,
2005.
GUILHOTO, J.J.M.; SONIS, M.; HEWINGS, G.J.D. (1995), Linkages and multipliers in a multiregional
framework: integrations of alternative approaches. Illinois: REAL, 1996. 19 pp. (Discussion Paper, 8)
GUILHOTO, J.J.M.; SONIS, M.; HEWINGS, G.J.D.; MARTINS, E.B. (1994), Índices de ligações e
setores-chave na economia brasileira: 1959/80. Pesquisa e Planejamento Econômico, v. 2, n. 24, pp. 287-
314, Aug. 1994.
HIRSCHMAN, A.O. (1958),. The Strategy of Economic Development. New Haven, TC: Yale University
Press.
KALDOR, N. (1966), Causes of the slow rate of economic growth in the United Kingdom, 1989. In:
TARGETTI, F.; THIRLWALL, A. P. (Ed.).The Essential Kaldor. Holmes & Meier Publishers, New
York, 1989.
KALDOR, N. (1981), The role of increasing returns, technical progress and cumulative causation in the
theory of international trade and economic growth. Economie Appliquée, vol. 34(6), pp. 593-617, 1981.
LAPLANE, M. & SARTI, F. (2006), Prometeu Acorrentado: o Brasil na indústria mundial no início do
século XXI. 2006. In: CARNEIRO, Ricardo (org.). A Supremacia dos mercados e a política econômica
do governo Lula. São Paulo: Editora UNESP publishing house, 2006.
LEONTIEF, W. (1951). The Structure of the American Economy. Second Edition. New York: Oxford
University Press.
LEWIS, ARTHUR W. (1954), Economic Development with Unlimited Supply of Labor, 1958. In
AGARWALA AND SINGH, orgs. The Economics of Underdevelopment. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1958.
LIPTON, M. (1968), ‘Strategy for agriculture: urban bias and rural planning’, in: P. Streeten and M.
Lipton, eds. The crisis of Indian planning. London: Oxford University Press
LODEFALK, M. (2010), Servicification of Manufacturing - Evidence from Swedish Firm and Enterprise
Group Level Data, Örebro University. Swedish Business School. Working Paper 3/2010.
MARCONI, N. and ROCHA, M. (2012), Taxa de câmbio, comércio exterior e desindustrialização
precoce - o caso brasileiro. Economia e Sociedade (UNICAMP. Impresso), v. 21, pp. 853-888, 2012.
MCCOMBIE, J. S. L. & THIRLWALL, Anthony A. P. (1994a), The Balance-of-Payment constraint as
an explanation of international growth rates differences. New York, SI, Martin’s Press,1994.
MCCOMBIE, J. S. L. &; THIRLWALL, A. P. (1994b), Economic growth and the balance-of-payments
constraints. New York: ST. Martin’s Press.
MILLER, R. E & BLAIR P.D. (2009), Input-Output Analysis: Foundations and Extensions. 2nd. Edition.
Cambrige: Cambridge University Press.
MORENO-BRID, J. (2003), Capital flows, interests payments and the balance-of-payments constrained
growth model: a theoretical and empirical analysis. Metroeconomica, v. 54, n. 2.
NORDÅS, H. K. and KIM, Y. (2013), “The Role of Services for Competitiveness in Manufacturing”,
OECD Trade Policy Papers, No. 148, OECD Publishing. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5k484xb7cx6b-en.
PALMA, G. (2005), Four sources of ‘de-industrialisation’ and a new concept of the dutch disease. In:
OCAMPO, J. A. (Org.). Beyond reforms:structural dynamics and macroeconomic vulnerability. Stanford
University Press and World Bank.
PRATES, D. M. (2006), A inserção externa da economia brasileira no governo Lula, in: CARNEIRO, R.
(Org.). A Supremacia dos Mercados e a Política Econômica do Governo Lula. São Paulo: Editora
UNESP publishing house, 2006.
PRATES, D. M. (2007), A alta recente dos preços das commodities. Revista de Economia
Política [online]. 2007, vol. 27, n. 3, pp. 323-344.
PREBISCH, R. (1949), O desenvolvimento econômico da América Latina e seus principais problemas,
1949, in BIELSCHOWSKY, R., org. Cinquenta anos de pensamento na CEPAL, Ed. Record publishing
house, vol. 1, 2000.
PREBISCH, R. (1986), El desarrollo de la América Latina y algunos de sus principales problemas, in:
BIELSCHOWSKY, R. Cinqüenta años de pensamiento en la Cepal: selected texts. Santiago de Chile:
Cepal/Fondo de Cultura, 1998.
RASMUSSEN, P. (1956), Studies in Intersectoral Relations. Amsterdam: North Holland.
ROCHA, I. L. (2011), Reestruturação industrial no Brasil: uma análise da dinámica comercial e produtiva
da economía. Campinas, SP: Master’s Degree Dissertation, 2011.
RODRIK, D. (2007), Industrial development: Some stylized facts and policy directions. In: Industrial
Development for the 21st Century: Sustainable Development Perspectives. Department of Economic and
Social Affairs Publications. New York: United Nations, 2007.
ROSENSTEIN-RODAN, P. 54, N. (1943), Problems of Industrialization in Eastern Europe and South-
Eastern Europe. Economic Journal 53, June 1943.
ROSTOW, W. W. (1956), The take-off into self-sustained growth. The Economic Journal, v. 66, n. 261,
pp. 25-48, Mar, 1956.
ROWTHORN, R. & COUTTS (2004), “Deindustrialization and the Balance of Payments in Advanced
Economies”, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 28(5), 767:90.
SCHULTZ, T.W. (1964) Transforming traditional agriculture, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
SINGER, H. W. (1950). The distribution of gains between investing and borrowing countries. American
Economic Review, 40 (2), 473-485.
STALLINGS, B. & PERES, W. (2000), Crecimiento, empleo y equidad. El impacto de las reformas
económicas en América Latina y el Caribe. Santiago de Chile: Fondo de Cultura Económica/Cepal.
SZIRMAI, A. (2009). Industrialisation as an Engine of Growth in Developing Countries, 1950-2005,
UNU-MERIT working paper, 2009-10, February, 2009).
SZIRMAI, A. (2012), Industrialisation as an engine of growth in developing countries, 1950-2005.
Structural Change and Economic Dynamics. Vol. 12, n. 4, Dec. 2012.
TAVARES, M. C. (1998), “Ciclo e crise: o movimento recente da industrialização brasileira”. Campinas,
Institute of Economics, 1998.
THIRLWALL, A. P. & HUSSEIN, M. (1982), The balance of payments constraint, capital flows and
growth rates differences between developing countries. Oxford Economic Paper, n. 10, pp. 498-509.
THIRLWALL, A. P. (1979), The Balance of Payments Constraint as an Explanation of International
Growth Rate Differences. 1979.
VERDOORN, P. J. (1949), On the factors determining the growth of labour productivity. In:
PASINETTI, L. (Ed.). Italian Economic Papers, Oxford University Press, pp. 45-53.
WILLIAMSON, J. (1989), What Washington mean by policy reform in a conference held by the Institute for
International Economics in November, 1989. Published as the opening chapter in the conference volume The
progress of policy reform in Latin America, 1990.
Appendix 1 - Translator of types of commodities, manufacturing and services
Agricultural Commodities                               Food and beverages
Agriculture, forestry, extractive products             Food and beverages
Livestock and fishing activities                       Electric Materials and Communication Equipment
Tobacco products                                       Household appliances
Wood products - excluding furniture                    Office machines and IT equipment
Pulp and paper products                                Electrical machines, appliances and equipment
Alcohol                                                Electronic materials and communications equipment
Petroleum                                              Medical-hospital equipment/instruments for
Petroleum refining and coking Agricultural             measurement and optical purposes
Oil and natural gas                                    Transportation equipment
Mineral Commodities                                    Cars, vans and off-road vehicles
Manufacture of steel and steel products                Trucks and buses
Iron ore                                               Parts and accessories for motor vehicles
Metallurgy of non-ferrous metals                       Other transportation equipment
Other extractive products                              Construction
Cement                                                 Construction
Other non-metallic minerals                            Sales
Textiles and footwear                                  Sales
Textiles                                               Modern Services
Articles of apparel and accessories                    Information Technology Services
Leather products and footwear                          Financial Intermediation
Miscellaneous                                          Business Services
Furniture items and products of different industries   Business Services
Newspapers, magazines, CDs                             Education and Health
Chemical Products                                      Commercial Education
Manufacture of resins and elastomers                   Commercial Health
Pharmaceutical products                                Public Education
Agrochemicals                                          Public Health
Perfumes, hygiene and cleaning products                Traditional Services
Paints, varnishes, enamels and lacquers                Transport and Post Activities
Various chemical products and preparations             Real Estate Activities
Chemical products                                      Repair of Household Goods
Rubber and plastic items                               Hotels and Restaurants
Metallurgy (incl. Machinery)                           Household Services
Metal products - except machinery and equipment        Other Community, Social and Personal Services
Machines and equipment, including maintenance and      Public Admin
repairs                                                Public Admin and Compulsory Social Security
