     What determined labour productivity in the Brazilian manufacturing
                         industries in the 2000s?




                                André Nassif
  The Brazilian Development Bank (BNDES) and Fluminense Federal University
                                   (UFF)
                         andrenassif27@gmail.com


                               Carmem Feijó - UFF
                               cfeijo@terra.com.br


                    Eliane Araújo – State University of Maringá
                            elianedearaujo@gmail.com




                                    July 2014




JEL classification: E23, L16, L23, 012, 014
Keywords: labour productivity, manufacturing, Brazil

Área 6: Crescimento, Desenvolvimento Econômico e Instituições



                                        1
                                       Abstract

In the 2000-2008 period (which covers the analysis of this paper), while the
average real GDP growth was 3.72 per cent per year, the labour productivity had a
negative variation of -0.95 per cent per year. There has been a “cliché” to evaluate
the low economic growth rates as a result of low labour productivity growth in the
last few decades in the Brazilian economy. However, according to the so-called
Kaldor-Verdoorn Law, the reciprocal could also be true: the low growth rates of
labour productivity in Brazil could be an effect of the low growth rates of the real
GDP. We regress the change in labour productivity in the 2000-2008 period of 21
Brazilian manufacturing industries on three main variables: real GDP (which
captures the Kaldor-Verdoorn Law), the ratio of gross investment to value added
and technological innovation. In the several econometric models we ran, the real
GDP growth was the most significant variable to explain the behaviour of labour
productivity in the manufacturing industries in Brazil in the 2000s. This result
suggests that the larger and more sustainable the real GDP growth in Brazil is, the
greater will be its labour productivity growth rates. This result is also consistent with
the Kaldor-Verdoorn Law, according to which the labour productivity growth is
highly dependent on the growth rates of the economy as a whole. The investment
only showed to be significant when it was included into the model with a lag of one
period and when innovation (which was also significant) was incorporated as one
of the explanatory variables of the labour productivity. Although this result seems to
be consistent with theoretical expectations, it must be carefully analysed because,
as innovation data is available for only few years, the number of observations is too
few to make the empirical conclusion robust. In relation to the gross investment,
specifically, although the literature suggests that labour productivity growth should
respond positively to increasing gross capital formation, this latter explanatory
variable was not significant in most models we ran. Even so, this unexpected result
is consistent with some descriptive statistics on the behaviour of gross investment
by sector of economic activity in Brazil between 2000 and 2008. In specific terms,
between 2000 and 2008, the growth rates of gross capital formation in more
knowledge-based sectors (capital goods and intermediate goods) and industries
from medium to high technological sophistication (mass consumption) were less
(3.5 per cent and 3.1 per cent, respectively) than those of the economy as a whole
(4.8 per cent). In a few words, rather than concluding that, in general terms, gross
investment is not important for boosting labour productivity in the economy, our
results suggest that, in the case of Brazil in the 2000s, gross capital formation grew
at very low rates – in fact, at rates lower than those of the economy as a whole – in
sectors with a high capacity of technological innovation and a high capacity to spill
over their gains from productivity to the economy as a whole.




                                           2
                                     Resumo

No período 2000-2008 (que cobre a análise deste artigo), enquanto a taxa de
crescimento do PIB real foi de 3,72% a.a., a produtividade do trabalho teve
variação negativa de -0,95% a.a. Já se tornou um “clichê” atribuir as baixas taxas
de crescimento econômico no Brasil às reduzidas taxas de incremento da
produtividade do trabalho. No entanto, de acordo com a chamada Lei de
Kaldor-Verdoorn, a recíproca também é verdadeira: as reduzidas taxas de
incremento da produtividade do trabalho podem ser consequência das baixas
taxas de crescimento econômico no país ao longo da última década. Neste
trabalho, fizemos diversos exercícios de regressão econométrica da produtividade
do trabalho em 21 setores da indústria de transformação no Brasil no período
2000-2008, tendo como variáveis explicativas as taxas de variação do PIB real, o
investimento bruto como proporção do valor adicionado setorial e uma variável
associada à inovação tecnológica. Nos diversos modelos econométricos
implementados, a taxa de variação do PIB real foi a variável mais significativa para
explicar o comportamento da produtividade do trabalho na indústria brasileira.
Estes resultados são consistentes com a Lei de Kaldor-Verdoorn, que sugere que
as taxas de incremento da produtividade do trabalho são fortemente dependentes
da taxa de crescimento da economia como um todo. O investimento só se revelou
significativo quando incluído com defasagem de um período e quando a variável
associada à inovação também foi incluída no modelo. Embora este resultado seja
coerente com o esperado, de acordo com a literatura teórica, o mesmo deve ser
analisado com cautela, já que, como os dados associados à inovação tecnológica
só estão disponíveis para poucos anos do período analisado, o número de
observações ficou bastante reduzido para tornarem robustas as conclusões
empíricas. Em relação ao investimento propriamente dito, embora a literatura
sugira que a produtividade do trabalho deva responder positivamente aos
incrementos da taxa de investimento, estes últimos não foram significativos para
explicar o comportamento da produtividade da indústria brasileira entre 2000 e
2008. Apesar de surpreendentes, tais resultados são confirmados pelas
estatísticas descritivas sobre o comportamento do investimento na indústria
brasileira na década de 2000. Com efeito, entre 2000 e 2008, as taxas de
crescimento da formação bruta de capital fixo nos setores industriais mais
intensivos em conhecimento (bens de capital e bens intermediários) e nas
indústrias de média e alta tecnologias (consumo de massa) foram menores (3,5%
e 3,1%, respectivamente) do que as da economia como um todo (4,8%). Em
outras palavras, longe de sugerir que o investimento bruto em geral não seja
importante para fomentar a produtividade do trabalho nos diversos setores da
economia, nossos resultados sugerem que a formação bruta de capital fixo na
indústria de transformação cresceu a taxas bastante reduzidas na década de
2000 – na verdade, a taxas menores do que as verificadas na economia como
um todo - justamente naqueles setores com maior capacidade de inovação
tecnológica e maior poder de disseminação de seus respectivos ganhos de
produtividade para o restante da economia brasileira.



                                         3
1. Introduction

       Since Adam Smith (1776), productivity growth has been understood as one
of the main drivers of economic development. Krugman (1994) expressed this
idea well in the quotation below:

          Productivity isn’t everything, but in the long run it is almost everything. A
         country’s ability to improve its standard of living over time depends almost
         entirely on its ability to raise its output per worker.

        Industrialisation, in turn, has always been associated with a quick increase
in aggregate productivity, since industry, manufacturing in particular, has strong
backward and forward linkages, 1 allowing productivity gains to be easily
transmitted throughout the productive structure. 2 Higher levels and rates of
productivity growth are expected to be observed in economies that have already
reached a mature industrial structure.
        The Brazilian economy is one relatively successful example of a late
industrialised country in Latin America. Its industrialisation process started taking
shape after the Second World War and gained momentum during the 1970s when
GDP grew at above 7% on average per annum. Figure 1 shows the change in both
manufacturing productivity and GDP from the 1970s to 2008. Higher GDP rates
were observed in the 1970s, when industrial productivity also increased at positive
rates. Growth rates of both variables were close to zero in the 1980s for both
indicators, and although labour productivity increased in the 1990s due to the
opening up process of the economy, GDP recovery was at lower rates than
observed in the 1970s. The 2000s exhibited a different picture as GDP growth
coincided with a decrease in manufacturing productivity. Specifically, in the
2000-2008 period (which covers the analysis of this paper), while the average real
GDP growth was 3.72 per cent per year, the labour productivity had a negative
variation of -0.95 per cent per year. These results highlight the loss of weight of the
manufacturing industry in total GDP, due to early de-industrialisation and
significant demographic changes.




1
    See Hirschman, 1981.
2
    See Kaldor, 1978.

                                           4
     Figure 1: Change in manufacturing labour productivity and real GDP
                   1970-2008 – in index number: 1970=100




      Source: ECLAC-PADI database for manufacturing productivity and IPEA data for real GDP.

      Table 1 presents growth rates estimates for labour productivity in Brazil
covering the 1961-2012 period, based on the recent work by Bonelli and Fontes
(2013). In this long-term perspective, one can say that Brazilian labour productivity
has shown a strong pattern of underperformance since the 1980s. Yearly labour
productivity growth in Brazil was negative in the 1980s, close to zero per cent in
the 1990s, and slightly more than one per cent between 2001 and 2012.


    Table 1: Yearly growth rates of aggregate labour productivity in Brazil
                         (1961-2012 – in percentage)
              Average                     Labour productivity

              1961-1970                                        3.5
              1971-1980                                        4.8
              1981-1990                                       (-0.9)
              1991-2000                                        0.7
              2001-2012                                        1.2
       Source: Bonelli and Fontes (2013:7)



       The evidence above could reinforce the conclusion that one of the main
factors to explain the low real GDP growth in Brazil in the past three decades is the
low rates of labour productivity. Hence, productivity is the key variable to be
explained in order to shed some light on the issue of why the Brazilian economy
has lost its vigour to grow since the 1980s.


                                                5
       Although the mainstream economic literature analyses productivity as a
variable mostly explained by forces from the supply side, this paper will argue that
productivity is better understood when one investigates it considering forces from
both the demand and supply sides. This means that, in addition to a firm’s stimulus
to increase its productivity in order to increase or maintain its profit rate and market
share, the stimulus from the macroeconomic environment should also be taken into
account. In this perspective, this paper aims not only to show the concept,
determinants and a theoretical model for explaining labour productivity in general
(see Section 2), but also to show empirical evidence on the main determinants of
this indicator in the Brazilian manufacturing industries between 2000 and 2008
(see Section 3).3 The last section, Section 4, presents the conclusion and some
policy implications for Brazil, taking into account the empirical evidence shown in
Section 3.

2. Labour productivity: concept, determinants and a theoretical model

       Productivity is the measure of the efficiency of the combination of all inputs
in the production process. Mainstream economists, based on the concept of a
production function, measure the level and variation of productivity through the so-
called total factor productivity (TFP). Neoclassical economists consider TFP a
superior measure for productivity in relation to the measurement of the contribution
of a single factor productivity, since, differently from the latter, the former is
invariant to the intensity of use of observable inputs (Syverson, 2010).
       TFP is based on Solow’s theoretical and empirical growth model (1956 and
1957), which, however, suffers from some shortcomings. We will mention three of
them: first, since the estimation of productivity by TFP is based on either a
microeconomic production function (at the firm or sectoral level) or a
macroeconomic production function (at the aggregate level), it is hard to conceive
a production function which actually reflects an adopted technology since
technology is not a homogeneous good, even at the firm level, as it is possible to
match different “vintages” of embodied knowledge at the same place and time;
second, assuming that a great part of the technical progress is embodied in capital
goods, it is difficult to find a realistic measure for the contribution of the capital
stock for the total productivity growth; third, and perhaps more importantly, as
technical progress is exogenous in Solow’s model, the estimation of the
contribution of this factor is always done as a residual.4
       In an influential critique to Solow’s model (and the TFP estimation), Nelson
(1981: 12) pointed out that “technological advance, while acknowledged as a
central feature of growth, is treated in a very simple way, and the Schumpeterian
proposition that technological advance (via entrepreneurial innovation) and
competitive equilibrium cannot coexist is ignored”. The author concluded that “the
sources of growth (subjacent to Solow’s model and TFP estimations) are viewed


3
  Due to the lack of compatible statistical data, we cannot extend our model for the post-2008 period.
4
  Since the estimation of the residual is subject to all sorts of issues, Abramovitz (1993) referred to
the residual as “some sort of measure of ignorance”.

                                                  6
as operating independently and additively”. 5 Abramovitz (1986 and 1993) also
defies the estimation of the contribution of the technical progress as a residual,
arguing that it misses important elements for productivity variation such as
education, on-the-job training, and research and development (R&D). According to
the author (Abramovitz, 1993: 218), “all these missing elements were unmeasured
and difficult to measure but still embedded in the residual”.
        For estimating the change in economic efficiency in the Brazilian
manufacturing industries in the 2000s in this paper, we follow a more traditional
view of productivity change and prefer to use a measurement of the labour
productivity. Among several reasons for making this choice, we will mention just
three: i) by capturing the intensity of use of the other production factors, labour
productivity indirectly incorporates the contribution of all of them6; ii) once it is
translated by the ratio of the value added in a sector or even in the total economy
to the respective number of workers, labour productivity is a reliable measure for
evaluating the efficiency at both the microeconomic and macroeconomic levels;
and iii) together with the per capita income growth over time, labour productivity
has traditionally been used for evaluating economic and social convergence or
divergence among countries (see, for instance, Baumol, 1986, León-Ledesma,
2002, and McMillan and Rodrik, 2011).
        The concept of labour productivity could be seen as totally determined by
supply-side forces. However, as many theoretical and empirical studies have
emphasised, the behaviour of labour efficiency is affected by both supply and
demand forces (see, for instance, Dixon and Thirlwall, 1975, DeLong and
Summers, 1991, León-Ledesma, 2002, and Syverson, 2010). As Syverson (2010:
43) recognized, although “productivity is typically thought of as a supply-side
concept, a new strand of research has begun to extend the productivity literature to
explicitly account for such idiosyncratic demand effects as well”. In his survey on
the subject, Syverson (2010) argued that the behaviour of the labour productivity
could jointly be affected not only by an efficient combination of capital, labour and
other inputs, but also by other elements such as information technology (IT), R&D,
the level of internal and external competition, and even by government policies.
        Structuralist literature, based on Myrdal’s (1957) and Kaldor’s (1966 and
1970) tradition of explaining long-term growth as a process of cumulative causation,
develops theoretical and empirical studies in which the growth of labour
productivity is highly dependent on the initial conditions of the economy. In this
sense, all else being equal, the higher the level of industrialisation of an economy,
the greater its capacity of sustaining higher rates of growth and, therefore, also of
labour productivity. The reason for that is because the manufacturing industry
presents increasing static and dynamic returns to scale, a crucial assumption to
explain productivity growth. 7 Therefore, the relation between growth and
productivity change is given by the so-called Kaldor-Verdoorn Law, which
5
  For more details on the critique of the theoretical and empirical estimations of productivity based
on Solow’s model, see Nelson (1981).
6
  Note that, differently from the above mentioned Syverson’s (2010) conclusion, this characteristic
of labour productivity can provide an advantage in choosing it as an appropriate indicator for
measuring economic efficiency.
7
  See Young (1928), Kaldor (1966) and McCombie and Thirlwall (1994), among others.

                                                 7
postulates that labour productivity growth rates are positively influenced by output
growth rates. Far from representing a tautology (high labour productivity growth
causes high economic growth rates, which, in turn, imply high labour productivity
growth), according to the cumulative causation principle, the operation of the
Kaldor-Verdoorn Law means that as long as an economy builds a large and
diversified manufacturing industrial base, it augments its potential of exploiting
static and dynamic economies of scale insofar as it is capable of sustaining high
economic growth. 8 Since this latter phenomenon is closely associated with high
investment rates and rapid technical progress, an economy which shows high rates
of GDP growth tends also to sustain high labour productivity growth. As McCombie
and Thirlwall (1994: xxi) argued, “a faster growth of output leads to a faster growth
of productivity through the “Verdoorn effect” which is caused by, inter alia, a higher
rate of induced investment and of induced technical progress”.
       León-Ledesma (2002) estimated a structural model for a set of OECD
countries in the 1965-94 period, in which he presents an estimation for labour
productivity considering the effects of aggregate demand, investment-output ratio,
innovation and a variable capturing the catching up effect of innovation. By doing
so he emphasised, in addition to the impacts of investment and the traditional
Kaldor-Verdoorn Law, the direct and indirect effects of innovation and technical
progress on the behaviour of labour productivity. In the author’s words, “innovation
not only leads to a higher degree of product differentiation and quality but also to
process innovation leading to increased productivity” (León-Ledesma, 2002: 204).
In this paper, we will use a modified version of León-Ledesma’s equation for
productivity, considering that labour productivity variation is jointly explained by the
effect of investment, innovation and the aggregate demand growth (the Kaldor-
Verdoorn Law). In this way, we aim to explain productivity as a result of the short
and long-term effects induced by the physical investment, innovation and technical
progress. This general model can be expressed as:

                
                                                                                                  (1)
                I 
r = a + αy + β   + ϕInnov
                VA
                
                
                
where r is the labour productivity growth; a is the constant term; y is the real GDP
growth; I/VA is the investment ratio, that is to say, the ratio of the gross investment
to the value added; and Innov is a variable associated with innovation. ∝, β and ϕ

8
  The debate on the role of static and dynamic economies of scale (directly associated with the
manufacturing sector, and, today, with some tradable segments of the service sector) is relatively
old in economics. Graham (1923) had shown that, the more an economy reallocates resources from
industries subject to increasing returns to scale to industries subject to constant returns to scale, the
less would be its capacity for sustaining economic growth in the long run. Young (1928) also
showed that, by incorporating activities subject to increasing returns to scale, the enlargement of
the market tends to boost international competitiveness and accelerate long-term growth. In his
classic study, Kaldor (1966) emphasised the importance of static and dynamic economies of scale
inherent to the manufacturing sector for boosting long-term growth.

                                                   8
are positive coefficients. In the next section, we will translate the theoretical model
represented by equation (1) into an econometric estimation in order to show
empirical evidence for the labour productivity growth of the Brazilian manufacturing
industries in the 2000s.

3. Labour productivity: empirical evidence for the Brazilian manufacturing
industries in the 2000s

        The aim of this section is to first briefly describe the variables and the
sources of the statistical data used in the estimation of the theoretical model and
second to present our estimates. As mentioned earlier, the theoretical model of
manufacturing productivity growth associates its dynamic to the growth of
aggregate demand, investment in fixed asset and technological innovation. One
limitation of the empirical estimation for the productivity of the Brazilian
manufacturing industries lies in the lack of comprehensive data for demand of
investment. Another limitation is due to the lack of enough observations in relation
to data on innovation. As the statistical data used in our estimation comes from
different sources, a compatibilisation exercise had to be performed in order to
harmonise the sectoral classifications.9
        Statistical data for demand of investment in the manufacturing industry was
obtained from Miguez et al (2014) who estimate a matrix of investment absorption
for the 2000-2009 period. As far as we know, that is the most comprehensive
statistics available for demand of investment for the manufacturing industry for the
2000s. From the input-output matrices available, the authors disaggregate the final
demand vector of fixed capital formation into institutional and activities sectors. For
our proposal, based on the estimates of the national and imported matrices of
investment absorption at basic prices, we calculated the investment rate for the
Brazilian manufacturing industry.
        The proxy for the innovative activity in the manufacturing industry was
obtained from the Industrial Technological Survey (PINTEC according to the
Portuguese acronym) carried out by the Brazilian Institute of Geography and
Statistics (IBGE). This survey is available for the years 2000, 2003, 2005 and 2008,
and it covers all manufacturing industries with ten or more employees that
performed any innovative activity – either in the productive process or in improving
a product or even introducing a new one into the market. From this dataset we
calculated for each sector the ratio of total expenditure in innovative projects
(research and development – R&D) by firms in that period and the total net
revenue with sales of products and services from all manufacturing firms. Then, the
innovation variable of equation (1) was calculated as the ratio of R&D of an
industry of the Brazilian manufacturing sector to the total net revenue with sales of
product and services from that industry.


9
  This exercise basically involved the classification of industries. We follow an aggregation of
industrial sectors considering science, engineering and knowledge based industries, natural
resource-based industries and labour intensive industries. A description of the sectors included in
each group is in Annex 1.

                                                9
       Productivity growth estimates were obtained from the ECLAC-PADI 10
database. This database presents structural statistics for the manufacturing sector
for Latin American countries from 1970 to 2008. Therefore, it is an internationally
harmonised database, which collects statistical information from national statistical
offices. In the Brazilian case, the main source of information comes from the
Industrial Censuses and the Annual Industrial Surveys carried out by IBGE. All
information provided in ECLAC-PADI has been converted from each country’s
currency to 1985 constant dollar prices.
       Lastly, the estimates for aggregate demand growth come from the National
Accounts estimates for GDP.
       To perform our estimate, equation (1) can be translated into the following
standard econometric specification:

                                                                                    (2)
where subscript i represents an industry of the manufacturing sector, t refers to the
period of observation of the variable, and e is the error variable.
       The estimate uses panel data models in the static and dynamic versions.
Panel data models combine temporal and cross-sectional data, and this presents
important advantages for our empirical exercise as it allows:
       i)      the use of a larger amount of information by combining sectoral data
                with time series, so that the available productivity data for the 21
                sectors of the Brazilian manufacturing industry could be related to the
                explanatory variables between 2000 and 200811;
       ii)     the use of a larger number of observations, which, in turn, ensures
                the asymptotic properties of the estimators and increases the
                degrees of freedom of the estimates;
       iii)    the reduction of the risk of multicollinearity, since data from the
                different sectors of the manufacturing industry have different
                structures;
       iv)       the introduction of dynamic adjustments, which the cross-section
                analysis would not allow.
       Initial estimates were made considering only panel data static models. The
Hausman test showed that the best fit of the data was with random effects.12 Table
2 summarises these results

10
   PADI is the acronym in Spanish for Analysis Program of Industrial Dynamics.
11
   For more information on the methodology for panel data, see Wooldridge (2002), and for the
development of these models in the dynamic version, see Arellano-Bond (1991), Arellano-Bover
(1995) and Blundell-Bond (1998).
12
   The Hausman test is used to decide which model is most appropriate: the random effects model
(H0) or the fixed effects model (HA). Under the null hypothesis, the estimators of the model with
random effects are consistent and efficient; under the alternative hypothesis, the random effects
estimators are not consistent, but the fixed effects estimators are. The main differences between
the models of fixed and random effects are that the models with random effects do not consider the
constant as a fixed parameter, but as an unobserved random parameter. Additionally, in the model
with fixed effects, the differences of individuals (industry sectors) are considered to be captured in
the constant part, while in the random-effects models, these differences are considered to be
represented in the error term.

                                                 10
             Table 2: Labour productivity determinants - The static model
                 Random effect (1)   Random effect (2)     Random effect (3)
Yt                     1.48***             1.90***               5.69***
                        (3.96)             (2.98)                 (4.91)
(I/VA)it                -0.004             -0.005
                        (-0.42)            (-0.31)
I/VAi(t-1)                                                      0.044**
                                                                  (2.09)
Innovit                                    0.044*                0.071**
                                            (1.92)                (2.51)
a                      -0.08***             -0.14                -0.23**
                        (-3.15)            (-3.23)               -(3.05)
Note: t test in brackets, *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5% and * significant at 10%

        In these estimates, productivity growth is largely explained by GDP growth
(Yt), in accordance with the Kaldor-Verdoorn Law, in the three versions of the
model (columns 1, 2 and 3). Investment rate was not statistically significant in
explaining the behaviour of productivity when the model was run without innovation
(column 1) or the variable investment rate in period t (column 2). These are
interesting results as they suggest that the rate of investment impacts productivity
but with a lag. Indeed, in column 3, both the investment rate lagged in one period
and innovation in period t were shown to be significant.13 The effect of innovation
on productivity growth implies that the innovative sectors of the manufacturing
industry have a significant impact on boosting aggregate productivity.
        So far our first estimates confirm the importance of aggregate demand and
innovative activities for stimulating productivity growth and that the investment rate
also has a positive effect on productivity, but with a lag. As investment is a
component of aggregate demand, we can conclude that its first impact on
productivity is through its effect on aggregate demand (via the multiplier effect) and
its next is on increasing industrial productivity. However, this conclusion calls
attention to the fact that our previous estimates may have an endogeneity bias.
This is because, for example, GDP tends to affect productivity at the same time as
it is affected by it. To tackle this problem, we ran a dynamic panel data with the
Generalized Method of Moments in the form proposed by Arellano and Bond
(1991). In their paper the authors argue that it is possible to get around the
problem of endogeneity between the dependent variable and the control variables
by introducing the dependent variable with a lag. Thus, equation 2 can be changed
to:

rij = a + µrij(t-1) + αyi + β(I/VA) ij + eij                                                     (3)


13
  It should be remarked that this model is somewhat limited due to the few observations available
for the innovation variable.

                                                   11
       The result of the estimation of the dynamic model is shown in Table 314. The
difference between the result of equation (3) and the estimates from equation (2) is
the inclusion of a lagged productivity term (the last line in Table 3) as an
explanatory variable, and the exclusion of the innovation variable in the dynamic
model, since, as mentioned earlier, this variable is only available for a few years.
As in the estimation of the static model, GDP growth was the main explanatory
variable of productivity growth in the dynamic model. Investment ratio, though, was
not significant.

           Table 3: Labour productivity determinants – The dynamic model
                    yt                             2.15***
                                                    (4.71)
               (I/VA)it                             -0.047
                                                    (-1.17)
                    a                              -0.19**
                                                    (-2.44)
                 ri (t-1)                          -0.18**
                                                    (-2.22)
Note: t test in brackets, *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5% and * significant at 10%

        This is an unexpected result, as according to the literature, productivity
should respond well to investment. In order to interpret this outcome, we should
bring into the discussion arguments relating to the macroeconomic environment
that prevailed in the 2000s and that might have affected the performance of
investment decisions, which are highly dependent on the state of expectations.
That is to say that a macroeconomic environment of high volatility in the main
macroeconomic prices, such as exchange rate, interest rate, wage rate, fiscal rules
and so on, does not favour a long-term commitment of resources.
        Although the Brazilian economy performed relatively better in the 2000-2008
period (3.72 per cent per year), in relation to the previous years, the
macroeconomic agenda changed from a liberal orientation in the beginning of the
2000s to a pro-growth agenda from 2007 on. Actually, during the 2003-2006 period,
corresponding to the first mandate of President Lula da Silva, the liberal and pro-
stability conventions to growth conflicted with a pro-growth agenda (Nassif and
Feijo, 2013), which means that entrepreneurial uncertainty might have been rather
high during this period. Although growth rates resumed from 2004 onwards, this
was due to a great extent to the boom in foreign trade and the improvement in the
terms of trade. So, the relatively good performance of Brazilian growth rates from
the mid-2000s onwards was to a great deal the result of exceptional and
occasional favourable external conditions. The boom in international trade at that
time reinforced the trend towards the increase in the relative weight of natural
resources- based industries in the manufacturing sector, and the decrease in the
importance of more technological industrial segments. In short, the good
performance of the economy from 2004 onwards was the result of extraordinary


     In equation (3), µ is a parameter term that means the lagged labour productivity.
14



                                                   12
external conditions, which did not last long, and was followed by a structural
change in the manufacturing sector towards less dynamic industries.
       In relation to the investment behaviour in the manufacturing sector, a recent
study by Bielschowsky et al (2014) analyses the investment data presented by
Miguez et al (2014) according to five types of investment, in other words,
classifying the type of investment according to its own determinant logic.15 This sort
of information helps us to evaluate the impact of investment on industrial
productivity, since this impact should be higher when investment is concentrated in
more technologically dynamic sectors. Table 4 shows the growth rate in gross
capital formation for selected periods for each type of investment.

                 Table 4: Gross capital formation - Real average growth rates
                                 (2000-2008 – in percentage)
                          2000-03 2003-05      2005-08     2000-08

Infrastructure                 -3.9           7.3           21.2           7.8
Families                       1.2            0.8            5.9           2.8
Natural Resources              0.3            9.1           10.7           6.3
Mass Consumption               -8.0           6.2           13.2           3.1
Capital Goods and              -8.6          16.3            8.6           3.5
Intermediate Goods
Industries
Total Economy                  -3.2          6.4            12.4           4.8
Source: Bielschowsky et al (2014), Table 2

       Investment in capital goods and intermediate goods industries and in mass
consumption industries, both of which are most induced by domestic conditions,
were the ones to show the worst performance relatively, concerning the
manufacturing sectors only. Investment in natural resources-based industries,
which also include industries linked to agribusiness, was the one to show better
performance. It should also be mentioned that in the 2000-03 period mass
consumption and capital goods and intermediate goods industries were the ones
with the largest decrease in investment. This last piece of evidence shows that
although investment in fixed assets in the manufacturing industry had increased in
the period, it actually started recuperating from a severe contraction after 2003.
       We can draw two conclusions from the evidence in Table 4. The first is that
as investment growth was less strong in more technologically dynamic sectors, its
impact on productivity could also be less strong. The other conclusion is that the

15
     The authors define five types of investment. Investment in infrastructure, which depends on long-
term political decisions and is greatly determined by the State; investment by families, which is
concentrated in real estate; investment in natural resources activities (includes agribusiness and oil
and gas) which depend mostly on foreign demand; investment in mass consumption industries,
which depend on the performance of the domestic market; and finally investment in the production
of capital and intermediate goods, which are determined by the behaviour of the economy.

                                                    13
recovery in the investment growth rates in the manufacturing sector might not have
been enough to promote the catching up of the industrial productivity. This follows
from the evidence that in the 2000-03 period growth rates were highly negative for
the capital and intermediate industries and mass consumption industries. If these
interpretations are correct, then we have a clue for the low significance of
investment to explain productivity growth.
       In short, a rather high degree of entrepreneurial uncertainty in relation to the
macroeconomic environment and a relatively short period of ‘ bonanza’ to recover
the growth rates of the economy might explain why investment in fixed assets still
does not show significance to explain labour productivity.

4. Conclusion and policy implications

       There has been a “cliché” to evaluate the low economic growth rates in the
2000s as a result of low labour productivity growth rates in the Brazilian economy.
In the 2000-2008 period (which covers the analysis of this paper), while the
average real GDP growth was 3.72 per cent per year, the labour productivity had a
negative variation of -0.95 per cent per year. However, according to the so-called
Kaldor-Verdoorn Law, the reciprocal could also be true: the low growth rates of
labour productivity in Brazil could be an effect of the low growth rates of the real
GDP. This means that it is not enough to diagnose that the labour productivity in
Brazil was low in the 2000s. It is necessary to go further and identify the main
determinants of the labour productivity in order to explain why this indicator was so
low in that period in Brazil. By estimating econometrically the main explanatory
variables of the labour productivity of the Brazilian manufacturing industries in the
2000s, we tried to contribute to the debate on the subject.
       In this paper, we used a modified version of León-Ledesma’s (2002) model
for explaining the main determinants of labour productivity in the Brazilian
manufacturing industries in the 2000s. First of all, it is important to remember that,
due to the lack of data for all variables of our model, the empirical research only
covers a short period of time (nine years referring to the 2000-2008 period). Then,
in principle, the results must be cautiously analysed. However, it is important to
stress that, by applying the model to 21 industries in the Brazilian manufacturing
sector, the size of the sample is significantly increased. Even so, our econometric
results seem robust when they are compared with some descriptive statistics on
the manufacturing sector in Brazil during the period under analysis.
       In the several econometric models we ran, the real GDP growth was the
most significant variable to explain the behaviour of labour productivity in the
manufacturing industries in Brazil in the 2000s. This result suggests that the larger
and more sustainable the real GDP growth in Brazil is, the greater will be its labour
productivity growth rates. This result is also consistent with the Kaldor-Verdoorn
Law, according to which the labour productivity growth is highly dependent on the
growth rates of the economy as a whole.
       In most models we ran, the gross investment was not significant to explain
the behaviour of the labour productivity in the manufacturing industries in Brazil
throughout the 2000s. The investment only showed to be significant when it was
included into the model with a lag of one period and when innovation was
                                          14
incorporated as one of the explanatory variables of the labour productivity.
Although this result seems to be consistent with theoretical expectations, it must be
carefully analysed because, as innovation data is available for only few years, the
number of observations is too few to make the empirical conclusion robust.
        In relation to the gross investment, specifically, although the literature
suggests that labour productivity growth should respond positively to increasing
gross investment, this latter explanatory variable was not significant in most
models we ran, as already stated. Even so, this unexpected result is consistent
with some descriptive statistics on the behaviour of gross investment by sector of
economic activity in Brazil between 2000 and 2008. In fact, while gross capital
formation grew at 7.8 per cent and 6.3 per cent, respectively, in infrastructure and
natural resources-based sectors (this latter includes agribusiness), in the
2000-2008 period, growth of investment in the mass consumption and capital
goods and intermediate goods sectors were only 3.1 per cent and 3.5 per cent,
respectively, in the same period. Indeed, between 2000 and 2003, gross capital
formation grew at negative rates in the most dynamic sectors of the Brazilian
economy.
        In specific terms, between 2000 and 2008, the growth rates of gross capital
formation in more knowledge-based sectors (capital goods and intermediate
goods) and industries from medium to high technological sophistication (mass
consumption) were less (3.5 per cent and 3.1 per cent, respectively) than those of
the economy as a whole (4.8 per cent). In a few words, rather than concluding that,
in general terms, gross investment is not important for boosting labour productivity
in the economy, our results suggest that, in the case of Brazil in the 2000s, gross
capital formation grew at very low rates – in fact, at rates lower than those of the
economy as a whole – in sectors with a high capacity of technological innovation
and a high capacity to spill over their gains from productivity to the economy as a
whole.
        These results are also consistent with several recent studies which show
empirical evidence that early de-industrialisation in Brazil intensified in the 2000s.16
Nassif, Feijó and Araújo (2013:14-15) presented empirical evidence that the
technological gap (measured as the relative labour productivity in the Brazilian
manufacturing industries compared with those of the United States) grew
significantly in all manufacturing industries classified according to their
technological intensity between the mid-1990s and 2008. Bacha (2013) showed
that between 2005 and 2011 the Brazilian economy highly benefited from both the
improvement in the terms of trade and the large net capital inflows, which were
both responsible for the overvaluation of the Brazilian currency (the real) in real
terms. Also according to Bacha (2013: 97-98), this short period of external
“bonanza” explains, on the one hand, the relatively good performance of the
Brazilian economy in the 2005-2011 period (a real GDP growth of 4.2 per cent per
year) and, on the other hand, the strong reallocation of resources from domestic
production to imports in the same period.17

16
  See, for instance, Oreiro and Feijó (2010), Nassif, Feijó and Araújo (2013) and Bacha (2013).
17
  It should be mentioned that Bacha’s (2013) analysis suggests that the early de-industrialisation in
Brazil would have begun in the mid-2000s. However, there is strong evidence that this process

                                                15
        In other words, the empirical evidence suggests that Brazilian policy-makers
were not able to, by taking advantage of the short period of favourable external
conditions that occurred between 2004 and 2011, design and implement
macroeconomic policies to boost labour productivity in industries with a major
capacity for innovating and disseminating gains from productivity to the economy
as a whole. Although suggestions of economic policies go further than the scope of
this paper, we could conclude that any attempt for boosting labour productivity and
real GDP growth rates in Brazil should include instruments that contribute to
reaching three important goals: i) the reduction of the high degree of uncertainty
that still prevails in the economy (at the time of finalising this paper in July 2014); ii)
the decrease of the high real interest rates; and iii) the elimination of the long-term
real overvaluation trend of the Brazilian real, a phenomenon that has been
observed since the mid-1980s in Brazil.18




began in the mid-1980s, continued in the 1990s and intensified in the 2000s. Most empirical studies
conclude that one of the main factors responsible for this phenomenon is the overvaluation trend of
the Brazilian currency in real terms, which can be observed since the mid-1980s. Episodes of
depreciation of the Brazilian real have suddenly occurred as a response to internal or external
shocks. For details, see Oreiro and Feijó (2010) and Nassif, Feijó and Araújo (2011).
18
   From the microeconomic point of view, since 2003 the Brazilian government has been making a
great attempt at adopting industrial and technological policies. However, in an environment of high
real interest rates and real exchange rate overvaluation, it is hard to expect good results from any
industrial and technological policies. On industrial and technological policies that have been
adopted in Brazil from 2003 on, see Coutinho et.al. (2012). On macroeconomic proposals aiming at
reaching the three mentioned macroeconomic goals, see Oreiro (2014).

                                                16
References


Abramovitz, Moses (1986). “Catching up, forging ahead and falling behind”.
Journal of Economic History, 46: 385-406.

Abramovitz, Moses (1993). “The Search for the sources of growth: areas of
ignorance, old and new”. The Journal of Economic History, 52 (2): 217-243. June.

Arellano, M. and Bover, O. (1995). Another look at the instrumental-variable
estimation of error-components model. Journal of Econometrics. v. 68, p. 29-52.

Arellano, M. and Bond, (1991). S. Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte
Carlo evidence and an application to employment equations. The Review of
Economic Studies, v. 58, n. 2, p 277-297, 1991.

Bacha, Edmar L. (2013). “Bonança externa e desindustrialização: uma análise do
período 2005-2011” In: E. Bacha and M. B. de Bolle (orgs). O Futuro da Indústria
no Brasil: desindustrialização em debate”. Rio de Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira.

Baumol, William J. (1986). Productivity growth, convergence, and welfare: what the
long-run data show”. The American Economic Review, 76 (5): 1072-1085.

Bielschowski, Ricardo, Squeff, Gabriel C. and Vasconcelos, Lucas F. (2014).
“Evolução dos investimentos nas três frentes de expansão da economia brasileira
na década de 2000”. Texto para Discussão. Brasilia: IPEA (forthcoming).

Blundell, R. and Bond, S.(1998). Initial conditions and moment restrictions in
dynamic panel data models. Journal of Econometrics, v. 87, p. 115-143,

Bonelli, Regis and Fontes, Julia (2013). “Desafios brasileiros no longo prazo”.
Texto para Discussão. Rio de Janeiro: IBRE/Fundação Getulio Vargas.

Coutinho, Luciano, Ferraz, João C., Nassif, André, and Oliva, Rafael (2012).
“Industrial Policy and Transformation” In: J. Santiso and J. Dayton-Johnson. The
Oxford Handbook of Latin American Political Economy. Oxford: Oxford University
Press: 100-132.

DeLong, Bradford J. and Summers, Lawrence (1991). “Equipment investment and
economic growth”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (2): 445-502. May.

Dixon, R. and Thirlwall, A. P. (1975). “A model of regional growth-rate differences
on Kaldorian lines”. Oxford Economic Papers 27 (2): 201-214. July.

Graham, Frank D. (1923). “Some Aspects of Protection Further Considered”.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 37: 199-227, February.
                                        17
Hirschman, A. O. 1981. A Generalized Linkage Approach to Development with
Special Reference to Staples, in Hirschman, A O. Essays in Trespassing –
Economics to Politics and Beyond, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Kaldor N (1966). Causes of the slow rate of economic growth of the United
Kingdom. An inaugural lecture. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press.

Kaldor N (1970). “The case for regional policies”. Scottish Journal of Political
Economy. November.

Krugman, Paul (1994). The age of diminished expectations. The MIT Press.

León-Ledesma, Miguel A. (2002). “Accumulation, innovation and catching-up: an
extended cumulative growth model”. Cambridge Journal of Economics, 26: 201-
216.

McCombie, J.L.S and Thirlwall, A.P. (1994). Economic growth and the balance-of-
payment constraint. New York: St.Martin´s Press.

McMillan, Margaret and Rodrik, Dani (2011). Globalization, structural change, and
productivity growth”. NBER Working paper no. 17.143. Cambridge, MA.: National
Bureau of Economic Research. June.

Miguez,, Thiago., Freitas, F. Squeff, Gabriel. C. ; VASCONCELOS, Lucas. F., and
Moraes, Thiago (2014). "Uma proposta metodológica para a estimação da Matriz
de Absorção de Investimentos para o período 2000-2009"; Texto para Discussão
nº 1977. Brasília: do Instituto de Pesquisa Econômica Aplicada – Ipea.

Myrdal, Gunnar (1957). Economic Theory and Underdeveloped Regions. London:
Duckworth.

Nassif, André, Feijó, Carmem, and Araújo, Eliane (2011). “The long-term “optimal”
real exchange rate and the currency overvaluation trend in open emerging
economies: the case of Brazil”. UNCTAD Discussion Papers nº 206. Geneva:
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. December.

Nassif, André, Feijó, Carmem, and Araújo, Eliane (2013). “Structural change and
economic development: is Brazil catching or falling behind?”. UNCTAD Discussion
Papers nº 211. Geneva: United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.
October.


Nelson, Richard R. (1981). “Research on productivity growth and productivity
differences: dead ends and new departures”. In: Nelson, R. The Sources of
Economic Growth. Cambridge, MA.: Harvard Economic Press, 1996 (originally
published in the Journal of Economic Literature, September, 1981: 1029-1064).
                                       18
Oreiro, José L. (2014). “Muito além do tripé: proposta de um novo regime de
política macroeconômica para dobrar a renda per capita em 20 anos”. Artigo
preparado para o seminário “Indústria e Desenvolvimento Produtivo do Brasil”, na
Escola de Economia de São Paulo (EESP) da Fundação Getúlio Vargas.

Oreiro, José L. and Feijó, Carmem (2010). “Desindustrialização: conceituação,
causas, efeitos e o caso brasileiro”. The Brazilian Journal of Political Economy. Vol.
30, nº 2 (118):219-232, abril-junho.

Smith, Adam (1776). An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of
Nations. New York: Modern Library, 1937.

Solow, Robert M. (1956). “A contribution to the theory of economic growth”.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 70: 65-94. February.

Solow, Robert M. (1957). “Technical change and the aggregate production
function”. Review of Economics and Statistics, 39: 214-231. August.

Syverson, Chad. (2010). “What determines productivity?” NBER Working Paper
Series 15.712. Cambridge (MA.): National Bureau of Economic Research. January.

Wooldridge,J. M. (2010). Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data.
England: Mit Press.

Young, Allyin A. (1928). “Increasing returns and economic progress”. The
Economic Journal 152 (XXXVIII): 527-542. December.




                                         19
                                    Annex 1
            Manufacturing industry according to technological intensity

Science, engineering and knowledge-based

Metal products
Non electrical machinery
Eletrical machinery
Motor vehicles
Scientific instruments
Chemicals

Natural resource-based

Food and beverage
Tobacco
Wood products
Paper and cellulose
Petroleum refining and oil and carbon products
Glass and other non-metallic mineral products
Iron and steel
Non ferrous metals

Labour intensive

Textile
Clothing
Leather manufactures and footwear
Furniture, pottery and other manufactured products
Paper printing
Other chemicals
Rubber products and plastic products
Source: ECLAC-PADI




                                        20
