                                   Social Security and Public Debt:
                              Empirical evidence for the Brazilian economy


                  Bruno Pires Tiberto                          Helder Ferreira de Mendonça
       National Social Security Institute (INSS) and           Fluminense Federal University
             Fluminense Federal University                     Department of Economics, and
                Department of Economics                       National Council for Scientific and
                                                             Technological Development (CNPq)


                                                  Abstract

This paper presents a contribution to the empirical literature concerning the relationship between social
security and public debt in emerging economies. In particular, several economic and social shocks, as
income inequality, were considered in the analysis. Based on Brazilian data from 2004 to 2010, and
taking into account the effects of shocks on variables which are essential to the public debt and the social
security deficit, two sets of GMM models were considered. Furthermore, with the objective of testing the
results, a GMM system model was built. The findings confirmed that the social security deficit
significantly contributes to an increase in the public debt. Regarding the effects on social security, it was
observed that an increase in the level of formality in the economy reduces the deficit. In contrast, a
reduction in income inequality, real increase in the minimum wage, and increase in health benefits imply
an increase in the social security deficit. Therefore, these variables play a crucial role in the search for an
efficient social security management system and cannot be overlooked in ensuring fiscal sustainability.

Key words: public debt; social security; economic and social variables; Brazilian economy.

JEL classification: E62, H55, H63.


                                                  Resumo

Este trabalho apresenta uma contribuição para a literatura empírica relativa à relação entre a previdência
social e a dívida pública nas economias emergentes. Em particular, vários choques econômicos e sociais,
como a desigualdade de renda, foram considerados na análise. Com base em dados do Brasil para o
período de 2004-2010, e levando em conta os efeitos dos choques sobre as variáveis que são essenciais
para a dívida pública e o déficit da previdência social, dois conjuntos de modelos GMM foram
considerados. Além disso, com o objetivo de testar os resultados, um modelo de sistema GMM foi
construído. Os resultados confirmaram que o déficit da previdência social contribui de forma significativa
para o aumento da dívida pública. Com relação aos efeitos sobre a previdência social, observou-se que
um aumento no nível de formalidade da economia reduz o déficit. Em contraste, uma redução na
desigualdade de renda, um aumento real do salário mínimo e um aumento na concessão de auxílios-
doença implica um aumento do déficit da previdência social. Portanto, estas variáveis desempenham um
papel crucial na busca por um sistema de gerenciamento eficiente da previdência social e não pode ser
negligenciado para garantir a sustentabilidade fiscal.

Palavras chaves: dívida pública; previdência social; variáveis econômicas e sociais; Economia
Brasileira.

Classificação JEL: E62, H55, H63.

Área 5: Economia do Setor Público
                                                       1
1. Introduction
         Since 1999, Brazilian economic policy has been based on the tripod of inflation targeting, primary
surplus and flexible exchange rates. In particular, the introduction of primary surplus targets has guided
fiscal policy and worked as a safeguard for the inflation targeting system. In other words, the patterns of
primary surplus are essential to explain the evolution of fiscal and monetary policies. Therefore, it is
crucial to identify and analyze which factors can erode this framework sustained by the primary surplus.
         Given the importance of the difference between revenues and expenditures of the General Social
Security for the primary result of the federal government, the long-term financial viability of the social
security system has been one of the main topics of fiscal policy discussed in Brazil in recent decades. The
Brazilian pension system runs at a deficit and may become fiscally unsustainable in the future. As a
result, the need for funding of the social security system represents a source of fiscal imbalance that could
set public debt onto an unsustainable path.
         In recent years, the federal government has adopted a series of social measures to increase the
average standard of living of the population. Those measures include, for example: encouraging the
formalization of the Brazilian labor market, promoting a real increase in the minimum wage and reducing
income inequality in the labor market. The implementation of this social policy has had a direct impact on
the labor market and, consequently, has implications for the financing of the social security system.
         This paper seeks to make a contribution to the literature on public debt and social security by
considering a variety of economic and social shocks. It is important to highlight that this study presents,
in an innovative way, issues that have been neglected by the literature, but which are fundamental for the
management of economic policy. As examples of this, we can cite the analysis of the effects of income
inequality on the social security deficit and the impact of the social security deficit on the evolution of the
Brazilian public debt.
         In short, the main objective of this paper is to present empirical evidence of the relation between
social security and public debt, and of the effects of social policies, adopted by the federal government,
on the social security deficit. To this end, several models were estimated using the generalized method of
moments (GMM). In addition to estimates of individual models, an estimation of systems of simultaneous
equations was also performed.
         The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The next section provides a brief summary of
the literature on public debt management. Section 3 presents a short review of the literature on social
security. Section 4 shows empirical evidence, through an econometric analysis, of the relationship
between the social security system and public debt and of the relationship between the social policies of
the federal government and the social security system. The last section presents the conclusions.

2. Public debt: main features in the literature
         It is possible to identify three perspectives regarding public debt management in the literature. The
first, examines the problem of dynamic inconsistency of fiscal policies, and is represented by the models
of Giavazzi and Pagano (1990) and Calvo and Guidotti (1990). The second, which considers the model of
Barro (2003), seeks to determine the optimal structure for public debt, considering a smoothing out of tax
revenues in an environment in which public spending is exogenous. The last view, represented by the
models of Missale, Giavazzi and Benigno (2002) and Giavazzi and Missale (2004), seeks stabilization of
the public debt/GDP ratio. In general, all these models conclude that an increase in the average maturity
and the partial indexation of public debt are optimal strategies for public debt management.
         The Giavazzi and Pagano model (1990) focuses on the analysis of the roll-over of public debt.
Consequently, the amount, average maturity and amortization structure of public debt are important
elements in this study. The model evaluates whether the choice of a particular maturity structure can
mitigate the risks of a crisis of confidence. Four basic assumptions are adopted: (i) an open economy with
a fixed exchange rate regime, (ii) free capital mobility, (iii) imperfect public information about the
preferences of the government or the central bank’s ability to maintain the fixed exchange rate, and (iv) a
high stock of public debt needing to be rolled over in all periods. The conclusion is that the central bank’s
ability to withstand a crisis of confidence depends on its success in managing the public debt. The
concentration of debt maturities in a few periods is detrimental, because in times of crisis of confidence
                                                      2
the government is obliged to pay higher risk premiums. Therefore, a good strategy would be to increase
the average maturity of government securities, as well as to distribute their maturity dates evenly over
time.
        Calvo and Guidotti’s model (1990) considers several environments for optimal indexing structure
and maturity of public debt. Additionally, the restriction corresponds to a social loss function which
includes taxation and inflation rate. The four basic assumptions of the model are: (i) the stock of debt is a
predetermined variable, (ii) government spending is the source of uncertainty in the model, (iii) strict
purchasing power parity is considered, and (iv) the current government can curb the next government
with respect to the use of instruments of economic policy. The result suggests that the indexation of
public debt is desirable in order to avoid the use of an inflation tax. However, full indexation is not
recommended because it can generate an increase in taxation as a source of financing for the public
sector. Therefore, the optimal strategy would be public debt with long-term maturity, which is partially
indexed.
        Barro (2003) found that smoothing taxation stimulates the government to issue government bonds,
the payments of which are contingent on government spending and taxation. Hence, when public
expenditure is equal in all periods, public debt should be structured as indexed perpetuities (consoles).
One advantage of adopting this structure is the ability to isolate the budget constraints from unexpected
changes in the securities of different maturities indexed to the price index.
        Missale, Giavazzi and Benigno (2002) made an empirical analysis that considered the maturity of
government securities suitable for fiscal stabilization. It was assumed that the stabilization of public debt
would be achieved through the attainment of fiscal surplus targets. The analysis included 72 cases of
fiscal stabilization, between 1975 and 1998, in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) countries. The authors concluded that the optimal strategy is to increase the
average maturity of public debt.
        Based on the analysis of the stabilization of the Brazilian public debt/GDP ratio, Giavazzi and
Missale (2004) recommended that the government find sources of financing that offer low costs and low
volatility of returns. Thus, the choice of public debt instruments involves a trade-off between risk and
expected cost of debt servicing. Under this view, the risk is minimized when an instrument has low return
and when it is also capable of offering protection against fluctuations in the primary surplus and in the
public debt/GDP ratio. The findings denoted that the use of pre-fixed government bonds and price-
indexed securities was the best strategy for public debt management.

2.1. Change in the Brazilian public debt management
        As a result of a payment balance crisis trigged by successive speculative currency attacks on
several emerging economies in the second half of the 1990s, the Brazilian government adopted a flexible
exchange rate system in January of 1999. Due to the exchange rate overshooting and the fact that
approximately 25% of the public debt had been indexed to the exchange rate at that time, the Brazilian
National Treasury adopted a new strategy for managing the country’s public debt. The main objectives
were the improvement of the composition of public debt and the lengthening of the maturities of
government securities. One important change introduced was the establishment of primary surplus
targets. As a result, the economic policy was changed and the cornerstone of the Brazilian economy
became the tripod of inflation targeting, primary surplus, and floating exchange rates.
        Despite the changes introduced in the political economy, which were briefly successful, the
beginning of the 2000s was marked by successive shocks to the Brazilian economy that led to the failure
to meet the inflation targets (see figure 1).1 This environment created a macroeconomic instability that
implied a reduction in the maturities of government securities. This scenario changed only after 2005 due
to the success in achieving the targets for primary surplus and the consequent fall in the public debt/GDP
ratio.
        After 2002 the National Treasury adopted an assets and liabilities management strategy that
strengthened the substitution of interest rate indexed securities (Selic-indexed bonds) and exchange
1
  As examples of shocks on the Brazilian economy: instability in the American economy (2001), crisis in Argentina (2001), and political
shock caused by first Lula’s government.
                                                                  3
indexed securities by fixed rate securities and inflation indexed securities. 2The result of this strategy was
a considerable increase in the proportion of fixed rate and inflation-indexed government securities (see
figure 2). Moreover, the proportion of exchange indexed securities became negligible. Nevertheless,
although the proportion of Selic-indexed bonds was decreased, it remains very high (approximately 35%).
                                                                           Figure 1
                                                        Inflation targeting a and public debt maturity




Note: Source of data – Central Bank of Brazil and Brazilian National Treasury. a Tolerance intervals for the inflation target is ±2.5% from 2003 to 2005, and ±2% after this period.

                                                                       Figure 2
                                                   Primary surplus, Public Debt, and Indexing factors




                                                                     Source of data: Central Bank of Brazil.
       An important implication of the Brazilian public debt framework is that the impact caused by an
increase in the interest rate (Selic) to reduce inflationary pressure implies pressure to increase the public
debt/GDP ratio. It is important to highlight that the combination of inflation targeting, a large portion of
the public debt being indexed to the interest rate, and the short average maturity of the public debt, creates
interdependence between fiscal and monetary policies. In particular, the generation of primary surplus has
an important role in this system because it contributes to fiscal balance which, in turn, is one of the
preconditions to the success of inflation targeting.3
       The generation of primary surplus depends on the successful implementation of fiscal policy to
achieve its goals. A successful fiscal policy is one which is able to rationalize public expenditure to
produce primary surpluses. A significant source of government expenditures is the social security system
expenses. An imbalanced social security system, as is the case in Brazil, represents a permanent drain of
public resources. Therefore, the primary result of the social security system is an important variable for
analysis of the management of Brazilian public debt.

3. Social security literature: main features
        In the middle of the last century, the change in the demographic profile of the developed countries
stimulated the literature on social security. The increase in life expectancy and the reduction in the birth
rates implied an increase in the elderly/young ratio (United Nations, 2007). Furthermore, since in most
countries the social security system in effect is the pay-as-you-go kind, the consequences on long-term
financial viability are an increase in the payment of social security benefits and a decreased funding base
for the system.4
2
  Regarding this strategy, see Back and Musgrave (1941), Lucas and Stokey (1983), Bohn (1988), and Calvo (1988).
3
  Fiscal balance eliminates the possibility of the “unpleasant monetarist arithmetic” taking place (see Sargent and Wallace, 1981).
4
  For an analysis of social security systems, see Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin (2004a).
                                                                                           4
        Samuelson (1958) was one of the first authors to study the problem of social security in a general
equilibrium context and he demonstrated that the social security pay-as-you-go system corrects the
fundamental market incompleteness (for example, the impossibility of writing contracts with the unborn).
Moreover, in the overlapping generation model of Samuelson (1958), the market results were not
efficient, so that the transfer of resources from the young generation to the elderly generation, through a
social security pay-as-you-go system, could increase the welfare of a society.
        Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin (2004b), based on Browning’s model (1975), considered three
generations of the same size: young people, adults, and old people. These three groups were required to
choose whether or not to adopt the social security pay-as-you-go system. The proposal was as follows: in
each period, young people and adults would pay a contribution of T, and the old people would receive a
pension of 2T. The conclusion was that adults and old people support this system because their net gain is
T and 2T, respectively. In turn, young people are indifferent, because their net gain is zero.
        Diamond (1977) argues that the choice of a pay-as-you-go system is required due to the
shortsighted action of individuals when they are young. Most individuals are not forward-looking enough
in their youth and, therefore, do not save enough to maintain the same standard of living in old age.
According to Diamond (1977), this may be because young people lack the necessary information to judge
their needs in old age, or are unable to make effective decisions about long-term issues, or, simply, fail to
place sufficient importance on their future necessities.
        Cooley and Soares (1999) argue that a pay-as-you-go system can also be chosen and maintained in
a sustainable way in societies where economic agents are rational, forward-looking, and self-interested.
Under this view, pay-as-you-go systems cause dynamic inconsistency and therefore rational agents do not
believe in their sustainability. As a way to avoid this problem, mechanisms of reputation and credibility
among the generations should be used. The social security system can be thought as a dynamic game that
involves repeated iterations between the generations. If generation t expects that its act to stop the
financing of pensions of generation t-1 will be followed by the future generation t+1, a reputational trade-
off is introduced in generation t. Generation t finds that the cost of stopping the financing of the system
can be very high because, for its own generation, the system may collapse at t+1 (when generation t
would benefit from the pension system). Therefore, to ensure the system at t+1, generation t disclaims
possible short-term benefits that it would earn with the discontinuation of financing of the system for
generation t-1.
        As identified by Feldstein (1974), the pay-as-you-go systems can stimulate workers to take early
retirement. In addition, Feldstein (1974, 1996), Kotlikoff (1979), and Seidman (1986), show empirical
evidence that the choice of pay-as-you-go systems reduces significantly the long-term pattern of capital-
intensive accumulation and standard of living in those countries.
        In contrast to the above results, recent empirical studies have shown that social policies play a
positive influence on economic growth. Zhang and Zhang (2004), through an empirical analysis of cross-
section data for 64 countries during the period 1960 to 2000, concluded that pay-as-you-go systems tend
to stimulate per capita economic growth by reducing birth rate and increasing investment in human
capital without affecting the saving rate.
        These beneficial results of the action of social policies were also found by Justino (2007) through
an analysis of panel data for 14 Indian states over the period 1973 to 1999. The findings indicate that the
strengthening of social security contributes to reducing poverty and increasing economic growth. In a
similar vein, Alan, Sultana and Butt (2010) studied the long-term relationship between social spending
and economic growth in 10 developing Asian countries. The main conclusion was that spending on social
policies results in faster economic growth.

3.1. Social security in Brazil: main variables
        Based on the literature on social security, this section identifies the key variables for the analysis
of the Brazilian case. The first variable to consider is the sickness benefit. Figure 3 shows that there was a
significant increase in the granting of sickness benefits to social security beneficiaries over the past
decade. In addition, it was observed that the average value of the sickness benefit under the Social
Security General Regime (SSGR) was always greater than the average of all other benefits paid by the
                                                      5
SSGR. This can be explained by the deferral of retirements due to the application of a social security
factor and stricter criteria for granting retirements. Other factors that contributed to the increase in the
sickness benefits were: adverse economic conditions at the beginning of the decade, which raised the
unemployment rate and, thus, sickness benefits were seen as a complement to household income; and the
facility to get this benefit.
                                                               Figure 3
                                              Sickness benefits and other SSGR benefits




                                                  Source of data: National Social Security Institute.
        Another variable that is important in analyzing the behavior of the Brazilian social security system
is the minimum wage. Figure 4 demonstrates that approximately 60% of SSGR benefits are equal to one
minimum wage. This percentage shows the importance that the minimum wage policy has on the social
security budget. Furthermore, one cannot neglect the systematic readjustment of the minimum wage, at
rates higher than the inflation rate.
                                                        Figure 4
                                  Minimum wage - percentage of benefits and readjustments




         Note: Source of data - National Social Security Institute and Central Bank of Brazil. INPC is the National Consumer Price Index.
        One aspect that should be considered in the study of social security in Brazil is the formality of the
labor market, which directly affects the social security budget. The social security contribution on
payrolls is one of the SSGR’s main sources of revenue. The higher the level of formality in the economy,
the greater is the number of working-age workers who are contributing to the social security system.
Consequently, there is an increase in the social security revenues. Figure 5 shows that social security
protection has been increasing in recent years and that the social security deficit has begun to decrease,
due to an increase in the number of contributors to the SSGR.
                                                               Figure 5
                                                Social Security – protection and deficit




         Source of data - National Social Security Institute, Central Bank of Brazil, and Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics.

                                                                          6
        It is important to highlight that the implications of income inequality for the Brazilian social
security deficit should not be overlooked. Income inequality is particularly relevant because contributions
from workers’ wages are main sources of revenue for the social security system. In general, it is expected
that a decrease in income inequality would imply an increase in the poorest households’ income, which
would foster conditions for admission into the social security system. Figure 6 shows that average
nominal income is lower than the social security ceiling. Moreover, the percentage of workers with
income above the ceiling corresponds to, on average, only 5% of the population. This observation is
important because it shows that, although undesirable, an increase in income inequality could reduce the
social security deficit. As a small portion of the population have income above the ceiling, an increase in
the inequality may imply an increase in the social security revenue.
                                                       Figure 6
                                        Income and social security ceiling




                                Source of data - Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics.


4. Empirical analysis
        This section shows empirical evidence of the relation between the social security deficit and
federal public debt in the Brazilian economy. Moreover, it demonstrates how the federal government’s
social policies impact the social security deficit.
        Regarding the federal public debt, in addition to the effect of the social security deficit, we also
considered shocks transmitted by relevant variables to explain the behavior of the public debt (e.g.,
average maturity, the primary surplus, interest rates, and exchange rates). Since social programs may have
an important role in the analysis concerning the social security deficit, the following variables were
considered in this study: the amount of sickness benefits paid by the National Social Security Institute
(INSS), the financial impact of minimum wage on the social security costs, the level of formality in the
Brazilian economy, and inequality indexes.
        One difficulty in estimating the effects of economic shocks on the social security system and
public debt is the endogeneity problem, or identification problem. It is hard to distinguish, for example, if,
after an economic shock, an increase in the social security deficit is due to a decrease in the level of
formality in the economy (due to, for example, the slowdown in economic activity) or due to an increase
in the amount of benefits (for example, as a result of times of economic crisis). Likewise, it is hard to
identify whether an increase in the public debt, caused by an economic shock, is a consequence of:
reduction in the primary surplus, reduction in the average maturity of public debt, an increase in public
debt service, or an increase in the social security deficit.
        One way to avoid the endogeneity and identification problems in the estimations is to use the
generalized method of moments - GMM (Hall, 2005). One advantage of the GMM in relation to, for
example, the ordinary least squares (OLS) is that it presents robust estimators even in the presence of
serial autocorrelation, heteroskedasticity or non-linearity, which is typical in macroeconomic time series
models (Hansen, 1982).
        In order to assess the relevance of the management of the social security system for the federal
public debt, and the influence of federal social policies on the social security management system, thus
bypassing potential endogeneity problems, two sets of GMM models were estimated: (i) the first set
examines the effects of changes in the social security deficit on the federal public debt, and (ii) the second
set examines the effects of changes in the social variables on the social security deficit.
                                                               7
        It is important to note that the choice of the independent variables in the models was based on the
literature about the subject, and the use of lags followed the general to the specific method in a search for
the most parsimonious model. In addition, to provide robustness to the analysis and to observe the
validity of the models, a GMM system model was built.

4.1. Data
        A key variable for this study is the social security deficit. The evolution of this variable allows one
to conjecture how social security management can contribute to the sustainability of the public debt. As
shown by Figure 7, the trajectory for the public sector borrowing requirement - INSS (series extracted
from the Central Bank of Brazil (CBB) site) presents a structural break at January 2004. Hence, as a way
of eliminating possible problems in the estimations due to the instability of parameters (the “Lucas
critique”), the period considered in the empirical analysis extends from January 2004 to December 2010.
                                                             Figure 7
                                       Public sector borrowing requirements - INSS (% GDP)
                                 2.2
                                                                    structural break

                                 2.0


                                 1.8


                                 1.6


                                 1.4


                                 1.2


                                 1.0


                                 0.8


                                 0.6
                                        1999   2000   2001   2002   2003     2004      2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010
                                                  Chow Breakpoint Test: 2004M01 - Sample: 1999M02 2010M12
                                                  F-statistic         3.1597  Prob. F(2,139)      0.0455
                                                  Log likelihood ratio 6.3579 Prob. Chi-Square(2) 0.0416
                                                  Wald Statistic       6.3195 Prob. Chi-Square(2) 0.0424


All data are in logs with monthly frequency (84 observations). The data is divided into two groups:
(i) variables with effect on the federal public debt
- DEBT – net public debt (% GDP) - total - federal government and CBB (available from CBB). In the
period analyzed in this paper, there is a decreasing trend in the public debt/GDP ratio. An explanation for
this observation is a consequence of the change in the management of public debt that was introduced in
1999.
- INSS - public sector borrowing requirement - INSS - primary result - %GDP - flows accumulated in 12
months (available from CBB). In general, it is expected that an increase in the INSS would cause an
increase in the public debt and thus, a positive relation between these variables exists.
- MTDEBT– public debt average maturity – in months (available from Brazilian National Treasury –
CODIV). The public debt average maturity increased approximately 40% between January 2006 (29
months) and December 2010 (40 months). As an increase in the average maturity can reduce the public
debt service costs (see, Giavazzi and Pagano, 1990), it is expected that there exists a negative relation
between this variable and the public debt.
- SURPLUS - public sector borrowing requirement - primary result - %GDP - flows accumulated in 12
months (available from CBB).5 In general, with exception of the period after the subprime crisis, the
primary surplus has shown a relative stability (between 2.4% and 2.8%). It is important to highlight that
the systematic generation of primary surplus reduces the public debt default risk which, in turn, decreases
the cost of the public debt. Therefore, it was expected that the empirical evidence would reveal a negative
relation between primary surplus and public debt.
        Based on the composition of the federal public debt, the main indexing factors over the period
were also considered in this analysis:6
- SELIC - interest rate - Selic accumulated in the month in annual terms (available from CBB). Selic is the
main indexing factor of the federal public debt and the main instrument of monetary policy. Due to the
high relevance of this variable on the public debt composition, a positive relation between these variables

5
  Positive values correspond to the primary surplus in the series.
6
  It is important to note that although in the recent period the price-indexed securities have grown considerably, they are not considered in
this study due to their lack of significance for the public debt.
                                                                                 8
is expected.
- EXCH - exchange rate - free - United States dollar (purchase) - period average (available from CBB).
Even though the proportion of exchange rate indexed bonds has been decreasing substantially, it was one
of the main indexing factors over the period. It is expected that currency valuations (decreases in EXCH)
contribute to a decrease in the public debt.
(ii) variables with effect on the INSS
- AUX – sickness benefit paid by National Social Security Institute. It is a result of the ratio between
concessions of sickness benefit and all benefits paid by the SSGR (both series available from Social
Statistical Bulletin - flows accumulated in 12 months). The trajectory of this variable reveals a significant
increase until the first quarter of 2007 (representing almost 56% of all benefits). From the second quarter
of 2007, there was a decreasing trend, but the relevance is still very significant, being approximately 45%
of the total. In short, it is expected that there exists a positive relation of this variable with the INSS.
- WMIN - financial impact of minimum wage on social security expenditures (% GDP). This series is the
result of the ratio between the total of benefits equal to one minimum wage paid by the SSGR (available
from Social Statistical Bulletin - flows accumulated in 12 months) and the Gross Domestic Product (GDP
– flows accumulated in 12 months – available from CBB). It is important to highlight that the real
increase in the minimum wage has a significant impact on the social security budget and thus it is
expected that an increase in this variable implies an increase in the INSS.
         In addition to the aforementioned variables, the consequence of the level of formality in the
Brazilian economy on the INSS was also considered. It is expected that a greater level of formality
reduces the INSS due to the increase in the government’s tax revenue. Hence, the following variables are
considered in this study:
-     EMPF       –     formal      employment       –     seasonally      adjusted    index     (available   from
CBB). In the period analyzed in this paper, there is a strong increasing trend over the period. A possible
justification for this observation is the favorable macroeconomic environment and the policies adopted by
the federal government for increasing the level of formality.
- CT_PO – Brazilian labor Market – formality rate. It is a result of the ratio between the employed people
(registered) and occupied people (total) – both series are available from CBB. In this period, the trajectory
shows a strong increasing trend.
         As in the case of a greater level of formality, a lower income inequality may also be able to reduce
the INSS. Hence, the following indices are considered:
- GINI – Gini coefficient – measures the inequality of a distribution, a value of 0 expressing total equality
and a value of 1 maximal inequality. This coefficient is the result of information available from Monthly
Employment Survey - Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE). In this period, this variable
shows a decreasing trend over the period. This observation matters because a major source of revenue for
social security is the levy on the workers’ remuneration. Therefore, a decrease in inequality can indicate
an increase in workers’ remuneration, which, in turn, could cause an increase in the social security
revenues.
- THEIL – Theil index is a statistic used to measure economic inequality. This index is calculated based
on information available from Monthly Employment Survey – IBGE. As the Gini coefficient, a value of 0
expresses total equality and a value of 1 maximal inequality.

4.2. Empirical evidence
       To preliminarily evaluate the relation between the aforementioned variables with DEBT and INSS,
figure 8 shows scatter plot diagrams with correlations. With the exception of the correlation between
DEBT and SURPLUS, all correlations are in accordance with the theoretical view for the analysis
regarding public debt.7In a similar manner, except for WMIN, the correlations for INSS are also in
agreement with the theoretical perspective.8
7
  A possible reason for the positive correlation between DEBT and SURPLUS is that an increase in the primary surplus does not have an
immediate effect on the public debt.
8
  It is true that while the financial impact of the minimum wage on the social security expenditures had a strong growth over the period, the
INSS had a decreasing trend. However, the decrease in INSS is a result of other economic and social factors that offset the positive effects on
the INSS of an increase in the WMIN.
                                                                      9
4.2.1. Economic shocks on public debt
         With the objective of estimating the effect of economic shocks, especially from the INSS, on
public debt, two specifications (GMM models) were considered:
(1) DEBTt   0   1DEBTt 1   2 INSSt 1   3MTDEBTt 6   4 SURPLUSt 1   5SELICt 6  t1 ; e
(2) DEBTt   6   7 DEBTt 1   8 INSSt 1   9 MTDEBTt 6   10 SURPLUSt 1   11EXCHt 2  t2 ,
where, µt ~ N(0,2).
         A first step in time series analysis is to check the presence of unit root. Hence, the augmented
Dickey-Fuller test (ADF) and the Phillips-Perron (PP) test were performed (see table A.1 - appendix).
The results indicate that the use of the series in first difference in the estimation of equations (1) and (2)
would be adequate, however it is possible that a linear combination of series is stationary even in the case
of non-stationary series.9 Hence, cointegration tests were performed on both specifications. The selection
of lags for the tests was made based on Akaike and Hannan-Quinn criteria in a vector-autoregressive
model. For both specifications, the number of lags is 2 (see table A.2 – appendix). Furthermore, the
inclusion of intercept and trend is based on the Pantula principle (see Harris, 1995). The cointegration
tests proposed by Johansen (1991, LR test statistic), based on the significance of the estimated
eigenvalues, indicate that there is a relation of long-term equilibrium among the series for both
specifications and thus the equations can be estimated with the series in levels without the problem of
spuriousness in the result10.
         The GMM method minimizes a function that represents the moment conditions being carefully
weighed. If the moment conditions are correct, their average is zero. In addition, it is necessary that the
instruments used in GMM are lagged one or more periods, as a prerequisite to predict the contemporary
variables that were not available at time t. As pointed out by Wooldridge (2001, p. 95), “to obtain a more
efficient estimator than two-stage least squares (or ordinary least squares), one must have overriding
restrictions.” In order to test the validity of moment conditions and test over-identifying restrictions in
each estimated model, a standard J-test was performed (see Hansen, 1982; and Cragg, 1983). As a way to
help predict the contemporary variables which are not available at time t, we used instrumental variables
uncorrelated with the regression residuals.
         Table 1 presents the GMM estimation results for equations (1) and (2). In order to consider the
effect of the subprime crisis on public debt, a dummy variable was included in the estimation of both
models. Both estimates showed an adjusted R2 greater than 0.90 and J-statistics that validate the
instruments used.
         The estimated results reveal that the INSS has significant influence on public debt. Both models
indicate that an increase in the INSS causes an increase in the public debt/GDP ratio (INSS coefficient is
positive coefficient and significant). This result is important because it shows that a social security
management system, capable of reducing the INSS, would contribute to public debt sustainability.
         The coefficients regarding lagged federal debt are positive and have statistical significance. This
result indicates that economic shocks on public debt are persistent. Furthermore, the estimates show that
the coefficients of other variables have statistical significance and signs according to the theoretical
arguments. In other words, increases in the SELIC and EXCH lead to increases in public debt. On the
other hand, an increase in primary surplus contributes to a decrease in public debt. The only result that
was different from what would be expected, according to the theoretical perspective, is the coefficient of
the MTDEBT (positive sign). However, this observation is consistent with the idea that in economies
where credibility is not sufficiently developed the strategy to extend the public debt may imply an
increase in SELIC and thus in public debt service. Regarding the coefficients of the dummies, it shows
that they are negative and statistically significant. A possible explanation for this result is due to the sharp
fall in the SELIC to neutralize the recessive effects of the crisis which, in turn, reduced the public debt
service cost.
9
  Tests ADF and PP are in disagreement regarding the presence of unit root in SELIC. As a consequence, the Kwiatkowski-Phillips-Schmidt-
Shin (KPSS) test was performed and the result is that SELIC is I(1) – see table A.1 - appendix.
10
   The test for Number of Cointegrating Relations by Model and Johansen’s Cointegration Test are available from the authors on request.

                                                                  10
                                                                                                                        Figure 8: Scatter plots diagrams
                             DEBT vs. INSS                                                             DEBT vs. MTDEBT                                                            DEBT vs. SURPLUS                                                                     DEBT vs. SELIC
          3.55                                                                            3.55                                                                        3.55                                                                              3.55

          3.50                                                                            3.50                                                                        3.50                                                                              3.50

          3.45                                                                            3.45                                                                        3.45                                                                              3.45

          3.40                                                                            3.40                                                                        3.40                                                                              3.40
DEBT




                                                                                   DEBT




                                                                                                                                                             DEBT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DEBT
          3.35                                                                            3.35                                                                        3.35                                                                              3.35

          3.30                                                                            3.30                                                                        3.30                                                                              3.30

          3.25                                                                            3.25                                                                        3.25                                                                              3.25

          3.20                                                                            3.20                                                                        3.20                                                                              3.20

          3.15                                                                            3.15                                                                        3.15                                                                              3.15
                 .1     .2      .3         .4         .5      .6      .7      .8                 3.3     3.4        3.5        3.6      3.7           3.8                 -2.0    -1.5    -1.0   -0.5          0.0      0.5      1.0     1.5                   2.1   2.2    2.3    2.4   2.5    2.6   2.7    2.8   2.9   3.0

                                            INSS                                                                        MTDEBT                                                                   SURPLUS                                                                                 SELIC
                          Correl.: 0.7288                                                               Correl.: -0.6555                                                                 Correl.: 0.1612                                                                   Correl.: 0.3976
                         DEBT vs. EXCH                                                                  INSS vs. AUX                                                                    INSS vs. WMIN                                                                      INSS vs. EMPF
          3.55                                                                            .8                                                                           .8                                                                               .8

          3.50                                                                            .7                                                                           .7                                                                               .7

          3.45
                                                                                          .6                                                                           .6                                                                               .6
          3.40
                                                                                          .5                                                                           .5                                                                               .5
                                                                                   INSS
DEBT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 INSS
                                                                                                                                                               INSS
          3.35
                                                                                          .4                                                                                                                                                            .4
                                                                                                                                                                       .4
          3.30
                                                                                          .3                                                                                                                                                            .3
          3.25                                                                                                                                                         .3

                                                                                          .2                                                                                                                                                            .2
          3.20                                                                                                                                                         .2

          3.15                                                                            .1                                                                                                                                                            .1
                                                                                            3.72 3.76 3.80 3.84 3.88 3.92 3.96 4.00 4.04                               .1
                 0.4   0.5    0.6    0.7        0.8     0.9   1.0     1.1    1.2                                                                                                                                                                             4.3            4.4           4.5               4.6          4.7
                                                                                                                                                                            .60   .65     .70    .75          .80    .85        .90     .95
                                                                                                                        AUX
                                            EXCH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         EMPF
                                                                                                                                                                                                  WMIN
                             Correl.: 0.3896                                                             Correl.: 0.8389                                                                Correl.: -0.6338                                                               Correl.: -0.7276
                             INSS vs. CT_PO                                                                           INSS vs. GINI                                                                                             INSS vs. THEIL
           .8                                                                                                  .8                                                                                              .8

           .7                                                                                                  .7                                                                                              .7

           .6                                                                                                  .6                                                                                              .6

           .5                                                                                                  .5                                                                                              .5
   INSS




                                                                                                        INSS




                                                                                                                                                                                                       INSS
           .4                                                                                                  .4                                                                                              .4

           .3                                                                                                  .3                                                                                              .3

           .2
                                                                                                               .2                                                                                              .2

           .1
                                                                                                               .1                                                                                              .1
             3.76        3.80        3.84             3.88     3.92         3.96
                                                                                                                 -.80     -.78       -.76          -.74     -.72         -.70                                    -.88         -.84     -.80    -.76      -.72        -.68         -.64
                                           CT_PO
                                                                                                                                            GINI                                                                                               THEIL

                             Correl.: -0.7855                                                                                 Correl.: 0.6012                                                                                    Correl.: 0.4192
                                                                                                                                                    11
                                                                        Table 1
                                                                  GMM estimation – DEBT
                                                     Explanatory          Specification       Specification
                                                     variables                Eq(1)                Eq(2)
                                                     Constant                -0.058             1.494***
                                                                            (0.384)              (0.401)
                                                                            [-0.151]              [3.725]
                                                     DEBT t-1              0.670***             0.526***
                                                                            (0.095)              (0.102)
                                                                             [7.030]              [5.138]
                                                     INSS   t-1            0.115***             0.154***
                                                                            (0.039)              (0.050)
                                                                             [2.938]              [3.091]
                                                     MTDEBT t-6             0.226**                0.010
                                                                            (0.091)              (0.046)
                                                                             [2.481]              [0.211]
                                                     SURPLUS        t-1    -0.025**            -0.037***
                                                                            (0.012)              (0.013)
                                                                            [-2.154]             [-2.882]
                                                     SELIC t-6              0.136**
                                                                            (0.045)
                                                                             [3.021]
                                                     EXCH t-2                                   0.053***
                                                                                                 (0.016)
                                                                                                  [3.359]
                                                     Dummy                  -0.059**            -0.043**
                                                                             (0.026)             (0.019)
                                                                             [-2.253]            [-2.289]
                                                     R²                        0.913               0.905
                                                     Adj. R²                   0.906               0.897
                                                     J-statistic               4.313               6.100
                                                                            p= 0.634            p = 0.412
      Note: Marginal significance levels: (***) denotes 0.01, (**) denotes 0.05, (*) denotes 0.1. Standard errors in parentheses and t-statistics in brackets.
        From estimated coefficients in equations (1) and (2) (see table 1) the effects on federal public debt
at period t are calculated. The shocks of one standard deviation in the explanatory variables at period t-1
are shown in table 2.11 The shock of one standard deviation on INSSt-1 causes a positive change on the
federal public debt at period t which corresponds to 2.23 basis points (b.p.).
                                                                          Table 2
                                                                  Economic shocks on DEBT
                                     Variable    Stand. dev. Coefficient Eq(N.)         Effect    Confid. interv.
                                      INSS          0.144          0.154        2      2.23 b.p.   1.05 — 3.41
                                    MTDEBT          0.156          0.226        1      3.53 b.p.   1.21 — 5.97
                                    SURPLUS         0.464         -0.037        2     -1.74 b.p. -2.72 — -0.74
                                     SELIC          0.252           0.136       1      3.44 b.p.   1.54 — 5.32
                                     EXCH           0.184           0.054       2      0.99 b.p.   0.50 — 1.46
                              Note: Confidence interval is calculated by Monte Carlo simulation with 10.000 repetitions.
        The immediate impacts transmitted by the MTDEBT and SELIC are relatively close (about 3.5
b.p.). The impact of lower magnitude is the EXCH (less than 1 b.p.). Although the shock transmitted by
the SURPLUS is greater (in absolute terms) only to the EXCH, it contributes to a negative growth of
public debt of approximately 1.74 b.p. Moreover, confidence intervals are calculated for the estimates
(see table 2). If the weighting matrix used in GMM estimations is efficient, the estimators are
asymptotically normal. Given the normality of the coefficients and their estimated standard errors, it is
possible to calculate the probability of what the effects of economic shocks on the federal public debt
would be in a given confidence interval.

4.2.2. Economic shocks on the INSS
        Using the same methodology adopted in the previous section and the variables listed in section
4.1, this section shows empirical evidence of economic shocks, in particular those caused by social
policies, on the INSS. Hence, two specifications were considered:
(3)     INSSt  0  1INSSt 1  2 AUX t 1  3WMINt 1  4 EMPFt 1  t1 , and

11
     The coefficients consider the highest statistical significance among the two models estimated.
                                                                                 12
(4)      INSSt  5  6 INSSt 1  7 AUX t 1  8WMINt 1  9CT _ POt 1  t2 ,
where,     ~ N(0,2).
         The unit root tests (ADF and PP) indicate that the series in both models are I(1) (see table A.1 –
appendix). As a consequence, there exists the possibility of a long-term relationship among the series
when they are cointegrated and thus the models may use the series in levels. The tests denote that the
series in both models are cointegrated12.
         Besides the aforementioned variables in the models, two social variables (GINI and THEIL) were
included for observing the impact on the INSS. A justification for the inclusion of these variables is that
an important source of revenue for the National Social Security Institute is the contribution on workers’
wages. Therefore, a change in the distribution of wealth can have significant effects on the social security
deficit. Furthermore, to take into account the effect of the subprime crisis, a dummy variable with a value
of “1” for the period between August 2008 and September 2009 and value of “0” for the other periods
was introduced in the models. Therefore, the models to be estimated are:
(5)      INSSt  0  1INSSt 1  2 AUX t 1  3WMIN t 1  4 EMPFt 1  5GINI t 1  t1 ,
(6)       INSSt  6  7 INSSt 1  8 AUX t 1  9WMINt 1  10CT _ POt 1  11GINI t 1  t2 ,
(7)       INSSt  12  13 INSSt 1  14 AUX t 1  15WMINt 1  16 EMPFt 1  17THEILt 1  t3 ,
(8)      INSSt  18  19 INSSt 1  20 AUX t 1  21WMINt 1  22CT _ POt 1  23THEILt 1  t4 ,
where, ω~ N(0,2).
         Table 3 presents GMM estimations based on equations (5) to (8). In general, the coefficients are in
line with the theoretical arguments. All specifications show that the coefficient of the lagged INSS has
statistical significance and positive sign. Therefore, the inertial effect on the social security deficit cannot
be neglected. The same behavior is observed for the coefficients of AUX and WMIN.
                                                                        Table 3
                                                                  GMM estimation – INSS
                                            Explanatory Specification Specification Specification Specification
                                            variables        Eq(5)         Eq(6)         Eq(7)         Eq(8)
                                            Constant         0.130      5.206***         0.388       4.158**
                                                           (0.572)        -1.562       (0.640)        -1.598
                                                            [0.227]       [3.332]       [0.606]       [2.601]
                                            INSS t-1      0.804***      0.763***      0.782***      0.764***
                                                           (0.091)       (0.076)       (0.102)       (0.084)
                                                            [8.808]     [10.013]        [7.644]       [9.044]
                                            AUX t-1       0.279***      0.175**       0.331***       0.242**
                                                           (0.096)       (0.083)       (0.112)       (0.100)
                                                            [2.895]       [2.095]       [2.944]       [2.422]
                                            WMIN t-1         0.024      0.330**          0.109        0.284*
                                                           (0.113)       (0.154)       (0.130)       (0.164)
                                                            [0.209]       [2.145]       [0.836]       [1.730]
                                            EMPF t-1     -0.514***                   -0.479***
                                                           (0.155)                     (0.152)
                                                           [-3.324]                    [-3.155]
                                            CT_PO t-1                  -1.816***                   -1.477***
                                                                         (0.466)                     (0.448)
                                                                         [-3.894]                    [-3.297]
                                            GINI t-1     -1.567***     -1.265***
                                                           (0.435)       (0.421)
                                                           [-3.599]      [-3.001]
                                            THEIL t-1                                -0.653***     -0.603***
                                                                                       (0.222)       (0.200)
                                                                                       [-2.941]      [-3.009]
                                            dummy            0.017      0.030**          0.029       0.041**
                                                           (0.016)       (0.012)       (0.017)       (0.016)
                                                            [1.122]       [2.382]       [1.629]       [2.580]
                                            R²               0.937         0.941         0.935         0.938
                                            Adj. R²          0.931         0.937         0.930         0.933
                                            J-statistic      5.540         8.052         7.132         8.262
                                                          p= 0.699      p = 0.529     p = 0.522     p = 0.508
       Note: Marginal significance levels: (***) denotes 0.01, (**) denotes 0.05, (*) denotes 0.1. Standard errors in parentheses and t-statistics in brackets.


12
  The number of lags was defined based on Schwarz and Hannan-Quinn criteria in a VAR (see table A.2 -appendix). The test for Number of
Cointegrating Relations by Model and Johansen’s Cointegration Test are available from the authors on request.

                                                                                  13
        In other words, both an increase in the amount of sickness benefits and an increase in the
minimum wage imply a greater social security deficit. In contrast, the coefficients of the variables that
measure the level of formality in the economy (EMPF and CT_PO) show that a decrease in the
informality level contributes to a decrease in the INSS.
        The coefficients related to the variables GINI and THEIL indicate that an increase in social
inequality implies a decrease in the INSS. A possible reason for our finding is that the concentration of
income in Brazil is near the limit of the social security ceiling. As the main source of social security
revenue is the income of workers, an increase in the inequality means an increase in workers with higher
incomes, but because most of them are below the ceiling, the result is an increase in the social security
revenues.
        Finally, it was observed that the coefficients of the dummies are positive, which indicates that
economic crises tend to increase the INSS. The explanation for this phenomenon is that crises lead to an
economic slowdown and, with increasing unemployment, the social security revenues tend to fall. In
addition, the increase in the unemployment rates increases social security costs in two ways: (i) workers
who possess the requirements for retirement, but have chosen to remain in the labor market, tend to retire
in times of crisis, and (ii) the increase in the unemployment rates tends to increase the demand for social
security benefits, such as unemployment insurance.
        Taking as reference the estimated coefficients in the different specifications (see table 3), the
effects (one standard deviation) on the INSS at period t caused by shocks transmitted by explanatory
variables at period t-1 are obtained (see table 4).13 The shocks transmitted by AUX and WMIN cause a
positive change in INSS of 3.18 and 3.57 b.p., respectively. In contrast, the results show that the social
policies that aim to increase the level of formality in the Brazilian economy imply beneficial effects on
the social security budget. The shock on EMPF causes a negative change in the INSS of 5.08 b.p.
Likewise, the shock transmitted by CT_PO causes a negative change in the INSS of approximately 8.71
b.p. The shocks transmitted by GINI and THEIL also cause a negative change in the INSS (3.72 and 2.81
b.p., respectively).
                                                               Table 4
                                                        Economic shocks on INSS
                                  Variable    Stand. dev. Coefficient    Eq(N.)     Effect     Confid. interv.

                                    AUX         0.096        0.331           7     3.18 b.p.     1.39 — 5.02
                                   WMIN         0.108        0.330           6     3.57 b.p.     0.92 — 6.26
                                   EMPF         0.099       -0.514           5    -5.08 b.p.    -7.59 — -2.64
                                   CT_PO        0.048       -1.817           6    -8.71 b.p.   -12.45 — -5.02
                                    GINI        0.024       -1.567           5    -3.72 b.p.    -5.44 — -2.01
                                   THEIL        0.047       -0.603           8    -2.81 b.p.    -4.34 — -1.29
                         Note: Confidence interval was calculated by Monte Carlo simulation with 10.000 repetitions.
       It is important to highlight that if the weighting matrix used in GMM estimation is efficient, the
estimators are asymptotically normal. Due to the normality of the coefficients and the estimated standard
errors (see table 3), the likelihood of the effects of economic shocks on the INSS being within a
confidence interval was calculated (see table 4).

4.2.3. Equation system: DEBT and INSS
        Based on DEBT and INSS estimations, figure 9 illustrates the interaction between these variables
in the Brazilian economy. In general, one can say that in addition to the direct effects of the variables
related to macroeconomic policy (interest and exchange rates, primary surplus, and average maturity of
public debt), the effects of the variables that explain the social security revenues and expenditures cannot
be neglected. Therefore, policies that reduce the social security deficit, as for example, the increase in the
level of formality in the economy, can contribute to greater public debt sustainability.




13
  As in the previous section, the coefficients consider the highest statistical significance among the models estimated.
                                                                        14
                                      Figure 9: Interaction between INSS and DEBT
                         Level of                Income                     Minimum                Sickness
                        formality               inequality                   wage                   benefit




                                    Social security                              Social security
                                      revenues                                    expenditures




                                                             Social security
                                                                 deficit



                      Public debt           Primary                              Interest            Exchange
                       maturity             surplus                                rate                rate




                                                              Public debt




        One way to test the validity of the models and the coefficients presented in the previous sections is
to estimate them through a system of equations (see Hallsten, 1999). For the treatment of the potential
endogeneity problem (in particular, the relation between public debt and the social security deficit) the
use of GMM systems is suitable for non-biased estimates. Hence, in order to provide robustness to the
empirical evidence presented in previous sections, the following systems were considered (see tables 5.A
and 5.B):
- System 1
  DEBTt   0  1DEBTt 1   2 INSSt 1   3 MTDEBTt 6   4 SURPLUSt 1   5SELICt 6   t
                                                                                                1

 
  INSSt  0  1 INSSt 1   2 AUX t 1  3WMIN t 1   4 EMPFt 1  5GINI t 1   t
 
                                                                                          1


- System 2
 DEBTt   6   7 DEBTt 1   8 INSSt 1   9 MTDEBTt 6  10 SURPLUSt 1  11SELICt 6   t2


 INSSt  6  7 INSSt 1  8 AUX t 1  9WMIN t 1  10CT _ POt 1  11GINI t 1   t

                                                                                            2


- System 3
 DEBTt  12  13 DEBTt 1  14 INSSt 1  15 MTDEBTt 6  16 SURPLUSt 1  17 SELICt 6   t3


 INSSt  12  13 INSSt 1  14 AUX t 1  15WMIN t 1  16 EMPFt 1  17THEILt 1   t

                                                                                              3


- System 4
 DEBTt  18  19 DEBTt 1   20 INSSt 1   21MTDEBTt 6   22 SURPLUSt 1   23SELICt 6   t
                                                                                                     4


 INSSt  18  19 INSSt 1   20 AUX t 1   21WMIN t 1   22CT _ POt 1   23THEILt 1   t

                                                                                                    4


- System 5
 DEBTt   24   25 DEBTt 1   26 INSSt 1   27 MTDEBTt 6   28 SURPLUSt 1   29 SELICt 6   t
                                                                                                        5


 INSSt  24  25 INSSt 1   26 AUX t 1   27WMIN t 1   28 EMPFt 1   29GINI t 1  t

                                                                                                5


- System 6
 DEBTt   30   31DEBTt 1   32 INSSt 1   33 MTDEBTt 6   34 SURPLUSt 1   35 EXCH t 2   t6


 INSSt  30  31 INSSt 1  32 AUX t 1  33WMIN t 1  34CT _ POt 1   35GINI t 1   t

                                                                                                 6


- System 7
 DEBTt   36   37 DEBTt 1   38 INSSt 1   39 MTDEBTt 6   40 SURPLUSt 1   41EXCH t 2   t
                                                                                                       7


 INSSt  36  37 INSSt 1  38 AUX t 1  39WMIN t 1   40 EMPFt 1   41THEILt 1   t

                                                                                               7


- System 8
 DEBTt   42   43 DEBTt 1   44 INSSt 1   45 MTDEBTt 6   46 SURPLUSt 1   47 EXCH t 2   t8


 INSSt  42  43 INSSt 1   44 AUX t 1   45WMIN t 1   46CT _ POt 1   47THEILt 1  t

                                                                                                  8


where εt ~ N(0,2) and φt ~ N(0,2).
                                                                  15
                                                                                                         Table 5.A
                                                                                            GMM systems estimation DEBT and INSS
                    System 1                                                        System 2                                             System 3                                                  System 4
Explanatory              Explan.                           Explanatory                    Explan.                    Explanatory              Explan.                     Explanatory                    Explan.
               DEBT                           INSS                              DEBT                      INSS                      DEBT                      INSS                            DEBT                     INSS
variables                variables                         Variable                       variables                  variables                variables                   variables                      variables
Constant       0.001     Constant             0.330        Constant             0.056     Constant      5.183***     Constant       0.018     Constant        0.445       Constant             0.077     Constant    4.292***
               (0.321)                       (0.512)                           (0.327)                   -1.323                     (0.330)                  (0.574)                          (0.324)                 -1.372
               [0.002]                       [0.644]                           [0.172]                   [3.916]                    [0.055]                  [0.776]                          [0.237]                 [3.129]
DEBT t-1      0.711*** INSS t-1             0.796***       DEBT t-1            0.713*** INSS t-1        0.769***     DEBT t-1      0.715*** INSS t-1        0.792***      DEBT t-1            0.718*** INSSt-1       0.774***
               (0.070)                       (0.079)                           (0.069)                   (0.063)                    (0.067)                  (0.090)                          (0.063)                 (0.073)
              [10.194]                       [10.076]                          [10.316]                 [12.207]                   [10.730]                  [8.783]                          [11.297]               [10.615]
INSS t-1      0.097*** AUX t-1              0.257***       INSS t-1            0.096*** AUX       t-1   0.157***     INSS t-1      0.096*** AUX       t-1   0.289***      INSS t-1            0.092*** AUXt-1        0.213**
               (0.028)                       (0.082)                           (0.027)                   (0.067)                    (0.027)                  (0.095)                          (0.026)                 (0.082)
               [3.503]                       [3.140]                           [3.586]                   [2.326]                    [3.552]                  [3.041]                          [3.521]                 [2.597]
MTDEBT t-6    0.186*** WMIN t-1               0.039        MTDEBT t-6          0.171*** WMIN t-1        0.330**      MTDEBT t-6    0.176*** WMIN t-1          0.088       MTDEBT t-6          0.163*** WMINt-1       0.299**
               (0.058)                       (0.101)                           (0.060)                   (0.135)                    (0.061)                  (0.114)                          (0.062)                 (0.141)
               [3.181]                       [0.386]                           [2.845]                   [2.435]                    [2.880]                  [0.768]                          [2.614]                 [2.121]
SURPLUS t-1   -0.022**   EMPF t-1           -0.508***      SURPLUS       t-1   -0.020**   CT_PO t-1     -1.765***    SURPLUS t-1   -0.022*** EMPF t-1       -0.440***     SURPLUS       t-1   -0.019**   CT_POt-1    -1.468***
               (0.009)                       (0.119)                           (0.009)                   (0.364)                    (0.008)                  (0.133)                          (0.008)                 (0.364)
              [-2.554]                       [-4.274]                          [-2.306]                 [-4.847]                   [-2.679]                 [-3.311]                          [-2.251]               [-4.028]
SELIC t-6     0.117*** GINI      t-1        -1.361***      SELIC t-6           0.111*** GINI      t-1   -1.120***    SELIC t-6     0.116*** THEIL t-1       -0.573***     SELIC t-6           0.108*** THEILt-1      -0.508***
               (0.028)                       (0.278)                           (0.029)                   (0.250)                    (0.030)                  (0.135)                          (0.030)                 (0.120)
               [4.186]                       [-4.890]                          [3.879]                  [-4.475]                    [3.906]                 [-4.231]                          [3.563]                [-4.246]
dummy         -0.046*** dummy                 0.018        dummy               -0.043**   dummy         0.033***     dummy         -0.040**   dummy          0.025*       dummy               -0.040**   dummy       0.044***
               (0.017)                       (0.013)                           (0.017)                   (0.010)                    (0.016)                  (0.014)                          (0.017)                 (0.012)
              [-2.725]                       [1.392]                           [-2.541]                  [3.169]                   [-2.421]                  [1.734]                          [-2.401]                [3.687]
Adj. R²        0.915     Adj. R²              0.936        Adj. R²              0.918     Adj. R²         0.938      Adj. R²        0.917     Adj. R²         0.935       Adj. R²              0.920     Adj. R²       0.936
J-statistic              0.100                             J-statistic                    0.119                      J-statistic              0.133                       J-statistic                    0.126
                         p = 0.882                                                        p = 0.840                                           p = 0.702                                                  p = 0.804
                                       Note: Marginal significance levels: (***) denotes 0.01, (**) denotes 0.05, (*) denotes 0.1. Standard errors in parentheses and t-statistics in brackets.




                                                                                                                    16
                                                                                                   Table 5.B
                                                                                      GMM systems estimation DEBT and INSS
                   System 5                                                   System 6                                               System 7                                                   System 8
Explanatory              Explan.                         Explanatory               Explan.                      Explanatory                Explan.                      Explanatory                 Explan.
              DEBT                          INSS                         DEBT                       INSS                         DEBT                      INSS                         DEBT                      INSS
variables                variables                       variables                 variables                    variables                  variables                    variables                   variables
Constant      1.431*** Constant             0.121        Constant       1.258*** Constant         5.153***      Constant       1.216*** Constant           0.230        Constant       1.207*** Constant        4.305***
              (0.326)                      (0.539)                      (0.318)                    -1.353                       (0.309)                    (0.573)                      (0.314)                  -1.432
              [4.391]                      [0.225]                      [3.954]                    [3.809]                      [3.937]                    [0.401]                      [3.837]                  [3.006]
DEBT t-1      0.544*** INSSt-1            0.766***       DEBT t-1       0.575*** INSS t-1         0.740***      DEBT t-1       0.595*** INSS t-1          0.743***      DEBT t-1       0.590*** INSSt-1         0.741***
              (0.076)                      (0.079)                      (0.076)                    (0.063)                      (0.072)                    (0.091)                      (0.074)                  (0.074)
              [7.182]                      [9.631]                      [7.539]                   [11.660]                      [8.259]                    [8.187]                      [7.940]                 [10.038]
INSS t-1      0.149*** AUX t-1            0.302***       INSS t-1       0.157*** AUX t-1          0.185***      INSS t-1       0.143*** AUX t-1           0.347***      INSS t-1       0.149*** AUX t-1         0.246***
              (0.036)                      (0.081)                      (0.032)                    (0.070)                      (0.036)                    (0.095)                      (0.031)                  (0.083)
              [4.176]                      [3.735]                      [4.891]                    [2.647]                      [3.937]                    [3.637]                      [4.783]                  [2.975]
MTDEBT t-6     0.010     WMINt-1            0.009        MTDEBT t-6      0.027     WMIN t-1       0.315**       MTDEBT t-6       0.021     WMIN t-1        0.057        MTDEBT t-6       0.027      WMINt-1      0.290*
              (0.037)                      (0.102)                      (0.033)                    (0.139)                      (0.037)                    (0.112)                      (0.032)                  (0.147)
              [0.268]                      [0.087]                      [0.811]                    [2.274]                      [0.565]                    [0.514]                      [0.828]                  [1.968]
SURPLUS t-1 -0.035*** EMPFt-1             -0.544***      SURPLUS t-1 -0.033*** CT_PO t-1         -1.809***      SURPLUS t-1 -0.030*** EMPF t-1           -0.444***      SURPLUS t-1 -0.029*** CT_POt-1          -1.510***
              (0.010)                      (0.125)                      (0.010)                    (0.367)                      (0.010)                    (0.130)                      (0.010)                  (0.383)
              [-3.274]                     [-4.347]                     [-3.134]                  [-4.926]                      [-2.894]                  [-3.412]                     [-2.850]                 [-3.943]
EXCH t-2      0.056*** GINIt-1            -1.675***      EXCH t-2       0.058*** GINI      t-1   -1.273***      EXCH t-2       0.056*** THEIL t-1        -0.645***      EXCH t-2       0.057*** THEILt-1        -0.561***
              (0.012)                      (0.298)                      (0.012)                    (0.243)                      (0.012)                    (0.156)                      (0.012)                  (0.126)
              [4.591]                      [-5.628]                     [4.909]                   [-5.244]                      [4.620]                   [-4.141]                      [4.898]                 [-4.461]
dummy         -0.036**   dummy              0.018        dummy          -0.031**   dummy          0.031***      dummy           -0.026*    dummy           0.026*       Dummy          -0.030**     dummy       0.047***
              (0.015)                      (0.014)                      (0.015)                    (0.011)                      (0.014)                    (0.015)                      (0.014)                  (0.013)
              [-2.484]                     [1.259]                      [-2.156]                   [2.762]                      [-1.805]                   [1.758]                     [-2.103]                  [3.734]
Adj. R²        0.904     Adj. R²            0.931        Adj. R²         0.907     Adj. R²          0.937       Adj. R²          0.912     Adj. R²         0.932        Adj. R²          0.912      Adj. R²       0.933
J-statistic              0.104                           J-statistic               0.133                        J-statistic                0.151                        J-statistic                 0.144
                         p = 0.865                                                p = 0.766                                              p = 0.590                                                  p = 0.706
                                     Note: Marginal significance levels: (***) denotes 0.01, (**) denotes 0.05, (*) denotes 0.1. Standard errors in parentheses and t-statistics in brackets.




                                                                                                               17
        Tables 5.A and 5.B present the GMM systems estimation (same instrumental variables and lags
applied in the individual equations estimation). All coefficients of DEBT have signs in agreement with the
theoretical argument and statistical significance. The exception, as observed in the case of individual
estimation, is the MTDEBT. The INSS estimations also do not show considerable difference from
individual estimations. In short, although the standard errors are smaller in most of the systems, the
estimated coefficients have similar magnitudes to those observed for the individual estimations.
        Taking into account the results from GMM individual and systems estimation for the DEBT and
INSS, table 6 summarizes the effects of shocks transmitted by the variables considered in the models. The
results indicate that the magnitude of the shocks is similar between the methods considered (individual
and system). Therefore, the results leave no doubt that management of the social security system for the
fiscal budget cannot be neglected in order to ensure public debt sustainability.
                                                     Table 6
                                         Economic shocks on DEBT and INSS
       Variable/             Effects on DEBT                        Variable/             Effects on INSS
        method              Individual             System           method               Individual             System
                   Eq(n.)    GMM         System    GMM                          Eq(n.)    GMM         System    GMM
         INSS        2      2.23 b.p.      6      2.26 b.p.          AUX          7      3.18 b.p.      5      2.91 b.p.
       MTDEBT        1      3.53 b.p.      1      2.90 b.p.         WMIN          6      3.57 b.p.      2      3.56 b.p.
       SURPLUS       2      -1.74 b.p.     5      -1.61 b.p.        EMPF          5      -5.08 b.p.     5      -5.37 b.p.
        SELIC        1      3.44 b.p.      1      2.96 b.p.         CT_PO         6      -8.71 b.p.     6      -8.68 b.p.
        EXCH         2      0.99 b.p.      6      1.06 b.p.          GINI         5      -3.72 b.p.     5      -3.98 b.p.
                                                                    THEIL         8      -2.81 b.p.     8      -2.62 b.p.


5. Conclusion
        The empirical evidence in this study shows that the financing of social security is important to
explain the Brazilian public debt. In addition, other variables used in the model (primary surplus, interest
rates, exchange rates, and average maturity of public debt) are also relevant. An important result of this
analysis is with respect to the effects of the social security deficit. The findings confirm that the social
security deficit is significant to the increase in the public debt/GDP ratio. Therefore, an efficient
management of social security, which could reduce the deficit, is important for the success of the
management of public debt.
        Another important issue that had not been explored in the literature on social security was with
respect to the effects of income inequality. The empirical evidence in this study shows that a reduction in
the Brazilian income inequality would imply an increase in the social security deficit. This result deserves
attention because the adoption of measures to reduce income inequality is essential. Hence, it is
imperative that we search for mechanisms to mitigate the impact on the social security deficit of the
successful adoption of social policies.
        It is important to highlight that the results of this study showed that the policy to increase the level
of formality in the Brazilian economy has a strong influence in reducing the social security deficit.
Therefore, it is important that the federal government strengthens this policy as a means to improve the
management of the social security system. Another important observation is the increase in the social
security deficit caused by both the real increase in the minimum wage and the sickness benefit. Therefore,
these variables have a crucial role in the search for an efficient social security management system and
cannot be neglected in ensuring fiscal sustainability.

6. References
ALAN, S.; SULTANA, A; and BUTT, M.S. (2010). “Does social expenditures promote economic growth? A
   multivariate panel cointegration analysis for Asian Countries.” European Journal of Social Sciences, 14(1),
   44-54.
BACK, J.L. and MUSGRAVE, R.A. (1941). “A stable purchasing power bond.” American Economic Review,
   31(4), 823-825.
BARRO, R.J. (2003). “Optimal management of indexed and nominal debt.” Annals of Economics and Finance. N.
   4. Beijing, Central University of Finance and Economics.
                                                               18
BOHN, H. (1988). “Why do we have nominal government debt?” Journal of Monetary Economics, 21(1), 127-140.
BROWNING, E.K. (1975). “Why the social insurance budget is too large in a democracy.” Economic Inquiry,
    13(3), 373-388.
CALVO, G. (1988). “Servicing public debt: the role of expectations.” American Economic Review, 78(4), 647-661.
CALVO, G. and GUIDOTTI, P. (1990). “Indexation and maturity of government bonds: an exploratory model.” In:
    Dornbusch, R. and Draghi, M. (org.). Public Debt Management: Theory and History. Cambridge, Cambridge
    University Press.
COOLEY, T.F. and SOARES, J. (1999). “A positive theory of social security based on reputation.” Journal of
    Political Economy, 107(1), 135-160.
CRAGG, J.G. (1983), “More efficient estimation in the presence of heteroscedasticity of unknown form.”
    Econometrica, 51 (3), 751-763.
DIAMOND, P. (1977). “A framework for social security analysis.” Journal of Public Economics, 8(3), 275-298.
FELDSTEIN, M. (1974). “Social security, induced retirement, and aggregate capital accumulation.” Journal of
    Political Economy, 82 (5), 905-926.
________. (1996). “Social security and saving: new time series evidence.” National Tax Journal, 49(2), 151-164.
GIAVAZZI, F. and MISSALE, A. (2004). “Public debt management in Brazil.” NBER Working Paper, N. 10.394,
    Cambridge, Massachusetts.
GIAVAZZI, F. and PAGANO, M. (1990). “Confidence crises and public debt management.” In: Dornbusch, R.
    and Draghi, M. (org.). Public Debt Management: Theory and History. Cambridge, Cambridge University
    Press.
HALLl, A. (2005). “Generalized method of moments.” Oxford: Oxford.
HALLSTEN, K. (1999). “Bank loans and the transmission mechanism of monetary policy.” Sveriges Riksbank
    Working Paper, N. 73.
HANSEN, L.P. (1982). “Large sample properties of generalized method of moments estimators.” Econometrica,
    50(4), 1029–1054.
HARRIS, J. (1995). “Using cointegration analysis in econometric modelling”. Prentice-Hall/Harvester, London.
JOHANSEN, S. (1991). “Estimation and hypothesis testing of cointegration vectors in Gaussian vector
    autoregressive models” Econometrica, 59(6), 1551-1580.
JUSTINO, P. (2007). “Social security in developing countries: myth or necessity? Evidence from India.” Journal of
    International Development, 19(3), 367-382.
KOTLIKOFF, L.J. (1979). “Social security and equilibrium capital intensity.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    93(2), 233-253.
LUCAS, R. and STOCKEY, N. (1983). “Optimal fiscal and monetary policy in an economy without capital.”
    Journal of Monetary Economics, 12(1), 55-93.
MISSALE, A.; GIAVAZZI, F.; and BENIGNO, P. (2002). “How is debt managed? Learning from fiscal
    stabilization.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 104(3), 443-469.
MACKINNON, J.G.; HAUG, A.A.; and MICHELIS, L. (1999). “Numerical distribution functions of likelihood
    ratio tests for cointegration” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 14(5), 563-577.
MULLIGAN, C.B. and SALA-i-MARTIN, X. (2004a). “Internationally common features of public old-age
    pensions, and their implications for models of the public sector.” Advances in Economic Analysis & Policy,
    4(1), 1-35, article 4.
________. (2004b). “Political and economic forces sustaining social security.” Advances in Economic Analysis &
    Policy, 4(1), article 5.
SAMUELSON, P. (1958). “An exact consumption loan model of interest with or without the social contrivance of
    money.” Journal of Political Economy, 66(6), 467-482.
SARGETN, T.J. and WALLACE, N. (1981). “Some unpleasant monetarist arithmetic” Quarterly Review Federal
    Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 5(3), 1-17.
SEIDMAN, L.S. (1986). “A phase-down of social security: the transition in a life cycle growth model.” National
    Tax Journal, 39(1), 97-107.
UNITED NATIONS (2007). “World population prospects: the 2006 revision.” Population Division of the
    Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat. Highlights. New York: United
    Nations.
WOOLDRIDGE, J.M. (2001). “Applications of generalized method of moments estimation.” Journal of Economic
    Perspectives, 15(4), 87-100.
ZHANG, J. and ZHANG, J. (2004). “How does social security affect economic growth? Evidence from cross-
    country data”. Journal of Population Economics, 17(3), 473-500.

                                                       19
Appendix
                                               Table A.1: Unit root tests (ADF, PP, and KPSS)
                                                                 ADF                                                                             PP
                                                                            Critical values                                                      Critical values
                              Series     I/T    Lag      Test       1%           5%           10%           I/T     Band       Test      1%           5%           10%
                              AUX         C      1      -2.115     -3.512      -2.897     -2.586            I/T     18.1      -2.631    -4.072      -3.465     -3.159
                              ΔAUX               0      -2.234     -2.593      -1.945     -1.614                    0.92      -2.234    -2.593      -1.945     -1.614
                              CT_PO      I/T     1      -2.938     -4.074      -3.466     -3.159            I/T     11.7      -4.457    -4.072      -3.465     -3.159
                              ΔCT_PO      C      0      -3.618     -3.512      -2.897     -2.586
                              DEBT        C      1      -2.128     -3.512      -2.897     -2.586                    4.56      -0.933    -2.593      -1.945     -1.614
                              ΔDEBT              0      -5.993     -2.593      -1.945     -1.614                    0.798     -5.993    -2.593      -1.945     -1.614
                              EMPF       I/T     2      -3.813     -4.075      -3.466     -3.160                    8.17       8.838    -2.593      -1.945     -1.614
                              ΔEMPF                                                                          C      3.09      -4.265    -3.512      -2.897     -2.586
                              EXCH               1      -1.518     -2.593      -1.945     -1.614                    4.86      -1.470    -2.593      -1.945     -1.614
                              ΔEXCH              0      -5.749     -2.593      -1.945     -1.614                    0.236     -5.749    -2.593      -1.945     -1.614
                              GINI       I/T     3      -5.781     -4.077      -3.467     -3.160            I/T     1.12      -4.569    -4.072      -3.465     -3.159
                              INSS               0      -1.019     -2.593      -1.945     -1.614                    0.974     -1.019    -2.593      -1.945     -1.614
                              ΔINSS              0      -9.304     -2.593      -1.945     -1.614                    0.178     -9.304    -2.593      -1.945     -1.614
                              MTDEBT             6       0.892     -2.595      -1.945     -1.614                    0.939      1.277    -2.593      -1.945     -1.614
                              ΔMTDEBT            5      -1.744     -2.595      -1.945     -1.614                    0.455     -8.505    -2.593      -1.945     -1.614
                              SELIC      I/T     1      -3.742     -4.074      -3.466     -3.159                    16.4      -0.945    -2.593      -1.945     -1.614
                              ΔSELIC                                                                                0.472     -2.548    -2.593      -1.945     -1.614
                              SURPLUS            2      -1.111     -2.594      -1.945     -1.614                    3.77      -1.253    -2.593      -1.945     -1.614
                              ΔSURPLUS           1      -7.793     -2.594      -1.945     -1.614                    1.79      -6.803    -2.593      -1.945     -1.614
                              THEIL      I/T     3      -5.003     -4.077      -3.467     -3.160            I/T     0.698     -4.933    -4.072      -3.465     -3.159
                              WMIN       I/T     3      -3.017     -4.077      -3.467     -3.160                    5.55       2.397    -2.593      -1.945     -1.614
                              ΔWMIN              2      -2.045     -2.594      -1.945     -1.614             C      2.18      -5.397    -3.512      -2.897     -2.586
                                                                               KPSS
                                                      Series                    Band           Test         10%
                                                      CT_PO                      19.1          0.125        0.119
                                                      ΔCT_PO                     12.2          0.115        0.119
                                                      EMPF                       39.9          0.193        0.119
                                                      ΔEMPF                      8.1           0.080        0.347
                                                      SELIC                      57.8          0.341        0.119
                                                      ΔSELIC                     16.4          0.099        0.347

 Note: Augmented Dickey-Fuller test (ADF) – based on Schwarz criterion, the final choice of lag was made. Phillips-Perron and KPSS test – bandwidth is
                       Andrews using Bartlett kernel. Based on Schwarz criterion, intercept (I) or time trend (T) was applied.


                                                                     Table A.2
                                                           AIC, SC and HQ criteria for VAR
                                                                   With constant                                                       Without constant
                                         Lag             AIC                   SC                      HQ                     AIC                  SC                    HQ
                                          0            -77.890              -76.401              -77.293
                      Equation 1




                                          1            -191.430          -182.497               -187.849                    -188.745          -181.301              -185.761
                                          2           -20.4110*          -18.7734*             -19.7544*                    -20.2009*       -18.7121*               -19.6040*
                                          3            -203.988          -180.168               -194.438                    -201.864          -179.532              -192.911
                                          4            -201.425          -170.161               -188.891                    -199.870          -170.095              -187.932
                                          0            -71.408              -69.919              -70.811
                      Equation 2




                                          1            -184.003          -17.5071*              -180.422                    -183.994        -17.6550*               -181.010
                                          2           -18.8311*          -171.935              -18.1746*                    -18.8181*         -173.294              -18.2212*
                                          3            -186.934          -163.114               -177.384                    -186.881          -164.549              -177.928
                                          4            -184.718          -153.454               -172.183                    -184.176          -154.400              -172.238
                                          0            -114.172          -112.981               -113.695
                      Equation 3




                                          1            -272.586          -266.631               -270.199                    -270.653          -265.889              -268.743
                                          2            -293.301          -28.2582*             -28.9003*                    -292.337        -28.2809*               -28.8517*
                                          3           -29.3957*          -278.474               -287.749                    -29.3035*         -278.743              -287.305
                                          4            -293.120          -272.873               -285.003                    -292.204          -273.148              -284.564
                                          0            -134.274          -133.083               -133.797
                      Equation 4




                                          1            -285.137          -279.182               -282.750                    -280.718          -275.954              -278.808
                                          2           -31.1288*          -30.0569*             -30.6991*                    -30.9057*       -29.9529*               -30.5237*
                                          3            -310.406          -294.923               -304.199                    -308.719          -294.426              -302.988
                                          4            -310.885          -290.638               -302.767                    -308.649          -289.593              -301.009
                     Note: (*) denotes lag order selected by the criterion. AIC – Akaike criterion. SC – Schwarz criterion. HQ – Hannan-Quinn criterion.


                                                                                              20
