                      Economic theory and (ontological) reductionism:

                 some pitfalls in the road of the microfoundations project*

                                        José Ricardo Fucidji

             Institute of Economics, University of Campinas – UNICAMP, Brazil

                                            Celso Neris Jr.

            Economics Department, Sao Paulo State University – UNESP, Brazil

                Artigo submetido ao 47o Encontro Nacional de Economia (ANPEC), 2019

                        Área 1: História do Pensamento Econômico e Metodologia


Resumo: Este trabalho faz um levantamento da literatura sobre o projeto teórico de prover
microfundamentos à macroeconomia. Para isto, o projeto é avaliado a partir da metodologia econômica,
principalmente do realismo crítico. A novidade do artigo está em analisar o reducionismo deste projeto e
sua adequação, tanto em seus próprios termos, como para o fim de lançar luz sobre a realidade
socioeconômica. Enfatizamos que, além de ser projeto de ciência (isto é, de estabelecer uma maneira
sólida e rigorosa de fazer “ciência” econômica), ele também inclui uma ontologia da sociabilidade
mercantil que cria elos com a ideologia neoliberal. Algumas alternativas ao individualismo metodológico
dos microfundamentos também são avaliadas, tais como a economia da complexidade e a economia
institucional original, indicando seus limites e possibilidades. Para ser capaz de lidar com uma realidade
complexa, estruturada em múltiplos níveis e aberta, a teoria econômica deveria evitar explicações que
privilegiam um único nível, e dar preferência a abordagens nas quais os níveis micro e macro são
mutuamente condicionados mas relativamente autônomos.

Palavras-chave: metodologia econômica, reducionismo, microfundamentos.

Abstract: This paper aims to survey the literature on the theoretical enterprise of providing the
microfoundations of macroeconomics. To do so, it evaluates that project from the viewpoint of economic
methodology, mostly of critical realism. Its novelty lies in analysing the reductionism inbuilt in the
project and its unsuitability both to its own terms and to the purpose of illuminating socioeconomic
reality. We also stress that, in addition to a project of science (the sound or rigorous way of doing
‘scientific’ economics), it includes an implicit ontology of market sociability that establishes links
between microfoundations and the neoliberal ideology. Some attempts at overcoming the reductionist
individualism of microfoundations are also evaluated, such as complexity theory and old institutionalism,
pointing out its potential and shortcomings. In order to deal with a complex, hierarchically multi-level
structured and open reality, economic theory should not adopt explanations that give precedence to a
single level. It should instead prefer approaches in which micro and macro levels are mutually
conditioned and relatively autonomous.

Keywords: economic methodology; reductionism, microfoundations.

JEL codes: B41, A14, B13




*
    We very much thank Jamie Morgan and John Latsis for their comments and suggestions to this version.
    The work underlying this paper was made possible by a grant of the São Paulo Research Foundation
    (FAPESP) (# 2018/07082-6) “Metodologia Econômica e a Abordagem do Realismo Crítico”, and by
    financial support from FAEPEX-UNICAMP (# 2399/18) which are duly acknowledged.
                                                                                                           1


    Economic theory and (ontological) reductionism: some pitfalls in the road of the
                              microfoundations project



1. Introduction

        There is a huge literature on the microfoundations of macroeconomics, that is of
much wider interest than academic debate, as it influences how macro policies are
tailored, and with which persuasion strategies they are prescribed to governments and to
the public opinion. Keynes would say that we are ruled by died economists. It is the
truth, but not the whole truth. We are ruled by living economists who reinterpret
Smith’s, Ricardo’s, Walras’s, Marshall’s, or even Keynes’s thought in a specific way.
This paper highlights the effects that interpreting (accounting or molding) the economy
hason economic policy. To do so, the paper enquires what are the methodological (i.e.,
in what forms theory must be couched) and ontological (i.e., what it assumes, even
implicitly, about the entities of social reality) implications of the microfoundations
project.
        In doing our ontological analysis of the microfoundations project of modern
macroeconomics1, we have chosen a philosophical ontology (i.e. the study of the
relationship between theoretical entities and their referents in the external world), rather
than a scientific ontology (i.e. the study of theoretical entities in their own terms). That
distinction is made, among others, by Lawson (2015, 22-28). We are not meaning that
scientific ontology (or “internal metaphysics”) analysis are of lower importance or
value. There are lots of good analyses of this kind, particularly in Uskali Mäki’s many
contributions. However, critical imports are less evident in the latter kind of ontological
enquiry. Evaluating the microfoundations project by its internal metaphysics (the role
played by representative, hyper-rational agents in the theoretical schemata) would lead
us to an account of its internal logic, very insightful as it may be, but it would halt there.
        After surveying the outstanding problems of the microfoundations project, we
relate them to its implicit reductionist ontology – which requires using philosophical
ontology, as developed by critical realism. Following this lead and Soromenho’s (2000)
argument, the ontology of microfoundations project: is the sociability of independent
producers (a simple mercantile society, where property asymmetries and capital
accumulation are absent), in which the only social link is the contingent act of
exchange. This ontological conception is suitable to the project in two ways: it
maintains the agents' autonomy (deemed as atoms in their relations to one other); and,


1
    By “modern macroeconomics” we mean the dominant theory until at least the financial crisis of 2007-8.
    It can be identified by the requirements that theories must be microfounded, viz. agents with substantial
    rationality (hyper-rationality) and rational expectations; dynamic stochastic general equilibrium
    (DSGE) models; and macro policies that assume non-neutrality of money in the short run. This theory
    is associated with the new Keynesian, new Classical and new Neoclassical Synthesis schools
    (Goodfriend and King, 1997). Moreover, our definition is close to Colander et al. (2004) on theoretical
    dominance in the academic community. Thus, “modern macroeconomics” and “mainstream” are here
    interchangeably used.
                                                                                         2


assuming that agents' behavior is strictly egoistic and hyper-rational, it draws
implications to the systemic level, searching for coordination mechanisms to make
individual plans mutually compatible.
       Although this project complies with the methodological individualism
desideratum, its ontological implications forcefully misrepresent what we know about
real world agents. In other words: agents' behavior as required in the model is heroic or
implausible relative to real decision-makers. Moreover, essential features of agents
(such as the very possibility of free choice) and their environments (the supra-individual
conditions) are explained away in order to facilitate project coherence with the
postulates of free and perfect markets (postulates that would seem awkward to Smith,
Ricardo, and maybe even to Walras).
        The paper discusses, in Section 2, the problems of the project of microfounded
economics, its ontological implications and consequences. Section 3 deals with some
alternatives, pointing out to theories that are both more contextual and empirically
robust. Specifically, social institutions (as earlier argued by Hodgson) are picked as
analytical units fruitful to the study of socioeconomic phenomena, in accordance with a
realist ontology. Section 4 brings some final comments, stressing some risks of a
proposed alternative (complexity economics) sliding back into reductionism.


2. Reductionism in modern macroeconomics

        Reductionism is a proposition according to which, a whole must be completely
explained in terms of its components. In a broad sense, reductionism can be defined as
the conception that all the features of a complex phenomenon must be fully explained in
terms of a single level or kind of entities. In this section we shall see how reductionism
is associated with three aspects of modern macroeconomics viz., (i) its scientific project;
(ii) the reinforcement it lends to a certain view of market sociability; and (iii) its
leanings to the neoliberal ideology. We also briefly remark on the unfeasibility of
reductionism in the presence of emergent phenomena.
2.1. Modern macroeconomics as a scientific project

        “Reduction” is commonly understood as to make smaller, to decrease in number
or size. In the philosophy of science the term means to decompose or to make simpler a
complex entity, as to reach its more basic components. There is a long tradition in
Western thought, where it is used, metaphorically in references to “bridge laws” that
connect theories from different domains (e.g. micro and macroeconomics). John King
adopts, in discussing this topic, a definition given by the philosopher of science Kenneth
Schaffner: “Intertheoretic explanation, in which one theory is explained by another
theory, usually formulated for a different domain, is generally termed theory reduction”
(Schaffner, 1967, 137; author’s italics). King asserts, just after this quote, that the
microfoundations project (he calls it “dogma”) is a special case of this general principle
(King, 2012, 27). Prado (2006, 13) affirms that reductionism implies in dividing more
complex objects into its small component parts and then explaining them conveniently,
                                                                                                         3


that is, explanation should “begin from simpler and easier to know objects, ascending,
as if in a stairway, step by step to the knowledge of composites”.
       According to Hodgson (2000, 110), biological reductionism was used in social
sciences as a form of explanation in the period 1870-1920. In biological reductionism,
the behavior of individuals and groups is explained in terms of their biological
characteristics. In the 1920s, however, biological reductionism was broadly abandoned
by social sciences, having a revival later, with sociobiology in 1970s. In economics
things are slightly different, not only because marginalist theories were mechanicist, as
Hodgson also notes – and so not biology-inspired – but also because macroeconomics
enjoyed a relative autonomy between the decades of 1930 and 1960. At the end of
twentieth century, methodological individualism2 was the main kind of reductionism
used in social sciences generally, and in economics in particular.
        In economics, microfoundations – the fondness for explaining macroeconomic
phenomena completely in terms of entities from the microeconomic domain containing,
especially, optimizing agents with rational expectations – is a particular case of
reductionism. Ganem (1996, 113; italics added) says that microfoundations of modern
macroeconomics is a project that aims to identify “the collective laws that would reflect
the individual maximizing behaviors” and that “this research field ended up imposing
itself as the only rigorous (scientific) project. In the same vein, Hoffman and Pelaez
(2011, 266; authors’s italics) state that “the idea according to which the scientific
approach must be necessarily based on any kind of (rational) individualism should be
questioned”. The idea of necessity, we add, implies that there is no room for alternative
macroeconomic theories beyond the one with a particular interpretation of the
microeconomic domain.
        And that is why we claim that microfoundations reductionism is a scientific
project. This project traces back to the old physicalist dream of logical positivism of the
Vienna Circle. According to O’Neill (2004, 436) physicalism was a project of
unification of sciences, that could take many forms: “(i) a reductionist project in which
all the sciences would be logically derivable via bridge-laws from physics; (ii) a
programme for a unified method which would be followed by all sciences; (iii) a project
for a unified language of science; and (iv) a project that would integrate the different
sciences, such that, on any specific problem, all relevant sciences could be called
upon—a project for the ‘orchestration of the sciences’”. That ambition, although
discredited and never accomplished, was influential in the scientific imagination of the
twentieth century, deeply affecting the way of conceiving and of doing science. It
survived, via Popper, in the requirement that social sciences must be based on a
principle of individual rationality and, pour cause, on methodological individualism
(Caldwell, 1991, 16; Hodgson, 2007, 212).

2
    Udéhn (2002, 497) defines methodological individualism as: “a principle, rule or programme telling
    historians and social scientists how to define collective concepts, explain social phenomena, and/or
    reduce macro to micro”. And Janssen (2008, 600) explains that “the quest for microfoundations grew
    out of the widely felt, but rarely explicitly stated, desire to stick to the position of methodological
    individualism”.
                                                                                        4


      To Elster, methodological individualism is a doctrine according to which all social
phenomena (its structure and change) are to be explained, exclusively, from individual
properties, aims and beliefs. Such individual assumptions are useful to a project of
science:
     “[t]he basic building block in the social sciences, the elementary unit of
     explanation, is the individual action guided by some intention... Generally
     speaking, the scientific practice is to seek an explanation at a lower level than the
     explandum… The search for microfoundations, to use a fashionable term from
     recent controversies in economics, is in reality a pervasive and omnipresent
     feature of science” (Elster, 1983, 20-24, author’s italics; apud Hodgson, 2000,
     104).
      The rise of neoclassical economics after the 1870s consolidated reductionism in
economics, by bringing forth an analytical framework in which individual choice, given
by utility functions under constraints, was the gist of theoretical explanation. On this
principle, individualism, reductionism and atomism were gradually intermeshed through
the twentieth century. Hodgson argues that problems of choice under constraints
became the dominant topic and it strengthened preferences/utility optimizing as a
feature of utmost importance in economics. Hence, individuals are seen as social atoms:
     “In the social sphere the human individual was seen as the fundamental unit of
     analysis: the indivisible particle in motion. Of course it is accepted that
     individuals, like particles, are affected by their circumstances in the manner of the
     forces and constraints that impinge upon them. But in such an atomist social
     ontology the essential aspects of human personality and motivation are conceived
     as independent of the social relations with others” (Hodgson, 1993, 70).
      The atomist ontology is dovetailed to the reductionist methodology. In the
microfoundation project theories from different domains are unified by the requirement
that macro phenomena must be reducible to micro level phenomena. Its corollary is an
explicit epistemological monism, in which there is only one scientific way of
interpreting and theorizing economic reality. A correlated issue is that the search for
microfoundations strengthens a specific conception of sociability, premised on
individual rationality and spontaneous order.
2.2. Strengthening a market-oriented conception of sociability

        Modern macroeconomics is built on the ontological assumption that “individual
components of the analytical architecture must necessarily be entities closed in
themselves and externally related one to another” (Prado, 2006, 307). The specific
features of entities represented in the macroeconomic models, as well as their internal
relations with other entities, was gradually erased on behalf of the axiomatic deduction
of implications of the individual’s optimizing behavior. The possibility of individual
behavior being oriented by supra-individual institutions, as well as idiosyncratic
behavioris therefore denied. That is to say, these models assume that individuals are
sealed off from determinations coming from the social structures they live in, and also
                                                                                          5


that their internal structure is invariant, so as to facilitate homology between (or
conflation of) ontologically different domains.
        This impoverished account of the individual in methodological individualism, in
economics as well as in other social sciences, carries an intractable analytical problem:
either one cannot justify reduction (why to rest in the individual, and not in her
psychological or biological determinations?) or it is unfeasible to fully reduce entities to
their indivisible components (Hodgson, 2000, 111; Udéhn, 2001, 323-4).
        Now, what is the microfoundations project implicit sociability? By sociability
we mean the kind of interaction among individuals that is assumed in theoretical
contributions to this project. Soromenho (2000), drawing upon earlier papers by Persio
Arida, gives an account of the market sociability implicit in the general equilibrium
theory. By our turn, we have taken Soromenho’s account, as it can be applied equally to
the microfoundations project. Soromenho says that this conception of sociability was
originally proposed by classical economists (a stylized commercial society populated by
independent producers bonded by market exchange) and later resumed by neoclassical
ones, in a thread that goes from Hicks to Samuelson to Arrow and Debreu. In this
idealized conception of society, exchange is the only social bond among commodities
owners. In the last century, the task authors have assigned to themselves was to erase
from mercantile order explanations any mention to supra-individual determinants.
Individuals with their preferences, initial endowments and technologies were conceived
as the only determinants of social outcomes. It is all about, therefore, explaining market
workings exclusively upon individual attributes. Two issues are regarded, within that
theoretical framework, as of scientific relevance: whether the agents plans are mutually
compatible (whether there is spontaneous order in the market process) and how
coordination of such plans is obtained (or how equilibrium is reached). Those are the
well-known issues of existence, uniqueness and stability of the general equilibrium
theory (Soromenho, 2000, 203 et seq.).
        It would be beside the point harking back to the problems of research in the neo-
Walrasian general equilibrium theory. Suffice it to say, for our purpose, that although it
is regarded as hallmark of academic quality and rigor, the assumption according to
which agents' level is sufficient to bring about order at the system level is far from
having “sound foundations” in its own axiomatic terms. As Soromenho shows,
existence of equilibrium can be demonstrated, but there are no impediments to multiple
equilibria. In the latter case, the problem of uniqueness is added to the stability problem:
in order to choose among a few of possible equilibria, one must know the past trajectory
of the economic system, and thus its dynamic features – which are, by definition, out of
equilibrium. However, notions such as rationality and mechanisms (if any) to converge
towards equilibrium have much vaguer meaning out of equilibrium.
        Albeit respectful of the conventional approach, Soromenho (2000, 208-9) points
out that in order to get robust results of stability one needs to resort to supra-individual
entities (the “well-organized” markets and “auctioneer” assumptions, as in Hahn and
Neghishi’s 1962 model; see Janssen 1991) and strongly constrain the individual
                                                                                                           6


rationality assumption (static expectations of future prices). There is no better testimony
to the limitations of the general equilibrium hypothesis on individual substantive
rationality and spontaneous market order – and also about the alternative path one
should follow.
       We must distinguish, at this point, methodological from ontological
individualism (Hodgson, 2007, 214-5). According to methodological individualism,
social phenomena must be explained in terms of individual entities, but that implies
nothing about the existence of other entities. However, the microfoundations project
also implies an ontological individualism, namely, reality is composed of individuals
and their contingent relations3 to one another. If that is the case, then the
microfoundations project embodies a normative feature: economic agents must be
regarded only under the spotlight of (idealized) relations as wealth owners who are
guided only by their self-interest. As we shall see later, this feature makes an
association between the microfoundations of macroeconomics and the neoliberal
ideology.
        We argue that there are at least three implications stemming from this
ontological individualism. Firstly, stating that foundations (building blocks) must come
first is a constitutive metaphor that thoughtlessly assumes a distorted conception of
theorizing in economics, opposed to its historical development and excluding
alternative approaches. To establish this concept as the only right or scientific way of
doing economics is, to say the least, detrimental to the development of economics as a
science. Moreover, the reductionist ontology of optimizing individuals has been
exported to scientific endeavours outside economics. For example, Freakonomics is a
best-selling book that applies the rational choice principles to problems investigated in
other social sciences (for a critical evaluation, see Fine and Milonakis, 2009, chapter 6).
        Secondly, since the microfoundations methodology is regarded as the only
rigorous way of theorizing in economics, it grants academic advantages to its
practitioners over economists that, for any reason, do not use it – “competitive
advantages” in the market of ideas, in publishing in most prestigious journals, in getting
their research funded, etc. This notwithstanding the fact that its success, in terms of
sociology of science, is far beyond its actual achievements, except if “rigor and
elegance” are the only criteria to evaluate theoretical work. In this case, scientific
advance is regarded as a semantically and internally defined concept. Rigor and
elegance should not overcome the external criteria of relevance and capacity to



3
    Otherwise, if the relationship among entities are necessary (internal), then methodological
    individualism is impossible, as recognized even by Hayek (1967, 70-1; apud Hodgson (2007, 215):
    “The overall order of actions in a group is in two respects more than the totality of regularities
    observable in the actions of the individuals and cannot be wholly reduced to them. It is so not only in
    the trivial sense in which the whole is more than the mere sum of its parts but presupposes also that
    these elements are related to each other in a particular manner. It is more also because the existence of
    those relations, which are essential for the existence of the whole, cannot be accounted for wholly by
    the interaction of the parts but only by their interaction with an outside world, external both to the
    individual parts and the whole”.
                                                                                                              7


illuminate the social reality4. Not wonder that, in spite of the internal consistency
problems pointed out in his paper, Soromenho (2000, 214) gives a sociology of science
argument for the persistence of general equilibrium theory as a benchmark of
theorizing: it allows “wielding a set of (formal) techniques… in whose conversation
other approaches engage in”.
      Thirdly, the microfoundations project is an attempt of suppressing the macro
domain, thus denying autonomy of subject-matter to macroeconomics, except for
differences in level of aggregation and aims of the task at hand. In the well-known
phrasing by Robert Lucas, the terms “macro” and “micro” should eventually disappear:
         “most interesting recent developments in macroeconomic theory seem to me to be
         describable as the reincorporation of aggregative problems such as inflation and
         the business cycle within the general framework of ‘microeconomic’ theory. If
         these developments succeed, the term ‘macroeconomic’ will simply disappear
         from use and the modifier micro will become superfluous. We will simply speak,
         as did Smith, Ricardo, Marshall and Walras, of economic theory” (Lucas, 1987,
         108; apud Hodgson, 2000, 104).
       In other quarters, continuing efforts are being made by economists to enlarge what
we know about individual behavior (often resorting to other sciences) and its
relationship to its multiple, fuzzy, changing, contexts. Here we think of recent
developments in behavioral, experimental, and neuroeconomics, as well as approaches
under the umbrella of complexity economics (Davis, 2008). This line of inquiry allows
that micro and macroeconomy are distinct, though related, domains of economic reality.
Contrary to, or in spite of, these efforts, modern macroeconomics has resisted to
changing its axioms about individual behavior. We claim that resistence to change in
mode of explanation accounts for the affinity between modern macroeconomics and the
neoliberal ideology. Let us turn to this point.
2.3. Affinity between modern macroeconomics and neoliberal ideology

        Denis (2004), in his paper on two rhetorical strategies of laissez-faire (viz.,
reductionist and holistic), states that in Modernity, individual self-interest should be
articulated to the general interest in order to be legitimated. That is to say, individual
plans or aims should match, or at least be congruent to, collective ones. Two rhetorical
strategies were thus used to account for this articulation or, in our terms, to construct the
relationship between the micro and the macro level.



4
    Here we part ways with Soromenho. If our interpretation is right, he subscribes to the semantic view of
    theories, according to which theories should not be evaluated by their correspondance to entities in the
    external reality (since no theory can fully attend to this requirement), but by their ability “to conciliate
    theory with facts [interpreted according to this same theory]” (Soromenho, 2000, 197-8). Elements of
    our dissent would involve broader issues of self-referentiality, abstraction and idealization. Suffice it to
    say that, allowing that all theories are unavoidably unrealistic, for all of them involve abstraction and
    idealization, it does not follow that different procedures of abstracting and idealizing (classical,
    neoclassical, Marxist, neo-Walrasian, etc.) should be regarded as equals from a methodological
    viewpoint (see Mäki, 1992 and Lawson, 1997, chapter 16).
                                                                                                    8


        Drawing upon Denis (2004), we shall limit ourselves to the reductionist strategy.
In his account of reductionist persuasion strategies through the history of economic
thought, Denis delves into some nineteenth and twentieth economists, among whom we
are interested only in Lucas and his conception of economic society. Lucas subscribes
to Friedman’s statement that economics is the study of “a number of independent
households, a collection of Robinson Crusoes” (Friedman, 1962, 13), when he says that
“an economic system is a collection of people” (Lucas, 1987, 29; both apud Denis,
2004, 344).
        This phrasing implies, by allusions to number and quantity, that individuals are
regarded as isolated entities, relating to one another in a contingent, external way (i.e.,
individuals are social atoms). Thus, we can note that the microfoundations project
explicitly creates (or produces, or builds5) similarities of individual entities, such as
households and governments. This analogy often shows up in public debate on austerity
policies, as a powerful rhetorical resource, in as much as it equalizes (and so are the lay
people taught) decreases in government deficits to a household struggling with its own
budget. Now, by drawing upon this simple analogy between two very different (macro
and micro) domains, modern macroeconomics is rhetorically more prone to influence
the public imagination.
        An example of the ideological bias of modern macroeconomics is given by
Denis (2004, 344) when he discuss unemployment as a social disease. One could, he
says, adopt at least two approaches: either (i) unemployment is an emergent
phenomenon at macro level and is, therefore, unintentional; or (ii) it is the aggregate or
sum of all individual decisions at micro level. Lucas unmistakably and emphatically
adopts the second approach. According to Lucas (1987, 54), to explain why an agent
allocates her time to an activity (leisure, i.e., the decision of being jobless), is to know
her reasons to prefer this to all other available activities. According to Denis, 2004, 344-
5), Lucas’s aim is clear: if unemployment is mere summarization of individual decisions
of staying jobless, then is possible to demonstrate that neokeynesian policy activism is
misconceived.
       Lucas’s rhetorical strategy is reductionist. He asserts that one needs to solve
separately the problem of “understanding laborers' individual behavior” and then
explain the reason why they prefer, as an aggregate, other activities rather than work
(Lucas, 1987, 68; apud Denis, 2004, 345). Unemployment is regarded simply as an
individual choice, a private problem. If employment is freely decided in a work-leisure
trade-off, then there is no social disease and government intervention is not needed. Not
wonder that new classical economics is famous for its propositions regarding the many
kinds of macro policy inefficacy. Arguing for capitalism without government
intervention is a neoliberal feature common to the positions of Friedman and Lucas –
and, more generally, of the Chicago School.



5
    Considerations of space hinder us from discussing the performativity thesis in economics (see
    Boldyrev and Svetlova, 2016). Our critical position is found in Fucidji, Almeida and Neris (2016).
                                                                                         9


       New classical propositions on unemployment as well as on policy inefficacy
were loosened by the new Keynesians. However, they have taken the reductionist bent
of new classicals by adopting the methodological proposition that macro must be
explained by the microfoundations of optimizing individual behavior. Even though they
argue for government intervention, their recommendations are always diffident, as can
be seen in the literature on the independence of central banks. Only lately has
expansionary fiscal policy been taken into account by modern macroeconomists, albeit
without dispensing with the microfoundations requirement. That is why we claim a
bond between modern macroeconomics and laissez-faire policies. In the same vein, the
proposition of stabilization policies detrimental to economic growth (despite all its
technical apparatus and jargon) is also an affinity with the mindset of neoliberalism. In
this way, the microfoundations project is not just epistemologically monist and
ontologically reductionist, it also strengthens and is supported by an ideology that
accounts for its resistance to change.
2.4. Shortcomings of reductionism in economics

        There is another way of regarding economic reality. If reality – including the
economy – is multi-leveled, where complex, emergent and changing phenomena take
place, then the reductionism of the microfoundations project is fatally unfeasible. Here
we make some brief observations on obstacles that a realist conception of the economy
presents to reductionism in economics.
      A system is regarded as complex when the interaction among its components
changes the overall system behavior, that is, new dynamics are created, defying a
general statement of its workings. Certain analytical solutions for these systems are
possible, but only if simplifying assumptions are taken, which falsify the real
complexity of the subject (Hodgson, 1993, 75). A good characterization – as there are
dozens of definitions – is given in the advertisement of the collection Complexity in
Economics (Rosser Jr., 2004):
      “Complex dynamics in economics arise from nonlinear systems that do not
      converge to a fixed point, a limit cycle, or explode or implode exponentially due
      to endogenous factors. They arise from cybernetics, catastrophe theory, chaos
      theory, or the varieties of modern complexity theory, including models with
      heterogeneous, interacting agents”.
       An example of complexity is chaos theory. It shows that tiny variations in the
initial conditions can cause huge changes in results. It is, therefore, impossible forecast
the workings of the system by studying its components – either because precision of
initial conditions is poor, or because one cannot warrant a good description of
interaction and feedback mechanisms operating among the components, or between
them and the resultant system. Another example are simulation models of
heterogeneous agents. Those models are able to display the workings of simulated
                                                                                                          10


theories but are, for this very reason, unsuitable to a general, unified formulation6
(Squazzoni, 2010, 221). Hodgson (1993, 79-80) states that models with chaotic
dynamics can produce order (and vice-versa, ordered models can produce chaos) since
there is sufficient structural stability (defined as the ability to dissipate feedbacks and
heterogeneity effects at the components level) in the system. Kirman is more skeptical
about the possibility of complex dynamics being guided by attractors. According to
him, such attractors are also liable to evolution, and it makes policy-making based on
models even harder (Kirman, 2016, 536).
       This brings us to the point of emergence. As well as complexity, there are many
definitions of this concept (see Sawyer, 2001). Gilbert (2002), for example, uses
“emergence” and “result” almost as synonymous. Still, for our purposes iit s interesting
to take an ontological definition of emergence, as given by Hodgson (1993, 78-9): an
entity or phenomenon is emergent if it is formed by components at a lower level of
reality, but is not reducible to these lower level components. A good example is given
by biologist Ernst Mayr (1985, 44; apud Hodgson, 1993, 78): “every biologist would
insist that to dissect complex biological systems into elementary particles would be by
all odds the worst way to study nature”. In the act of ontological reduction properties or
features of higher level entities are lost. It follows that reality should be studied as a
“structured hierarchy” where each level has relative autonomy, functioning by its own
mechanisms and architectures and engendering emergence non predictable from
analyses of its components. An ontology of emergent entities is in accord, for example,
with post Keynesian macroeconomics that have always denounced composition
fallacies in macroeconomics. As stressed by Hodgson (1993, 80-1) the analytical aim is
to elucidate the workings and interactions among components at a given level, as well
as the interaction among levels.
       Finally, there are many good reasons for incorporating evolution as a phenomenon
of the ontology of economic reality. In modern macroeconomics, the homogeneous,
representative agent is made by fiat (she is a solicitor of her micro clones) and she is
unable to take non-optimizing actions, since it is assumed that she knows the model that
describes the workings of the economy. Ironically, by this fiat, free choice, so dearly
regarded by laissez-faire ideology, is falsified. As Lawson (1997, 30) points out: in
models that deal with substantive rationality and “single exit” solutions, there is no real
choice. Choice is only free when an agent, facing a situation S where the best choice
supposedly is x, can chose x, or y, or other totally different (innovative) choices. One
should note that there are many accounts for non-optimizing behavior that do not imply
“irrationality”, from uncertainty about other’s behavior to the Schumpeterian drive to
break the routine. Moreover, complex and emergent and innovation phenomena are
related and, as a block, are incompatible with the reductionist microfoundations project.
Economic systems display complex and unpredictable (i.e. open) paths in this
conception of ontology. Economists must pay more attention to partial, local and lower

6
    And maybe it is better this way. Models that are more sensible to specific factors and, because of this,
    can embrace historical and geographical specificities, are, overall, more useful than those that patently
    contravene the reality they should account for – for the sake of tractability or generality.
                                                                                                               11


level regularities and investigate their interactions in order to be able to suggest some
hypotheses about aggregate outcomes. Fears of this indetermination (an ontological
feature) and our poor control over the system may be the (unspoken) rationale for the
noted strong attachment to the deterministic models of modern macroeconomics.


3. Insufficiency of formalism as a solution to reductionism

        Mathematical formalization as a privileged means of interpreting and
intervening in economic reality is a key methodological feature of mainstream
economics. Formal modeling is regarded as a higher ability of theorizing and as a
border line to demarcate economics from other (more “literary”) social sciences. As said
earlier, in mainstream models assumptions about individual behavior and systemic
equilibrium are adopted for tractability and/or generality reasons, in flagrant opposition
to a realist ontology of economics as social theory7
        Economic theory has rested for too long on three fundamental assumptions:
egoism, rationality and equilibrium (Colander et al., 2004, 485). In fact, provided with
those assumptions, it does not matter for the mainstream whether an American and a
Pakistani have distinct behaviors. They are reduced, for theoretical purposes, to a single
behavior. No wonder that international organizations or influent economists prescribe
policies almost identical to countries that are structurally very different. The network of
prestige created by positions in governmental agencies, international organizations and
rating agencies promotes more and more adherence and allegiance to the mainstream, in
scholarship as well as in society (here we are in accordance with the performativity
thesis, see footnote 5). Whether in periods of economic crises one believes that this state
of affairs should change – due to evident, discomforting anomalies – this net of
influences in the economic system rescues most of the mainstream, at least for while.
For example, after recent changes in cutting-edge economics, the scene in policy-
making remains the same, or “the more things change, more they stay the same” (Paley,
2013, 193, 203, 205).
      Colander et al. (2004) used to be more optimistic. They suggest that what happens
in cutting-edge economics changes the mainstream influencing future developments in
the profession. Cutting-edge is a notion that includes even some works by critics of the
mainstream, which implies that mainstream contents are often being challenged to
update, modify and expand. Diversity of visions within the mainstream predicts future
changes in economics:



7
    Social reality (or domain) is here understood according to critical realism. Critical realists assume that
    there is an objective reality external to the scientific effort, that is to say, entities exist objectively and
    independently of the theoretical constructs of scientists. Social reality is conceived as open and
    structured, composed by three strata: empirical (where events or states are perceived by our senses);
    actual (events or states themselves) and real or deep (mechanisms underlying and producing items in
    the actual stratum). In fact, at each level or domain of reality (social, psychological, biological,
    chemical, physical, etc.) these strata are operative (See Lawson, 1997, 15-65 for details).
                                                                                         12


      “[t]he reality is more complicated; conventional economists often hold a variety
      of views simultaneously. If the variance of views increases, while the core
      remains relatively unchanged, the static characterization of the profession will not
      change, but its dynamic characterization will” (Colander et al., 2004, p. 487).
      More recently, in papers which discuss the role of economics and economic
methodology in the financial crisis of 2007-8 (Colander et al., 2009; Colander, 2010;
2013), they are less optimistic about change. They argue that economists should not be
blamed for their inability to predict the crisis, because crises are of course unpredictable
events. However, they should be criticized for their excessive reliance on certain
models (i.e. DSGE) that allow only one kind of microfoundations and disregard the
complexity of the real world (Colander, 2010, 419). Economists, moreover, were unable
(or unwilling?) to communicate to the public the serious limitations of, and
qualifications to, the models they wereusing. The authors suggest that formal models
should be improved, turning economics into complexity economics. We shall return to
this point. Now, one should note that, albeit most of critiques of formalism are not new,
it is so deep-seated in economics that even jeopardizes the complexity economics
alternative.
3.1. The crumbling of the microfoundations project

        From the survey of problems faced by the general equilibrium theory (section
2.2) it is fair to say that according its own practitioners (pace modern
macroeconomists), the scientific programme of drawing macro results exclusively from
micro, standardized behavior, has failed. In sum, Rizvi (1994, 363) states that
Sonneschein, Mantel and Debreu findings show that the assumption of individual
rationality does not provide guidance to macroeconomic analysis, as it is insufficient to
bring about the desired systemic regularities.
        Hodgson (2000, 107) adds that, because of arbitrariness and stability problems in
general equilibrium research programme, one can conclude that an economy populated
by atomistic agents does not have sufficient structure to survive, as its states of
equilibrium could be evanescent. Attachment to the microfoundations project thus
involves a leap of faith in the “invisible hand” and in the agents' calculative abilities.
This theoretical effort, Hodgson continues, resulted in nothing more than a “crippled
hand”, unable to order and coordinate at the system level, however simple the model.
His categorical statement is that there is no exaggeration in claiming that the
microfoundations project has crumbled (Hodgson, 2000, 108).
        Really surprising, as pointed out by Soromenho (2000, 7-10), is the
disproportionate amount of research dedicated to general equilibrium (and
microfoundations) in contrast to the lack of enthusiasm of theoreticians of general
equilibrium with their own programme. Everything goes as if the noted problems were
minor or esoteric details. Over four decades after the works of Sonnenschein, Mantel
and Debreu, textbooks containing microfoundations are still issued, policy-makersstill
use models with representative agents and the financial theory employs the efficient
markets hypothesis. In 1995 Lucas was awarded the Nobel Prize in Economic Science
                                                                                            13


for "for having developed and applied the hypothesis of rational expectations, and
thereby having transformed macroeconomic analysis and deepened our understanding
of economic policy".
        It is beyond the scope of this paper to investigate the causes of this dissonance8.
Hodgson’s assertion that economics has become a field of applied mathematics is still
valid. Theoretical research is almost only about techniques and the aim of illuminating
real world phenomena has been blurred. Economic theory has become a “mathematical
game” played by its own rules which are determined by the players, without bothering
with the adequacy of the referentiality of their theories to reality (Hodgson 2000, 109-
10).
        It is important, however, to stress that the above is not a critique of mathematics
in economics per se, and even less a defense of those who avoid it. In this vein, non-
deterministic modeling, as those developed under the umbrella of complexity theory,
are promising. Those models are an alternative way of formalizing theory, remarkable
by its plasticity and ability to incorporate specific and idiosyncratic features of subjects
that are to be modeled9. Still, the problem is not in mathematics, but in formalism as a
scientific dogma (oxymoron) and in the ontological and methodological assumptions
that guide formal exercises.
3.2 Methodologists as engineers?

        Among the recent proposals of redirecting economics and economic
methodology, we deal here with that of Colander (2013). As noted above, complexity
theory, which he advocates, is a new and promissing approach to theorizing. Colander
claims that the 2007-8 economic crisis was a failure of the economics profession (and
by its turn a failure of economic methodology) as economists were unable to persuade
their coleagues about problems of conventional methods they employed. He mentions
DSGE models and how economists spread it as the (only) scientific mode of
interpreting and intervening. Informal models, based on insights about heterogeneous
agents' interactions, are ruled out because they violate the standard assumptions of
individual rationality and systemic coordination.
        Colander (2013, 59-64) advances a alternative for economic methodologists:
emulating engineering, practical and problem-oriented methodologies, rather than
occupying themselves with too abstract, too philosophical issues. Methodologists, like
engineers, should be problem solvers using rules of thumb and practical common-sense,
no matter how imprecise the solutions could be. Methods should be precise only if
precision is required and easily achievable. Mainstream economists, on the contrary, lay
utmost emphasis on issues of science and modelling, rather than on solutions to real-
world problems. Colander’s proposal implies that methodology would be also a field of
applied economics, and its subject would be to investigate specific heuristics for any
problem in economics appliable to problems in other economic pursuits. Economic

8
    Elster (2009) brings forward some keen and provocative hints on this.
9
    For ahighly positive evaluation, see Squazzoni (2010) on agent based-modelling (ABM).
                                                                                                 14


methodology would be much less about abstract questions. Methodologists, then, would
play the role of chief engineers helping other engineers to do their practical work.
        We are in partial accord to Colander. On one hand, his proposal embraces the
perspective of promoting more humble and sensitive works on problems in a lower level
of abstraction. It has the merits, also, of stressing the pragmatic character of economics,
that of serving social aims external to the community of economists. On the other hand,
his proposal is aloof to the problem of formalism. A turn in mainstream economics
requires a serious consideration (and Colander’s proposal apparently does not include
this) of the ontology of economic subjects – in the sense of discerning methods suitable
to subjects to be investigated or liable to intervention. To regard that question as “too
abstract” or unnecessary is tantamount to investigating just the empirical stratum of
phenomena, without saying anything about causes as “natural necessities” of
phenomena, sliding us back to instrumentalism (Runde, 1998). In other words,
Colander’s proposal does not avoid the danger of producing a bunch of formal models,
more sofisticated and superior to those of the mainstream, but, even so, insufficient to
illuminate social reality.
         The range of proposals for redressing economics must be broader, including
non-formal analysis. There is no rationale for insisting in giving place of honor to
formal modelling. Why must theorizing be done just this way? What is the matter with
ordinary language approaches? Why rule out research that simply applies descriptive
statistics and case studies? According to a well-known critical realist aphorism, methods
should be suitable to the subject investigated – not vice-versa10.
3.3. Institutions as units of analysis

        Theories that take institutions as units of analysis (Hodgson, 1993) can be a
proper way of eschewing reductionism, since they adopt a holistic and systemic
approach. They have several advantages: (i) institutions provide (relatively) more stable
regularities of social reality; (ii) they also provide a bridge (non deterministic, by virtue
of the open nature of individual decision) between agents’ actions and systemic results;
(iii) they are not static constructs, as they represent the accumulated result of past
actions, including modifications caused by actions of current generation; and (iv) they
neither place micro above macro nor the opposite.
         According to Hodgson, institutions are categories or principles relatively
invariant in which analysis can be made. In old institutionalism championed by
Hodgson, institutions are a much broader concept, ranging from technical conventions
to consumption patterns (Cerqueira, 2002, 73). Institutions are defined as relatively
durable behavioral patterns and habits of thought or routine. On one hand, these
institutions are characterized by relatively durable behavior patterns and habits of
thought, shaping how people interact within groups. On the other hand, the generation
and selection of institutional variety explain changes in the social domain. This vision


10
     An argument for a broader pluralism along these lines is given by Vercelli (2016, 160-4).
                                                                                      15


is, thus, interactive, with macro level emerging from the micro one, without reducing or
conflating to one another.
        The conception of social reality is, thus, very different. The economic system is
conceived of as evolving, open and, for this reason, permanently out of equilibrium.
Theorizing gives painstaking attention to the environment where firms and
organizations operate, stressing that systemic features are capable of impinging on the
behaviors of micro entities that compose social reality. Note that taking institutions as
units of analysis does not imply that individual behavior should be assumed as passive
to institutional forces, but that they are mutually constitutive of that reality (Chick,
2016, 100-1). The institutional approach is, therefore, in closer accordance with the
principles of irreducibility and emergence than any sort of reductionism. As said by
Hodgson (2000, 119), “Fortunately, there are sophisticated alternative approaches in
philosophy and social theory that emphasize the structured interaction of parts with
wholes, and eschew single-level explanations”.


4. Concluding comments

Colander et al. (2004) have suggested that current heterodox critiques of mainstream are
nearly forty years old and, for this reason, they miss the point. It is not possible to
characterize mainstream by the trinity of “rationality, egoism and equilibrium”
anymore. According to these authors, economics is going to be more eccletic, advancing
new hypothesis based on new computational and mathematical developments. Such new
approach would allow a better analysis of a complex economic reality. However, our
argument is that the ontology of the individual (her mercantile sociability) and the
attending reductionist methodology of modern macroeconomics does have several
implications on, and a remarkable effect over, the supposedly “scientific” or “rigorous”
way of doing economics, and so over policymaking.

       One of these effects is the ever-increasing (and deemed irreversible)
mathematization of economics. Even complexity economics, which is an alternative to
reductionist methodology pledges allegiance to mathematical modeling. Robert Lucas,
in his critique of neokeynesian economics, not only have established “one way” of
doing economics, but also (maybe unwillingly) have linked it to the neoliberal ideology.
Thus, when arguing for free choice among theories, Colander et al. (2004) should not
neglect that some approaches are a priori excluded for its policy implications. They
even affirm that some approaches can be rejected because their assumptions and
methods are not suitable to what is currently deemed mainstream, but this does not
dismay them: any new approach needs first draw attention of some economic elite
member in order to make difference.
        Moreover, it must differentiate what is mature knowledge from work currently
being done in cutting edge economics, in another words, what is crystallized theoretical
artifacts from work in progress. Most of conventional economics has been applied in
several economic systems and is acting upon reality, in spite of any critiques in papers,
                                                                                       16


seminars and meetings of economists. In this sense, orthodox economics is lingering
heavily on current mainstream economics. Even if cririques are made by mainstream
economists, economics seems more resilient to change than one would expect.
        Other effect is the crystallization of the notion that macroeconomics must begin
from “sound microfoundations”. On this, although macro is certainly emergent from
micro, it does not follow that there is only one (conventional) way of characterizing the
behaviors and features of individual agents. It also does not imply disregarding macro
level determinations on these same agents in the micro level. There are methods for
studying and grasping the micro/macro interaction other than the conventional one –
e.g. institutional analysis and simulation models. Nothing justifies to conflate macro
into micro, besides such a reduction is plagued with problems.
        One escape from atomism is to regard a conception of social reality that allows a
broader plurality of individual behaviors and individual/structure interaction, where
those levels affect each other. We stress that institutional economics takes in the
endogenous change of economic system from individual features and behaviors, the
interaction among individuals and also their interaction with the structure. Once again,
one must note that the profession is resistant to change, however. One another effect of
microfoundations project has been its exportation to the study of other subjects in social
sciences. Not wonder that the idea of optimization has invaded also the institutional
approach. Or, one could say that mainstream has taken a conception originally critical
of neoclassical economics (with Veblen or Commons) and grafted it with criteria and
constraints, making the individual once again passive to her system’s determinations.
        As final word, one should, thus, be cautious lest micro reductionism (that of
either heterogeneous or hyper rational agents) or macro reduction (passive choice under
constraints) forestall alternative theories. Struggle to escape from established theories,
as pointed out by Keynes, is hard because it is not about an external opponent, but about
challenging our own habitual modes of thought.


References

Boldyrev, I.; Svetlova, E. (eds.) (2016), Enacting dismal science: new perspectives on
   the performativity of economics. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Caldwell, B.J. (1991) “Clarifying Popper”, Journal of Economic Literature 29(1): 1-33.
Cerqueira, H.G. (2002) “Evolutionary economics: a systemic chapter of economics?”
   [In Portuguese]”, Análise Econômica 20(37): 55-79.
Chick, V. (2016) “On microfoundations and Keynes‘ economics”, Review of Political
   Economy 28(1): 99-112.
Colander, D.J. (2010) “The economics profession, the financial crisis, and method”,
   Journal of Economic Methodology 17(4): 419-427.
                                                                                      17


Colander, D.J. (2013) “The systemic failure of economic methodologists”, Journal of
   Economic Methodology 20(1): 56-68.
Colander, D.J.; Holt, R. e Rosser Jr., J.B. (2004) “The changing face of mainstream
   economics”, Review of Political Economy 16(4): 485-499.
Colander, D.J.; Goldberg, M.; Haas, A.; Juselius, K.; Kirman, A.; Lux, T. e Sloth, B.
   (2009) “The financial crisis and the systemic failure of the economics profession”,
   Critical Review 21(2): 249–267.
Davis, J.B. (2008) “The turn in recent economics and return of orthodoxy”. Cambridge
   Journal of Economics 32(3): 349-368.
Denis, A. (2004) “Two rhetorical strategies of laissez-faire”, Journal of Economic
   Methodology 11(3): 341-357.
Elster, J. (1983) Explaining technical change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Elster, J. (2009) “Excessive ambitions”, Capitalism and Society 4(2): 1-30.
Fine, B. e Milonakis, D. (2009) From economic imperialism to freakonomics: the
   shifiting boundaries between economics and other social sciences. London:
   Routledge.
Friedman, M. (1962) Capitalism and Freedom. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Fucidji, J.R.; Almeida, R.F.; Neris, C. (2016) “Performativity of economics: clarifying
   terms and building bridges” [in Portuguese]. Paper presented at the 44th Annual
   Brazilian Economic Meeting (ANPEC), mimeo.
Ganem, A. (1996) “Establishing the rational order of the market: some reflections on an
   impossible project"[in Portuguese]. Brazilian Journal of Political Economy 16(2):
   105-122.
Gilbert, N. (2002) “Varieties of emergence”, in: Sallach, D. (ed.) Social agents:
   ecology, exchange, and evolution. The 2002 Agent Conference. Chicago: University
   of Chicago e Argonne National Laboratory, 41-56.
Goodfriend, M. e King, R. (1997) The new Neoclassical Synthesis and the role of
   monetary policy. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 12: 231-283.
Hahn, F.H. e Negishi, T. (1962) “A theorem of non-tâtonnement stability”,
   Econometrica 30(3): 463-469.
Hayek, F.A. (1967) “Notes on the evolution of systems of rules of conduct”, in: Hayek,
   F.A. Studies in Philosophy, Politics, and Economics. Chicago: University of
   Chicago Press, 66‐81.
Hodgson, G.M. (1993) “Why the problem of reductionism in biology has implications
   for economics”, World Futures 37(2-3): 69-90.
Hodgson, G.M. (2000) “From micro to macro: the concept of emergence and the role of
   institutions”, in: Burlamaqui, L.; Castro, A.; e Chang, H. (eds.) Institutions and the
   role of the State. New York: Edward Elgar, 103-126.
                                                                                    18


Hodgson, G.M. (2007) “Meanings of methodological individualism”, Journal of
   Economic Methodology, 14( 2): 211-226.
Hoffmann, R. e Pelaez, V. (2011) “Economic psychology regarding methodological
   individualism” [in Portuguese], Brazilian Journal of Political Economy 31(2): 262-
   282.
Janssen, M.C.W. (1991) “The alleged necessity of microfoundations”, Journal of
   Macroeconomics, 13(4): 619-639.
Janssen, M.C.W. (2008) “Microfoundations”, in: Durlauf, S.N. e Blume, L.E. (eds.) The
   New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, vol. 5, pp. 600-604.
King, J.E. (2012) Themicrofoundations delusion – metaphor and dogma in the history
   of macroeconomics. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Kirman, A. (2016) “Complexity and economic policy: a paradigm shift or a change in
   perspective? – a review essay on David Colander and Roland Kuper’s Complexity
   and the art of public policy”, Journal of Economic Literature 54(2): 534-572.
Lawson, T. (1997) Economics and reality.London: Routledge.
Lawson, T. (2014) “A conception of ontology”, in: Pratten, S. (ed.) Social ontology and
   modern economics.London: Routledge, 19-52.
Lucas Jr., R.E. (1987) Models of business cycles. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Mäki, U. (1992) “On the method of isolation in economics”, in: Dilworth, C. (ed.)
  Idealization IV: inteligibility in science – Poznán Studies in the Philosophy of
  Sciences and the Humanities 26: 317-351.
Mayr, E. (1985) “How biology differs from the physical sciences”, in: Depew, D.J. e
  Weber, B.H. (eds.), Evolution at a crossroads: the new biology and the new
  philosophy of science. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 43-63.
O‘Neill, J. (2004) “Ecological economics and the politics of knowledge: the debate
   between Hayek and Neurath”, Cambridge Journal of Economics 28(3): 431-447.
Palley, T. (2013) “Gattopardo economics: the crisis and the mainstream response of
    change that keeps things the same”, European Journal of Economics and Economic
    Policies Intervention 10(2): 193-206.
Prado, E. (2006) “Reductionist and systemic microeconomics” [in Portuguese], Nova
   Economia 16(2): 303-322.
Rizvi, S.A.T. (1994) “The microfoundations project in general equilibrium theory”,
   Cambridge Journal of Economics 18(4): 357-377.
Rosser Jr., J.B. (ed.) (2004) Complexity in economics. New York: Edward Elgar.
Runde, J. (1998) “Assessing causal economic explanation”, Oxford Economic Papers
   50(1): 151-172.
                                                                                   19


Sawyer, R.K. (2001) “Emergence in sociology: contemporary philosophy of mind and
   some implications for social theory”, American Journal of Sociology 107(3): 551-
   585.
Schaffner, K.F. (1967) “Approaches to reduction”, Philosophy of Science 34(2): 137-
   147.
Soromenho, J. (2000) “Microfoundations and sociability” [in Portuguese]. EconomiA
   (Anpec) 1(2): 185-219.
Squazzoni, F. (2010) “The impact of agent-based models in the social sciences after 15
   years of incursions”, History of Economic Ideas 18(2): 197-233.
Udéhn, L. (2001) Methodological individualism: background, history and meaning.
   London: Routledge.
Udéhn, L. (2002) “The changing face of methodological individualism”, Annual Review
   of Sociology 28: 479-507.
Vercelli, A. (2016) “Microfoundations, methodological individualism and alternative
   economic visions”, Review of Political Economy 28(1): 153-167.
