   The Effects of Fiscal Policy on Income Inequality in a
            model with Heterogeneous Agents
                     Walberti Saith∗    Joanna Giorgios Alexopoulos†
                               Leonardo Bornacki de Mattos‡


                                                     Resumo
      A desigualdade de renda é um dos principais obstáculos ao desenvolvimento econômico. Com-
      preender a dinâmica desse fenômeno social é central para entender o crescimento econômico
      também. Assim com base em modelos que se relaciona a polı́tica fiscal, a desigualdade e cresci-
      mento que propõe-se o seguinte problema: Dada a distribuição inicial do capital, qual é o efeito de
      um conjunto de tributação fixa, sobre a desigualdade? A fim de responder a esta pergunta constrói-
      se um modelo seguindo a tradição de estudos nesta área. O modelo proposto é uma versão de um
      equilı́brio competitivo do modelo neoclássico básico de crescimento, que incorpora desigualdade
      e agentes heterogêneos: pobres e ricos, permitindo compreender este problema de uma forma
      dinâmica. Usamos o problema de Ramsey para determinar as sequências ótimas para os três tipos
      de impostos, capital, trabalho e consumo em uma economia não estocástica. A solução analı́tica
      encontrada sugerem que, a taxação ótima no estado estacionário sobre o capital deve ser sempre
      zero, independentemente do favoritismo do governo em relação a um agente em particular. Além
      disso, o governo deve financiar suas transferências por diferentes combinações de impostos sobre
      o consumo e de trabalho.

Palavras-chave: Desigualdade, Polı́tica Fiscal, Problema de Ramsey, Crescimento Econômico,
Distribuição de Renda.

                                                     Abstract
      The income inequality is one of the main obstacles to economic development. Understanding the
      dynamics of this social phenomenon is central to understand economic growth also. Thus based
      on models that relates fiscal policy, inequality and growth we proposed the following problem:
      Given the initial distribution of capital, what is the effect of a set of flat-rate taxation, on inequa-
      lity? In order to answer this question we built a model following the tradition of studies in this
      area. The model we propose is a version of a competitive equilibrium of the basic neoclassical
      growth model, which incorporate inequality and heterogeneous agents: poor and rich, allow us to
      understanding this problem in a dynamic way. We use Ramsey problem to determine the optimal
      sequences for the three types of tax, capital, labor and consumption in a nonstochastic economy.
      The analytical solution found suggest that in steady state optimal tax on capital should always be
      zero regardless of the government’s favoritism towards particular agents. Also the government
      should financed his transfers using different combinations of taxes on consumption and labor.

KeyWords: Inequality, Fiscal Policy, Ramsey Problem, Economic Growth, Income Distribution.

JEL codes: D63, E62, O40
  ∗
    Doutorando em economia aplicada Universidade Federal de Vioçosa - UFV. Email: walberti@unir.br
  †
    Professora Universidade Estadual de Londrina -UEL. Email: joanna.alexopoulos@gmail.com
  ‡
    Professor Universidade Federal de Vioçosa - UFV. Email: lbmattos@ufv.br


                                                         1
1       Introduction
        Since the 1990s, Brazil has experienced great changes in his economic policy, these transfor-
mations brought economic stability and the possibility of real income gains. But these changes was
not enough to change the process of income concentration and increased inequality. Since the begin-
ning of the 2000s, Brazil’s economic policy has turned its attention to social programs, particularly
income transfers. So understand dynamics of inequality has an important role in Brazilian economic
policy.
        As pointed out by Shin (2012), income inequality1 refers to disparities in the distribution of
income, that is, the gap between the rich and poor in a country. Many studies in economic theory has
turned its attention to the relationship between inequality and economic growth.
        It is importante to point out that inequality can be harmful to the economy’s growth rate. This
result has brought social equity to center of policy debate in Brazil. Through appropriate use of taxes
and transfers, government can correct socially undesirable distributive outcomes arising from market
forces. The evidence shows that most developed economies are more effective at this redistributive
function, than developing economies (GONI; LOPEZ; SERVEN, 2011).
         Many studies in economic theory has turned its attention to the relationship between inequa-
lity and economic growth. One of the most known theory on the international literature it is the study
of Kuznets (1955), this author assumes that in the early process of capital accumulation the income
and wealth distribution becomes unequal, but after wealth become enough accumulated, wealth and
income distribution equalize and inequality decreasces. The hypothesis proposed by Kuznets indi-
cates that there is a relationship between the level of inequality and economic growth, although this
relationship is not linear2 . Many studies have indicated that initially, in the short run inequality stan-
dard increases with economic growth and, in the long run decreases from a turning point. This effect
is attributed by the authors to two factors, wage growth and the decrease in the return of investment.
        However there are other theories used to explain the relationship between inequality and eco-
nomic growth, but they are different and there is no consensus of how this relationship occurs. Among
these theories, those based on existing transition between the agricultural and industrial sectors, im-
perfections in the financing system and progress technological stands out.
        The several theories presented while different, show there is a strong evidence that economic
growth and inequality are related, it is also possible that different economic policies influence the
relationship between this two variables. Nevertheless the way how this relationship occurs still is
controversy, as point by Muinelo-Gallo and Roca-Sagales (2011) the issue of the sign and magni-
tude of theses effects is an open question. Garcia-Penalosa and Turnovsky (2007) argues that earlier
evidence suggested a negative trade-off between growth and inequality, therefore recent studies have
tended to support a positive relationship. Shin (2012) shows that empirical evidences in studies of
East Asian and South American countries presents a negative relationship between income inequa-
lity and economic growth. However in developed countries, such as United States and France this
relationship is positive.
        More recently, some authors have shown two ways of how inequality and growth are not
conflicting related. Chen and Turnovsky (2010) indicate that growth rate and inequality will be depend
of the set of forces to which both are reacting. Barro (2000) shows that the positive or negative
relationship depends on the development stage of the economy. This author also shows the effect of
    1
      The term inequality extends over various economic and social aspects, such as income distribution, access to educa-
tion and health services, however in this work inequality indicates that income distribution is not equal, so whenever we
refer inequality we are saying that income distribution is not equal.
    2
      This non-linearity is described as a curve in form of U inverted.



                                                           2
income inequality on economic growth is negative in poor countries, but is presented in a positive
way in rich countries.
        Thus, it is more likely that in countries like Brazil inequality impacts negatively on economic
growth. So inequality is a barrier to economic growth and also to development in Brazil. The ine-
quality can reduces the potential economic growth in long-run and welfare too, Muinelo-Gallo and
Roca-Sagales (2011) argues that distribution of wealth can affect the economic growth rate in the
long-run by modifying the size and the composition of aggregate demand.
        A central concern of this discussion is the role that government policies may play in reducing
economic inequalities, and determining the effects on economic growth rate. Important issue raised
in this context are what are the most efficient ways to reduce inequality? and also what are the main
instruments capable of reducing inequality?
        The economic theory has suggested that fiscal policy can affect inequality in the long run. This
is because fiscal policy can impact aggregate demand, distribution of wealth and income, in addition
to the production capacity of the economy. Thus, the choice of a distributive fiscal policy strategy has
become of crucial importance in achieving economic growth and reduce inequality at the same time
(MUINELO-GALLO; ROCA-SAGALAS, 2013).
       One of the ways in which tax policy impacts inequality is presented by Rebelo (1991). He
shows that redistribution of income by using income tax on has negative effect on growth because re-
duces the gap of income and wealth and consequently reduces growth. Income redistribution financed
through taxes on income also reduces the incentive to accumulate wealth.
        Using an endogenous growth model with elastic labor supply, Garcia-Penalosa and Turnovsky
(2007) investigate how different ways of financing an investment, impact the income distribution,
they show that growth is driven by policies that increase the return of capital. The authors also argue
that capital is more unequally distributed than labor, hence, higher returns to capital represent greater
income inequality.
        There are others authors that argue inequality decreases as consequence of the tax policy cho-
sen by median voter as show by Muinelo-Gallo and Roca-Sagales (2011, p. 10) “greater fiscal redis-
tribution through distortionary taxes, while it may reduce investment incentives, also decreases social
conflict and contributes to greater stability that encourages productive activities and capital accumu-
lation”. Therefore more unequal democratic societies demand redistribution financed by distortionary
taxes.
       The reduction of inequality and, therefore, a policy of income redistribution more equitable
may be achieved through the fiscal policy. A progressive tax policy, for example, can modify the
inequality in the long run. What is the optimal fiscal policy, which with less distortions on growth
decreases income inequality? the answer to that question is part of the optimal tax theory. This theory,
the well known Ramsey’s problem is the study of what amount of tax causes minimum distortion and
reduces inefficiency.
        The literature of optimal taxation focus on the effects of fiscal policy on economic growth,
there is also several studies that focus on the impact of other macroeconomic variables such as income
inequality. An example of this theory is the seminal study of Chamley (1986), which shows that the
optimal tax on capital in the long run should be zero. Though there are other studies as conducted by
Aiyagari (1995) that show in a model with incomplete insurance markets and borrowing constraints,
optimal capital tax should be positive, even in the long run.
        The effects of fiscal policy considering endogenous saving rates is used by Judd (1985) to show
that fiscal policy has transitory effect on output, and has no permanent effect on economic growth.
In other study Oh (2013) showed that Real Business Cycle models with only shocks to total factor



                                                   3
productivity can not explain the inequality. Furthermore, inequality is moderately countercyclical in
United States of America with data on an annual basis.
        Fochezatto and Bagolin (2006) indicate that a progressive tax policy have small effects on
income distribution. On the other hand, a policy of income redistribution, made by government
transfers thoght income taxation, have a significant impact on inequality.
       There are few authors that estimate the impact of fiscal policy on inequality, this studies focus
primarily in econometrics estimates for data panel, but the results are mostly not robust, presenting
evidence that the size of the impact and its significance depends on the set of control variables used
and the initial conditions of the economy.
        As stated high inequality can be harmful to the economy’s growth rate. This result has brought
social equity to center of policy debate in Brazil. Through appropriate use of taxes and transfers,
government can correct socially undesirable distributive outcomes arising from market forces. The
evidence shows that most developed economies are more effective at this redistributive function, than
developing developing economies (GONI; LOPEZ; SERVEN, 2011). Through the necessary fiscal
reforms, its redistributive function effectively. The redistributive impact of country’s fiscal system
is shaped by three factors: (1) The feasible volume of transfers. (2) Incidence of taxation and (3)
incidence of transfers.
       Despite its importance, little has been researched about the impact of fiscal policy on income
inequality. Thus investigate the relationship between fiscal policy and income inequality can show
important mechanisms through which the latter can be reduced. It also highlights the impact of these
variables on economic growth, because more equitable initial allocations lead to a higher growth rate.
        There is a lack in the national literature of analyzes the impact of fiscal policy on income
inequality, especially studies that analyze the issue dynamically. To understand the linkages between
fiscal policy, inequality and economic growth, it is necessary to adopt a structural, consistent dynamic
general equilibrium approach.
        Thus based on models that relates fiscal policy, inequality and growth we propose the fol-
lowing problem: Given the initial distribution of capital, what is the effect of a set of flat-rate taxation,
on inequality? Besides to answer this question, this work aims to understand how the government ob-
tains resources from the private sector through taxation and redirects them to current spending and
transfers.
        Therefore, this work intends to contribute to literature, presenting a model that captures the
effect of a set of fiscal policies on inequality and consequently economic growth. This type of analy-
sis because they capture the key interactions between agents and the economic system. The model
introduced here aim to describe the behavior for the economy as a whole by analyzing the interaction
of many microeconomic decisions.
        The hypotheses are: (i) there is a causal relationship between fiscal policy and income inequa-
lity regardless of the type of tax used by the government; (ii) the type of flat-rate tax: consumption,
capital and labor income, can simultaneously affect the growth and inequality rate of the economy in
different magnitudes; and (iii) consumer tax has a larger impact on inequality.


2     Theoretical Framework

2.1    Fiscal Policy and Inequality
       The analysis of fiscal policy effects on the economy is usually done in order to study economic
growth. One of mains instruments of fiscal policy are changes in the level and composition of taxation.

                                                     4
These changes can affect crucial macroeconomic variables, such as: aggregate demand, savings and
investment and the distribution of income.
       The studies of economic growth theory, focus in factors that cause inequality. In this context
inequality can be explained due to imperfections in the credit market, there are many studies that
explain the distribution of income and consequently inequality by the limited participation of financial
markets (GALOR; ZEIRA, 1993; MOTTA; TIRELLI, 2012; FOCHEZATTO; BAGOLIN, 2006).
        As point out by Mankiw (2000), households with low-wealth fail to smooth consumption
over time and do not accumulate wealth, on the other hand households with high wealth smooth
consumption not only from year to year, but also from generation to generation. This process is
capable of generating income inequality, and shows the importance of fiscal policy that redistribute
the income correcting this problem.
        In recent literature of optimal taxation, the debate has turned to the role of fiscal policy in
distributions issues. Many authors have questioned the adequacy of the representative agent model
to analyze these questions. It is considered necessary the use of models with heterogeneous agents.
Introduce another type of agent in a economic growth model, in special the case of our model with
poor and rich agents, does not alter the assumptions usually made in this type of analysis. This type of
modeling brings a gain in terms of analytical results since differentiate between rich and poor agents,
allowing a better understanding of fiscal policy effects on inequality.
        However, before we build a model that incorporates these hypotheses is necessary to build a
standard economic growth model according to the literature, to show the changes which we propose
on this model and its implications to the mains conclusions. In the standard models of optimal growth
theory, where the economy has only one sector, a representative household solves a version of the
savings problem with constant returns to scale production function. This function usually is: F (K, L),
where L is labor input and K represents the physical capital. When the return on capital is tax-free,
the gross rate of return is equal to the marginal product of capital, less depreciation.
        According to Sargent and Ljungvist (2000) we have: Rt+1 = Fk,t+1 + (1 − δ), where Rt+1
is gross rate of return, Fk (k, t + 1) is the marginal product of capital and δ is the depreciation rate.
We use a general utility function U (C, l), where l is the household’s leisure and C represent the
consumption level.

                                                  ∞
                                                  X
                                       max              β t U (Ct , lt )                             (1)
                                       Ct ,kt+1
                                                  t=0


       The utility function is concave and twice differentiable. Using this assumptions Sargent and
Ljungvist (2000) build a simple growth model with no taxes. The model proposed by these authors it
is a maximization of social planer problem (equation 1). This maximization is subject to a resources
constraint as shown in equation (2).


                                         ct + kt+1 = f (kt )                                         (2)

        With these equations we can make the Lagrangian and solve the maximization problem. After
solve the maximization problem and find the First Order Necessary Conditions - FONC, we can find
the Euler condition (Equation 3) that is:

                                                   "                       #
                                 UCt = βUCt+1 Fkt+1 + (1 − δ)                                        (3)


                                                          5
       Where UCt is the marginal utility consumption at period t and is the marginal utility of con-
sumption at t + 1. Because of constant returns to scale property, Fk (K, N ) = f 0 (k), where N is
the labor demand on this economy, k = K/N and F (K, N ) = N f (K/N ). In steady state, with no
population growth where k is constant in time, the equation 3 must satisfy:


                                            ρ + δ = f 0 (k)                                              (4)

        Where β −1 = (1 + ρ). To solve this equation is necessary to find the value of k know as
augmented golden rule that show the level of capital-labor ratio of steady state. Equation (4) repre-
sents how technology, f , δ and time preference, β, are determinants of level of capital when both
factors are not subject to taxation in steady state. An important conclusion of the model is that the
cross-distribution of wealth and consumption replicates itself over time, so that each individual share
always occupies the same position, so there is no mobility. The initial distribution of wealth perpetu-
ates the initial inequality remains over time.
       Then it is necessary a model where there is a mechanism for changes in inequality, and this
can occur through fiscal policy. We can introduce fiscal polices in this model with a tax of flat-rate
marginal rate τk,t+1 . Though if income from capital is taxed at the flat rate marginal rate, then the
Euler equation (3) becomes:

                                           "                              #
                            UCt = βUCt+1 Fkt+1 (1 − τk,t+1 ) + (1 − δ)                                   (5)


        If the flat rate tax on capital is constant, so in steady state, we can find a result similar of case
before, it must satisfy this condition:


                                        ρ + δ = (1 − τk )f 0 (k)                                         (6)

       We now can conclude that taxing capital diminishes the steady state capital labor ratio. The
equations (4) and (6) are the most important of studied in the dynamic theory of optimal taxation and
show that optimal is do not tax capital on long run. Based in this model, Chamley (1986) and Judd
(1985) proposes a model with flat rate taxes on labor and capital income at different rates and force
the government to finance itself with a stream of flat-rate taxes on capital and labor. This modeling
of optimal taxation is known as Ramsey (1927) problem and studied the behavior limits of optimal
taxation.
        Sargent and Ljungvist (2000) pointed out the important role of Euler equation in determining
the limiting tax rate on capital in a non-stochastic economy and therefore, find a solution to the
Ramsey (1927) problem. In the Ramsey problem the Euler equation takes a form similar to equation
(5), therefore household’s Euler equation becomes:

                                                   "                 #
                               WCt = βWCt+1 Fkt+1 + (1 − δ)                                              (7)
                                                           "                     #
                         W (Ct , lt ) = UC (Ct , lt ) + Φ UCt Ct + Ult (1 − lt )                         (8)


                                                       6
         Where Φ is a Lagrange multiplier on the government’s inter-temporal budget constraint. In the
Ramsey problem the taxes must be such that both (3) and (8) always hold. Thus if a steady state exists,
where Ct , lt , kt , τkt all converge and government expenditure sequence converges (CHAMLEY, 1986;
JUDD, 1985). It also must satisfy equation (4) and (6). The main conclusion of these conditions is
that, in optimal τk = 0, in other words, steady state properties of two versions of consumption Euler
equation results that it is optimal not to tax capital asymptotically (SARGENT; LJUNGVIST, 2000).
        This conclusion is robust if the government issuing debt or execute a balanced budget in the
sense of Ricardian equivalence in every period. However if the tax system is incomplete, the optimal
tax on capital can be different from zero.
        On the other hand, Aiyagari (1995) shows that with incomplete insurance markets and bor-
rowing constraints, the optimal capital tax rate is positive in the long run. Jones, Manuelli and Rossi
(1997) extend this model to allow the accumulation of human capital, assuming constant returns and
a linearly homogeneous function in human capital, they show that a zero tax also applies to income
from labor. Chari Lawrence J. Christiano (1994) found that taxing labor causes little fluctuation while
taxing private capital cause large fluctuations. There are also studies that show the effects of taxa-
tion on consumption (see Mendoza, Milesi-Ferretti and Asea (1997)). Taxing consumption may be
distorting with a negative effect on growth, when leisure is included in the utility function
        An important aspect of optimal taxation problem introduced above is determining income
taxes, which can be regressive, flat, or progressive. Furthermore, there is one type of tax that does
not create a any distortion, the lump-sum tax. The lump-sum tax does not create distortions because
these taxes do not depend on agents decisions.
         Although taxing capital in a progressive way is often considered an appropriate instrument for
redistribution, Chamley (1986) argues that doing so is not an efficient policy in the long run (SWAR-
BRICK, 2012). The Ramsey problem focus in how government maximize households’ welfare sub-
ject to raising set revenues through distortionary taxation. We propose a model with three types of
flat rate tax: consumption, capital and labor, and the impact of theses taxes on income inequality.


3    Model with Heterogeneous Agents
         In order to study the impacts of fiscal policies on inequality we built a model following the
tradition of studies in this area. The model we propose is a version of a competitive equilibrium of
the basic neoclassical growth model, which incorporate inequality and heterogeneous agents, allow
us to understanding this problem in a dynamic way.
        In a economy described by a representative agent, the household receives income from labor
and capital and chooses a path of consumption and capital investment to maximize their utility, the
government taxes both labor and capital income and also is subject to intertemporal budget constraint.
Without any market imperfection, it is best not to distort the choices of that consumer, so a lump-sum
should be implemented. In the real economies, lump-sum taxes are rarely because this tax falls equally
on the rich and poor, placing a greater relative burden on the most poor.
        The model we built introduces a new factor inequality in an attempt to show how fiscal policy
can alter the distribution of wealth of an economy. This model assumes heterogeneous agents, op-
posing the use of representative agent as in Sargent and Ljungvist (2000). Krusell and Smith (1998)
showed that while aggregate consumption behavior is enough to analyze most macroeconomic varia-
bles, in order to study the distributional effects of tax policies is necessary to introduce with different
types of agents in the model.
     A model with heterogeneous agents should consider the empirical evidence as suggested by
Mankiw (2000), he show that significant part of the population lives without virtual wealth, spending

                                                    7
the majority of their income and saving a small portion. Meanwhile there is a small portion of the
population with high level of wealth, the wealthiest Individuals are able to smooth consumption over
time and save a large portion of his wealth.
        Thus a model with heterogeneous agents must have, two types of agents: poor and rich, the
difference between them is the amount of accumulated wealth and savings rate (marginal propensity
to save). In fact the difference in the marginal propensity to save is critical to building a model that
considers inequality as endogenous. This one of the main mechanisms by which fiscal policy can
affect income inequality. Kaldor (1955) argues that economic growth can affect inequality through
the marginal propensity to save of the agents, this is because the marginal propensity to save is greater
for rich than the poor. Fiscal policy therefore can change not only the level of wealth of each agent,
but also their marginal propensity to save, affecting simultaneously, income inequality and economic
growth.
        Muinelo-Gallo and Roca-Sagalas (2013) indicates that a fiscal policy which can redistributing
wealth from the rich, who has marginal productivity of investment relatively low. Due to decreasing
returns on individual investments, to the poor who has marginal productivity of investment relatively
high, but who can not invest more than their limited endowments, would enhance aggregate efficiency
and growth and manly reduce income inequality.
        This relationship between agents wealth and their relative allocation of time to leisure it is also
important for a redistributive fiscal policy. Wealthier agents have a lower marginal utility of wealth,
they therefore increase leisure, and reduce labor supply. Given their relative capital endowments,
this translates to an endogenously determined distribution of income. As we will see exist various
structural changes through which a redistributive fiscal policy affect inequality and the economy as a
whole, including an increase in productivity and savings.


3.1    Households
         To understand the inequality is constructed a model with two types of agents: poor and rich.
The literature on fiscal policy and income inequality usually supposes that the poor (P ) consume all
their income each period and do not keep savings and consequently wealth. The rich (W ) are owners
the capital and are able to smooth consumption in each period, as can be seen in models of Mankiw
(2000), Swarbrick (2012). The model proposed by Judd (1985) for example has two classes of agents,
one class are workers that do not save and other class call capitalists who do not work, there is not any
kind of redistribution in the limit of all this model. Therefore, in there models inequality is exogenous
given.
        Different from this previously studies conducted such as Mankiw (2000), Gali, Salido and
Valles (2007) is supposed in this work that both agents can own physical capital and that there is a
difference γ in return of savings for rich and poor agent, therefore:


                                           RtP = RtW − γ                                               (9)

        Where RtP is return for the poor agent and Rt is the marginal product of capital. We also
assume K be the minimum level of capital to become a rich agent. So poor agents can also save and
accumulate wealth. This difference in the model allows social mobility, in the form in which poor
agents can become rich and rich agents may become poor. This change enables analyzing inequality
as an endogenous variable in the model, allowing the study of the effects of fiscal policy on inequality.
        Since the model has two types of agents is necessary to define the proportion of the population
that corresponds to the poor θt which must satisfy the following condition θt < 1, so the percentage

                                                    8
of the population will be rich is (1 − θt ). The initial condition of θ, constitutes an aggregate state
variable at the beginning of economy, but becomes an endogenous variable in the following periods
and is determined by fiscal policy in the previous period and the agents decisions.


3.2     Rich Agent
       For this problem it is considered that households want to maximize their utility subject to a
budget constraint:

                                                  ∞
                                                  X
                                         max            β t U W (CtW , HtW )                                         (10)
                                                  t=0

       Where CtW is the consumption of wealthier households and HtW is the hours dedicated to work
for wealthier agent on time t, discounted by a intertemporal rate 0 < β < 1. We will use 1 − Ht to
represent the hours spent in leisure. The households maximize utility subject to budget constraint:


       (1 + τtC,W )CtW + ItW = (1 − τtH,W )WtW HtW + (1 − τtK,W )RtW KtW ,                          if Kt ≥ K (11)

        Where CtW and WtW is consumption and wage in the time t respectively, RtW is the rent rate
of capital, KtW is the capital stock and δ is depreciation rate of capital. There is three forms of tax:
(1 + τtC,W ), (1 − τtH,W ) and (1 − τtK,W ) over consumption, labor and capital respectively.
        The budget constraint for the rich agent presents the capital stock accumulation function, given
the variables Kt and Kt+1 , this way the capital stock is given by:


                                            Kt+1 = It + (1 − δ)Kt                                                    (12)

       Where It is the investment in the period t and δ is depreciation rate. This equation represent a
law of motion. This equation can be writing to represent the investment It of this economy:


                                             It = Kt+1 − (1 − δ)Kt                                                   (13)

         We can insert the investment equation in the budget constraint of the rich agent to facilitate
assembly of the Lagrangian. Based on these equations we can build the Lagrangian function for rich
agent3 . Therefore, the FONCs for rich agents are, ∀ t:


              ∂LW                                            C,W
                        = β t UC (CtW , 1 − HtW ) − λW
                                                     t (1 + τt   )=0                                                 (14)
              ∂CtW
              ∂LW                                             H,W
                        = −β t UH (CtW , 1 − HtW ) + λW
                                                      t (1 + τt   )Wt = 0                                            (15)
              ∂HtW
             ∂LW                     h
                                             K,W
                                                                i
                W
                        = −λW
                            t + λW
                                 t+1  (1 − τt+1  )Rt+1 + (1 − δ)  =0                                                 (16)
             ∂Kt+1
              ∂LW
                        = −(1 + τtC,W )CtW − ItW + (1 − τtH,P )Wt HtW + (1 − τtK,P )Rt KtW                           (17)
              ∂λW
                t
   3
     Rich agents are defined, in this model, as those agents who have a level of capital higher or equal than the threshold
level K. Rich agents have a higher return of capital, Rt and different scheme of labor and capital income taxation,
τtH,W ,τtK,W .


                                                             9
        From FONCs we can find the marginal utility of consumption and leisure. Isolating λt in the
first two derivatives, equation (14) and (15) we can find the labor suplly:

                                       UH (CtW , 1 − HtW )   (1 + τtH,W )Wt
                                                           =                                             (18)
                                       UC (CtW , 1 − HtW )     (1 + τtC,W )
        The labor supply show how the rich agent trade labor and leisure over time, and also show the
relation between two type of tax and wage are important to determining this ratio. Divining equations
(14) by (17) and substitution in equation (14) we can find the Euler Equation:


                                                        W (1    + τtC,W ) h      K,W
                                                                                                    i
      UC (CtW , 1   −   HtW )   =         W
                                    βUC (Ct+1 ,1   −   Ht+1 )       C,W
                                                                           (1 − τt+1 )Rt+1 + (1 − δ)     (19)
                                                             (1 + τt+1  )

       Equation (19) is the well-known Euler Equation. It shows that the intertemporal marginal rate
of substitution between consumption at period t and period t+1 equals to the relative price between
both consumptions. Note that even if consumption tax is constant over time, taxation on capital
income distorts the relative price of intertemporal consumption (CHAMLEY, 1986).


3.3    Poor Agent
       In this model poor agent has a similar maximization problem as the rich agent, that is, maxi-
mizing a utility function:

                                                   ∞
                                                   X
                                          max            β t U P (CtP , HtP )                            (20)
                                                   t=0

       Where the variables are the same of case of rich agent and superscript P indicate the type
(Poor) of agent. The poor agent receive income from work and savings on capital, and want to
maximize their utility subject to a budget constraint:


      (1 + τtC,P )CtP + ItP = (1 − τtH,P )WtP HtP + (1 − τtK,P )RtP KtP + TtP ,              if   Kt < K (21)

        Where TtP represent the government’s transference funded by the raise of tax on over the rich
agent. There is three forms of tax that is different of the rich agent: (1 + τtC,P ), (1 − τtH,P ) and
(1 − τtK,P ) over consumption, labor and capital respectively. The other variables are same for case of
rich agent. Note that both problems, rich and poor are different only because fiscal policy and interest
rate received on savings (τtC,W , τtC,P , τtH,W , τtH,P , τtK,W , τtK,P and RtP = RtW − γ). Based on the
equations of the poor agent problem we can find the FONCs, ∀ t:


            ∂LP
                    = β t UC (CtP , 1 − HtP ) − λPt (1 + τtC,P ) = 0                                     (22)
            ∂CtP
           ∂LP
                    = −β t UH (CtP , 1 − HtP ) + λPt (1 + τtH,P )Wt = 0                                  (23)
           ∂HtP
           ∂LP                    h
                                         K,P
                                                            i
             P
                    = −λPt + λPt+1 (1 − τt+1   P
                                             )Rt+1 + (1 − δ) = 0                                         (24)
          ∂Kt+1
            ∂LP
                    = −(1 + τtC,P )CtP − ItP + (1 − τtH,P )Wt HtP + (1 − τtK,P )RtP KtP + TtP            (25)
            ∂λPt

                                                            10
       From FONCs we can find the marginal utility of consumption and leisure. Dividing equations
(22) by (23) we can find the labor supply:

                                 UH (CtP , 1 − HtP )   (1 + τtH,P )Wt
                                                     =                                              (26)
                                 UC (CtP , 1 − HtP )     (1 + τtC,P )
        Equation (26) shows how poor agent trades both goods: consumption and leisure at period
t. The marginal rate of substitution between consumption and leisure equals to the relative prices
between consumption and leisure where the price of consumption good at period t is normalized to
one and the wage rate, net of taxation, is the opportunity cost of leisure. Note that as long as taxation
on consumption is different from taxation on labor income for poor agents, the taxation distorts the
relative price of both goods. Divining equations (22) by (23) and substitution in equation (24) we can
find the Euler Equation:


                                                        (1 + τtC,P ) h       K,P
                                                                                                i
                                     P
         UC (CtP , 1 − HtP ) = βUC (Ct+1        P
                                         , 1 − Ht+1 )          C,P
                                                                      (1 − τ t+1 )R P
                                                                                   t+1 + (1 − δ)    (27)
                                                        (1 + τt+1  )

        Equations are (26) and (27) are the counterparts of equations (18) and (19) of rich agents. The
Euler equation shows the relationship between intertemporal consumption and all type taxes, return
of capital and depreciation.


3.4    Firm
         The function of the firm can be assumed as Cobb-Douglas: Yt = F (Ht , Kt ), usually the
marginal products are equal to factor prices, this condition is known as production function with zero
profits. A representative firm rents capital and employs labor to produce a consumption good, this
way we have the following equation:


                                 Yt = AHtα Kt1−α − Wt Ht − Rt Kt                                    (28)

        Where Yt is the product, Ht are household labor provided at time t and Kt is capital stock, Wt
e Rt are wages and capital income respectively. From the First Order Necessary Conditions - FONCs,
∀ t we can have:

                                                          !α−1
                                                Ht
                                      Wt   = αA                                                     (29)
                                                Kt
                                                                 !α
                                                      Ht
                                      Rt   = (α − 1)A                                               (30)
                                                      Kt

        The equations (29) and (30) are the first order conditions for the firms problem with technical
progress assumed to be constant. The first equation show the wage is equal to marginal product of
labor, and the second equation show the rent tax is equal to marginal product of capital.




                                                   11
3.5     Government
       The government’s goal is to maximize welfare of the economy subject to raising set revenues
through distortionary taxation.
        The government collects taxes on household income of labor and capital to exogenously fund
transfers to the poor. The government also collects tax on consumption. The government is supposed
to operate with a balanced budget constraint:


                               Gt + Tt = τH Wt Ht + τK Rt Kt + τC Ct                             (31)

         Where Tt = θt TtP , is transference for the poor agent and Gt is spending of government given
exogenously. The government tax labor, capital income and consumption of the both agents with:
τtH,W , τtH,P , τtK,W , τtK,P , τtC,W , τtC,P , for the rich and poor agent respectively.
         Therefore we have in the aggregate the sums of tax so that: τ H = τtH,W + τtH,P , for labor,
τK    = τtK,W + τtK,P for capital, and τ C = τtC,W + τtC,P , for consumption.


3.6     Competitive Equilibrium
        As the model incorporates two types of agents is necessary to define the behavior of the
variables in the model. The variables Ct , Kt and Ht are divided between the two types of agents, so
the aggregate should be added to take:


                                      Ct   =   θt CtP + (1 − θt )CtW                             (32)
                                      Ht   =   θt HtP + (1 − θt )HtW                             (33)
                                     Kt    =   θt KtP + (1 − θ)KtW                               (34)
                                     θTt   =   θTtp                                              (35)

       Every period, the economy is bound by the resource constraint Yt = Ct + It + Gt . The
competitive equilibrium government policy (tax) allocations and prices are set based on the following
conditions:

     • Families maximize their utility subject to the restrictions for both types of agents.
     • Firms maximize profit using capital and labor.
     • The government budget is balanced.

       The government solves the problem of Ramsey to find the allocations, prices and fiscal policy
that maximizes social welfare.
      The effects of policy affect prices {R, W }∞                    W    P    W   P   W    P ∞
                                                  t=0 allocations {H , H , C , C , K , K }t=0 .
The equilibrium conditions are used to solve the model, and find the solution of Ramsey’s problem.
                                                                                                   C
       Assuming there is a steady state condition in which Ct it is constant, Ct = Ct+1 and τtC = τt+1
then we can modify the Euler equation of the rich and poor agents so that we have:


                                                               1
                                    (1 − τ K )FK + (1 + δ) =                                     (36)
                                                               βt

                                                    12
                                                      !α
                                                 Ht
            Where FK = rt = (α − 1)A             Kt
                                                           , so we have that taxing capital diminishes the steady state

for both agents. It is easy to prove that the same result can also be found for the poor agent. This
result is the same as found by the majority of studies done in the literature, is consistent with theory.
This famous equation shows how technology represent by δ and FK and time preference of time β
are important to determine of steady state rate level of capital. Another important point to note is that
tax consumption and labor does not affect the steady state.


4        Ramsey Problem
        The literature of optimal taxation has as objective to find a tax system that maximize a social
welfare function of the economy subject to a set of constraints. In this section we formulate the
problem of taxation dynamically, this approach is known in the literature as Ramsey problem, the
commonly found solution is called Ramsey plan.
       The government’s objective is to maximize households’ welfare subject to raising set revenues
through distortionary taxation. By creating an ideal fiscal policy, the government takes into account
the reactions of consumers and firms to the tax system. The problem is to determine the optimal
sequences for the three types of tax, capital, labor and consumption in a nonstochastic economy,
using a competitive equilibrium version of the basic neoclassical growth model . We assume that the
government has a balanced budget 4 .
       Following the example of Chamley (1986) and Sargent and Ljungvist (2000), we can rewrite
the budget constraint of the government in order to facilitate derivation of the central planner pro-
blem’s. It consists of using the FONC’s of the firm and equilibrium outcomes in factor markets. For
this we take the equation (31) and first we add and subtract Wt Ht , Rt Kt therefore have:

                                                                           
             Gt + Tt =           F (HtW , KtW , HtP , KtP )   P           W
                                              − (1 − τH )Wt θHt + (1 − θ)Ht
                                                                              
                                       P            W                P         W
                       − (1 − τK )Rt θKt + (1 − θ)Kt − (1 − τC ) θCt + (1 − θ)Ct                                  (37)


         Based on the equation (37) and the equations from the FONC’s for agents poor and rich, the
firm and Euler conditions than is possible build the problem of Ramsey using estimation strategy si-
milar to Sargent and Ljungvist (2000). But unlike these authors, we have not included resource cons-
traint this because if government and household budget constraints holding imply that the resource
constraint holds. The Ramsey problem in Lagrangian form is shown below where the objective func-
tion is constrained by the household first order conditions, the household budget constraints and the
government budget constraints.
    4
        If the government present debt in each period the results show in this study do not change.




                                                                 13
        ∞
                       (
        X
   L=          βt        Vt (UtW , UtP )
         t=0
                                                                                                   
                    + ϕt F (Ht Kt ) − (1 − τH )Wt Ht − (1 − τK )Rt Kt + (1 − τC )Ct − Gt − Tt
                                                                                                   
                       P             C,P      P      P           H,W      P        K,P    P P     P
                    + λt − (1 + τt )Ct − It + (1 − τt )Wt Ht + (1 − τt )Rt Kt + Tt
                                                                                               
                       W              C,W      W       W           H,W      W         K,P     W
                    + λt − (1 + τt )Ct − It + (1 − τt )Wt Ht + (1 − τt )Rt Kt
                                                                  
                       P             H,P                      C,P
                    + φt UC (1 + τt )Wt − UH (1 + τt )
                                                                    
                       W              H,W                      C,W
                    + φt UC (1 + τt )Wt − UH (1 + τt )

                                   (1 + τtC,P ) h
                                                                            i      
                        P                                 K,P    P
                    + Ψt βUCt+1            C,P
                                                    (1 − τt+1 )Rt+1 + (1 − δ) − UCt
                                   (1 + τt+1    )
                                                                                      )
                                           C,W h                              
                                    (1 +  τ t     )         K,W
                    + ΨWt    βUCt+1         C,W
                                                     (1 − τt+1  )Rt+1 + (1 − δ) − UCt
                                    (1 + τt+1 )

           Where Vt is the sum of the utility functions of all agents. Based on the Lagrangian of the
Ramsey’s problem, it is possible derive the Lagrangian regarding the following variables: C H, K,
τ C , τ H , τ K and T for both agents, also is derived the same variables for periods t = 0 and t > 1 . All
mathematical work and the main results are shown in the annexes. We now can concentrate in find
                                                                                         W         P
the optimal tax on capital. Utilizing the derivative of the Lagrangian with respect Kt+1     and Kt+1  it is
                                                       K
find the condition of optimal taxation on capital τ , which for the rich agent is:

                  h                 i          h                          i
       βϕW (1 − θ) FK − (1 − τ K )RW − λW + βλW 1 + (1 − τ K )RW + (1 − δ) = 0                          (38)

        It is worth mentioning that despite the result be displayed for the rich agent the same result is
valid for the poor agent. As in Sargent and Ljungvist (2000), Swarbrick (2012), λ is interpreted as
the marginal social value of goods and is strictly positive. Furthermore ϕ can be interpreted as the
marginal value of reducing taxes and is nonnegative.h Replacing the Euleriequation of rich agent (26)
in steady-state and remembering that steady-state: (1−τ K,W )R+(1−δ) = 1/β and also, FK = R,
so we have from the expression (38):

                                           h                 i
                                 ϕW (1 − θ) RW − (1 − τ K )RW = 0                                       (39)

       This implies that 1 − (1 − τ K ) = 0 and thus we conclude that τ K = 0. Thus it can be
concluded that the optimal capital tax is zero at steady state, a result that is equivalent to the poor and
rich agents.

Proposition 1. In a economic growth model with heterogeneous agents and a nonstochastic economy,
in steady state optimal taxing on physical capital should equal to zero for the both type of agents poor
and rich.


                                                    14
       Although the return (Rt ) the capital of the rich agents is higher than the poor agents. This result
is same as found by several authors most notoriously by: Judd (1985), Chamley (1986), Sargent and
Ljungvist (2000) and is consistent with studies of optimal taxation5 .
       Note that the result of zero taxation on capital is independent of the government bias to the
poor or the rich, represented by parameter γ in our model , as previously seem the parameter 0 <
γ < 1 indicates the government’s favoritism for the rich or poor agents. So the transfers made by the
government should be financed
        Although there are studies showing different results of this, mainly because under certain
assumptions taxes on capital would be optimize above zero as in Aiyagari (1995) that work with a
incomplete markets model. Similar results can also be found in other studies such as Stiglitz (1987),
Jones, Manuelli and Rossi (1997). This type of result is usually found when some kind of good is
not tax. Therefore government spending, in particular the transfer to the poor should be financed by a
combination of taxes.
        However as it is possible to see this result is presented with the economy in the steady state,
and does not explain how macroeconomics variables such as consumer, labor wage etc, react during
the Real Business Cycle - RBC. Also optimal steady-state tax do not say much about how long it takes
to reach the zero tax on capital and mainly how taxes and redistributive transfers are set during the
transition period.
       So it becomes necessary calibration a model with demand and supply shocks in order to know
how differ the reaction of agents rich and poor to the mains macroeconomic variables. We therefore
propose a model that simulates how a pro-poor government policy affects the optimal fiscal policy.
When γ is near to one, the government is highly favorable towards the poor. When γ is close to zero,
the government is highly favorable towards the wealthy.
        A similar study was conducted by Giavazzi and McMahon (2012) which presents a model that
contrary to the theory and other studies, low-income families tend to respond more to fluctuations
cutting consumption and working more hours following a government spending shock, for example.
This analysis suggests that the most wealthy families react more to fluctuations, although they can
smoothen their spending over time.
        Having focused on optimal tax policy, attention turns to the process of change in the compo-
sition of taxes on labor and capital. Domeij and Heathcote (2004) argue that combine different types
of taxes implies significant distributional changes, this type of combination is used in the context of
tax reform as shown abundance in the literature.
        Swarbrick (2012) show that changing the government preferences did affect fiscal policy as
shown. The government becoming more favorable towards the poor caused an increase in transfers
to these agents. This was financed mainly by taxing labor but in part by increasing taxes on capital.
Clearly, even in the case of a government very biased towards the rule-of-thumb agents, the optimal
tax rate on capital should be close to zero.6


5       Conclusions and Remarks
       This paper solves a optimal fiscal policy in a model with agent heterogeneity and inequality.
By introducing agents poor and rich, we show that the steady state optimal tax on capital in the long
run should always be zero regardless of the governments favoritism towards particular agents.
    5
     Sargent and Ljungvist (2000) point out that this model can be generalized to a finite of different classes of agents, N .
    6
     It is possible that, as the preference becomes too strong for the poor, there is political pressure to increase government
transfers financed by taxes on capital. This is a non-optimal policy and causes the model to fail.


                                                             15
        The fiscal policy has two main instruments through which affect the economy, mainly the
following macroeconomic variables: aggregate demand and the level of economic activity, savings
and investment and the distribution of income. First the government can increase or diminish they
spending in various sectors. Second the government can changes in the level and composition of
taxation. The analytical solution find in this paper suggest that in steady state the government should
be financed the transfers by different combinations of taxes on consumption and labor.
        So not all taxes should be zero at steady state. This result is usually explained by zero profit
conditions, this condition comes from the assumption of linearity in the accumulation technologies.
Note that the result of zero taxation on capital is independent of the government bias to the poor or
the rich, represented by parameter γ in our model.
       Technological shocks impact the marginal product of both agents, and consequently their re-
munerations, which changes the income gap between the agents. Therefore it can be said that tech-
nological shocks impact the income inequality in the steady state, although it can not say for sure
whether this relationship is positive or negative. For the better understanding of these relationships
becomes necessary for calibration of this model.


Bibliography
AIYAGARI, S. R. Optimal capital income taxation with incomplete markets, borrowing constraints,
and constant discounting. Journal of Political Economy, The University of Chicago Press, v. 103,
n. 6, p. 1158–1175, 1995. ISSN 00223808, 1537534X. Disponı́vel em: hhttp://www.jstor.org/stable/
2138707i.

BARRO, R. J. Inequality and growth in a panel of countries. Journal of Economic Growth, v. 5,
n. 1, p. 5–32, 2000. Disponı́vel em: hhttp://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1009850119329i.

CHAMLEY, C. Optimal taxation of capital income in general equilibrium with infinite lives. Econo-
metrica, The Econometric Society, v. 54, n. 3, p. pp. 607–622, 1986. ISSN 00129682.

CHARI LAWRENCE J. CHRISTIANO, P. J. K. V. V. Optimal fiscal policy in a business cycle model.
Journal of Political Economy, University of Chicago Press, v. 102, n. 4, p. 617–652, 1994. ISSN
00223808, 1537534X. Disponı́vel em: hhttp://www.jstor.org/stable/2138759i.

CHEN, Y. chin; TURNOVSKY, S. J. Growth and inequality in a small open economy. Journal of
Macroeconomics, v. 32, n. 2, p. 497–514, 2010. ISSN 0164-0704. Disponı́vel em: hhttp://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0164070409000901i.

DOMEIJ, D.; HEATHCOTE, J. On The Distributional Effects Of Reducing Capital Taxes. Interna-
tional Economic Review, v. 45, n. 2, p. 523–554, 05 2004. Disponı́vel em: hhttps://ideas.repec.org/
a/ier/iecrev/v45y2004i2p523-554.htmli.

FOCHEZATTO, A.; BAGOLIN, I. P. Polı́ticas fiscais e crescimento distributivo no brasil: Simulações
com um modelo aplicado de equilı́brio geral. In: Anais do XXXIV Encontro Nacional de Econo-
mia. [S.l.: s.n.], 2006.

GALI, J.; SALIDO, J. D. L.; VALLES, J. Understanding the effects of government spending on
consumption. Journal of the European Economic Association, v. 5, n. 1, p. 227–270, 2007.

GALOR, O.; ZEIRA, J. Income Distribution and Macroeconomics. Review of Economic Studies,
v. 60, n. 1, p. 35–52, January 1993.


                                                  16
GARCIA-PENALOSA, C.; TURNOVSKY, S. J. Growth, income inequality, and fiscal policy: What
are the relevant trade-offs? Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Blackwell Publishing Inc, v. 39,
n. 2-3, p. 369–394, 2007. ISSN 1538-4616.

GIAVAZZI, F.; MCMAHON, M. The Households Effects of Government Consumption. [S.l.],
2012. Disponı́vel em: hhttps://ideas.repec.org/p/nbr/nberwo/17837.htmli.

GONI, E.; LOPEZ, J. H.; SERVEN, L. Fiscal redistribution and income inequality in latin america.
World Development, v. 39, n. 9, p. 1558 – 1569, 2011. ISSN 0305-750X. Disponı́vel em: hhttp:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0305750X11000957i.

JONES, L. E.; MANUELLI, R. E.; ROSSI, P. E. On the optimal taxation of capital income. Journal
of Economic Theory, v. 73, n. 1, p. 93 – 117, 1997. ISSN 0022-0531. Disponı́vel em: hhttp://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022053196922383i.

JUDD, K. L. Redistributive taxation in a simple perfect foresight model. Journal of Public Econo-
mics, v. 1, n. 28, p. 59–83, May 1985.

KALDOR, N. Alternative theories of distribution. The Review of Economic Studies, Oxford Uni-
versity Press, v. 23, n. 2, p. 83–100, 1955. ISSN 00346527, 1467937X. Disponı́vel em: hhttp:
//www.jstor.org/stable/2296292i.

KRUSELL, P.; SMITH, J. A. A. Income and wealth heterogeneity in the macroeconomy. Journal
of Political Economy, The University of Chicago Press, v. 106, n. 5, p. pp. 867–896, 1998. ISSN
00223808. Disponı́vel em: hhttp://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/250034i.

KUZNETS, S. Economic growth and income inequality. The American Economic Review, Ame-
rican Economic Association, v. 45, n. 1, p. 1–28, 1955. ISSN 00028282. Disponı́vel em: hhttp:
//www.jstor.org/stable/1811581i.

MANKIW, N. G. The Savers-Spenders Theory of Fiscal Policy. The American Economic Review,
v. 90, n. 2, p. 120–125, May 2000.

MENDOZA, E. G.; MILESI-FERRETTI, G. M.; ASEA, P. On the ineffectiveness of tax policy in al-
tering long-run growth: Harberger’s superneutrality conjecture. Journal of Public Economics, v. 66,
n. 1, p. 99 – 126, 1997. ISSN 0047-2727. Disponı́vel em: hhttp://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S004727279700011Xi.

MOTTA, G.; TIRELLI, P. Income inequality and macroeconomic stability in a New Keynesian model
with limited asset market participation. n. 219, Jan 2012.

MUINELO-GALLO, L.; ROCA-SAGALAS, O. Joint determinants of fiscal policy, income inequality
and economic growth. Economic Modelling, v. 30, p. 814 – 824, 2013. ISSN 0264-9993. Disponı́vel
em: hhttp://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0264999312003653i.

MUINELO-GALLO, L.; ROCA-SAGALES, O. Economic Growth, Inequality and Fiscal Policies:
A survey of Macroeconomics Literature. [S.l.]: Nova Science Publishers, 2011.

OH, J. Inequalities and business cycles in dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models. Job Mar-
ket Paper, v. 3, 2013.

RAMSEY, F. P. A contribution to the theory of taxation. The Economic Journal, Wiley on behalf of
the Royal Economic Society, v. 37, n. 145, p. pp. 47–61, 1927.



                                                17
REBELO, S. Long-run policy analysis and long-run growth. Journal of Political Economy, The
University of Chicago Press, v. 99, n. 3, p. 500–521, 1991. ISSN 00223808, 1537534X. Disponı́vel
em: hhttp://www.jstor.org/stable/2937740i.

SARGENT, T. J.; LJUNGVIST, L. Macroeconomics Recursive. [S.l.]: New York University, 2000.

SHIN, I. Income inequality and economic growth. Economic Modelling, v. 29, n. 5, p. 2049–
2057, 2012. ISSN 0264-9993. Disponı́vel em: hhttp://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0264999312000466i.

STIGLITZ, J. E. Chapter 15 pareto efficient and optimal taxation and the new new welfare economics.
In: Handbook of Public Economics. [S.l.]: Elsevier, 1987, (Handbook of Public Economics, v. 2).
p. 991 – 1042.

SWARBRICK, J. Optimal Fiscal policy in a DSGE model with heterogeneous agents. Dissertação
(Master of Science in Economics) — University of Surrey School of Economics, 2012.




                                                18
