         How Judges Think in the Brazilian
                Supreme Court:
     Estimating Ideal Points and Identifying Dimensions
                       Pedro Fernando Almeida Nery Ferreira
                Departamento de Economia - Universidade de Brasília
                              pedrofnery@gmail.com
                                Bernardo Mueller
                Departamento de Economia - Universidade de Brasília
                                bmueller@unb.br
Resumo
Este trabalho usa o procedimento NOMINATE (Nominal Three-Step Estimation)
(Poole and Rosenthal, 1983, 1997) para estimar pontos ideais que representem as
preferências de todos os ministros do Supremo Tribunal Federal no Brasil de 2002 a
2012. Estas preferências estimadas são usadas para identificar a natureza das duas
principais dimensões ao longo das quais discordâncias tendem a se manifestar neste
tribunal. Estas estimativas preveem corretamente mais de 95% dos votos em casos de
revisão Constitucional (ADINs). O trabalho mostra que a principal dimensão na qual se
alinham as preferências diz respeito a questões de interesse econômico do Executivo,
refletindo a estrutura das instituições políticas no Brasil. Isto é significativamente
diferente da polarização conservador-liberal que se observa na Suprema Corte dos
Estados Unidos. Os resultados mostram que ao longo desta dimensão a Corte tem sido
claramente favorável aos interesses econômicos do Executivo, criando condições
propícias para a dramática transformação em instituições e políticas pela qual o Brasil
tem passado nas últimas duas décadas.

Abstract
We use NOMINATE (Nominal Three Step Estimation) (Poole and Rosenthal: 1983,
1997) to estimate ideal points for all Supreme Court Justices in Brazil from 2002 to
2012. Based on these estimated preferences we identify the nature of the two main
dimensions along which disagreements tend to occur in this Court. These estimates
correctly predict over 95% of the votes on constitutional review cases in each of the
compositions of the Court which we analyze. The main contribution of the paper is to
identify that the main dimension along which preferences align in the Brazilian
Supreme Court is for and against the economic interest of the Executive. This is
significantly different than the conservative-liberal polarization of the US Supreme
Court. Our estimates show that along this dimension the composition of the Court has
been clearly favorable to the Executive’s economic interests, providing the setting in
which the dramatic transformation in institutions and policies that the country has
undergone in last two decades could take place.
Palavras Chave: Supremo Tribunal; preferências; instituições políticas; direito e
economia.
Keywords: Supreme Court; ideal points; political institutions; law and economics.
JEL Codes: H5; H77; K10; K39.
ANPEC Área 6 - Crescimento, Desenvolvimento Econômico e Instituições.
         How Judges Think in the Brazilian
                Supreme Court:
 Estimating Ideal Points and Identifying Dimensions
1 Introduction
        Models of judicial decision making for the American judicial system have
established a series of stylized facts about the Supreme Court that are widely accepted
even when there are disagreements about what drives those characterizations or how
they are to be understood. It is accepted that the justices’ preferences fall within a single
conservative to liberal dimension. It is believed that this single dimension accounts for
enough of the variance in judicial voting that preferences along this dimension can be
treated as a sufficient metric of judicial ideology for the purpose of the analysis of a
series of issues related to the justices’ choices and behavior (Grofman and Brazill, 2002;
Martin and Quinn, 2002; Martin et al. 2005; Epstein et al, 2007). It is also believed,
though less consensually, that there is considerable drift of the justices’ preference over
time (Epstein, Martin, Quinn and Segal, 2007).
        Although the area of Judicial Politics in which these characterizations have
emerged has in the past decade been the stage of lively debates and great advances in
the use of statistical methods and formal theory, the focus of attention and consequently
the results has been limited almost exclusively to the US Supreme Court. Wetstein et al.
(2009) argue that ‘there is no recent scholarship that has demonstrated that a similar
unidimensional framework adequately explains the voting behavior of judges on the
high courts of other countries.’ Their analysis of the Canadian Supreme Court concludes
that although an attitudinal model based on notions of left-right ideology do explain
judicial behavior in some areas of Canadian law, this is not true across all areas, and
they warn against an ‘American fascination with simplistic notions of liberal-
conservative voting and position taking’ (Wetstein et al, 2009: 30).
        In this paper we contribute to the field of Comparative Judicial Politics by
analyzing the Brazilian Supreme Court with the use of formal theory and empirical
methods that have been developed for and applied mostly to the American judicial
system. Political institutions in general, and the judicial system in particular, are
sufficiently similar to those in the US that those methods and theory are relevant for
Brazil, yet there are sufficient differences to make the exercise interesting and insightful
both for the testing the robustness of the theory and methods as well as for gaining a
better understanding of the Brazilian institutions. Like the US, Brazil is a presidential
system where the Executive faces a similar division of power with a Congress and a
Judiciary, with rules set by a Constitution. The judicial system is composed of several
higher federal courts and a series of lower state courts, with the Supreme Court as the
final word on constitutional issues. The Supreme Court is composed of 11 justices, who
are appointed by the President and subject to approval by a committee of the Senate.
The decisions made in the Supreme Court frequently have high profiles, are closely
followed by the press and society, and have great impacts on the nation`s destiny.
Despite all these similarities with the judicial system in the US and many other
countries there are also several particularities and idiosyncrasies specific to Brazil. It is
these simultaneous similarities and peculiarities that make it interesting to apply to the
Brazilian context the methods of the Judicial Politics literature.
        There is already a large literature on the judicialization of politics in Brazil,
which examines the political involvement of courts and explores how judges make

                                                                                           1
decisions and affect policy outcomes (Carvalho, 2009; Vianna, Burgos and Salles,
2007; Castro, 1997; among others.) Yet, as Kapiszewski and Taylor (2008: 752), argue
in a review of the burgeoning Latin American literature on the study of the court as a
political actor, ‘few pieces make effective use of the many excellent research tools that
are available to carry out qualitative causal analysis, or the equally useful set of
quantitative analytical techniques.’ Exceptions for the case of Brazil are Leoni and
Ramos (2006) and Lannes, Desposato and Ingram (2012) both of which use spatial
methods to estimate the ideal points of Supreme Court judges. That both of these papers
are still unpublished is evidence of the novelty of applying these methods to the
Brazilian Supreme Court.
         In this paper we use a database of 756 Direct Actions of Unconstitutionality
(ADI) judged by the Brazilian Supreme Court (STF) from 2002 to 2012 to analyze the
judicial behavior of this court’s justices. ADIs can be initiated by a relatively broad list
of actors (the President, the Attorney General, Governors, the speakers of the House and
the Senate, political parties, the Bar Association, other professional organizations and
unions) to strike down federal or state laws or other normative acts for not abiding to
the Constitution. Thus ADIs are judged directly by the STF rather than having been
initiated in other instances of the judiciary. In an ADI the STF directly exerts its role as
a constitutional court. The interest in this type of case arises because to the important
implications that emerge from an ADI: the decision in this type of case can overturn a
law produced by the Executive or by the Legislature, at both the federal and the state
levels. Consequently, contrary to other types of cases where the judicial decision affects
only the parties to the process, a decision made in an ADI extend to all of society. 1 A
wide range of actors can be involved in any given ADI case, such as the Attorney
General and the Union’s General Advocate (both of which must participate in every
case) as well as amicae curiae, which makes for richer analytical possibilities. Also,
monocratic decisions or decisions taken by sub-sets of the court - a possibility in other
types of cases -, are not allowed for ADIs, making them more readily comparable
statistically. Finally, an ADI has many of the characteristics of other types of cases
considered by the Supreme Court, thus explaining their popularity in the empirical
literature about the STF as well as their use exclusively in this paper without much loss
in generality.
         The technique used in this paper to estimate the Supreme Court Justices’ ideal
points is the NOMINATE (nominal three-step estimation). This method was created by
political scientists Keith Poole and Howard Rosenthal (Poole and Rosenthal: 1983,
1997) and uses multidimensional scaling to spatially project preferences using binary
votes as inputs. The method was originally conceived to study voting behavior in
legislatures, a use for which it is already well-established with the ideal point scores
widely used by analysts and even the press.2 3

1
  This is because the Brazilian judicial system is statutory rather than common law, so that in regular
cases past decisions do not necessarily constrain future decisions.
2
  For a primer on the NOMINATE method see Everson, Valelly and Wisman (2009). For a primer on the
use of a software package for calculating NOMINATE scores in R, see Poole, Lewis, Lo and Carroll
(2011). For a recent manual see Lo (2012) ‘Using W-NOMINATE in R’ available at
http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/wnominate/vignettes/wnominate.pdf
3
  Because the Supreme Court is a much smaller group than Legislatures, for which this technique has
been more frequently applied, there may be statistical issues known as ‘micro-committee problems’ in
extending the analysis to courts. New techniques which may be better suited to courts have been devised,
such as the Martin and Quinn scores employing Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods to fit
Bayesian measurement models of judicial preferences (Martin and Quinn, 2002; Bailey, 2007). We intend
to compare the NOMINATE results to those of other methods for Brazilian data in future work.

                                                                                                      2
        The first major output from the paper is the ideal point estimates for all Supreme
Court Justices from 2002 to 2012. Because Brazilian justices face mandatory retirement
at age 70 there is a quicker turnover of the Court`s composition than in the US.
Consequently we estimate ideal points for nine different compositions of the Court over
this period. The list of periods and the composition of the court in each period are
shown in Appendix 1. For each period we provide an ideal point for each justice along
two dimensions, which can be conveniently presented in a unitary circle. We are also
able to estimate ideal points for the Attorney General and for the Union`s General
Advocate, as they must give their position on every ADI. The former acts as a custodian
of the law, while the latter is in charge of representing the Executive in the Supreme
Court. This characteristic of the Brazilian Supreme Court allows us to more rigorously
make inferences of the STF’s position relative to the Executive and the Legislature (or
at least the Law) and may eventually be useful for analysis of strategic behavior. As a
means to test the goodness of fit of the estimated ideal points they are used to ‘predict’
the actual votes in each period. The accuracy varies from one period to the next, but
more than 90% of the votes are always correctly ‘predicted’, indicating that the ideal
point we estimate are a good measure to locate the justices’ policy preferences.
        Perhaps the major analytical contribution of this paper is the identification of the
dimensions along which preferences align in the Brazilian Supreme Court.4 For the US
it is well established that preferences in the Supreme Court, as in Congress, can be well
portrayed as aligning along a single conservative to liberal dimension. This reflects the
polarization of American politics that is present in all its political institutions, from
electoral rules to political parties to the working of Congress, pervading even the
judiciary. Given that Brazil has a more proportional than majoritarian system a similar
polarization exists but is more nuanced and fragmented. These characteristics are
reflected in our results, as we found that including a second dimension provided useful
information. Contrary to the US, neither of the dimensions can be depicted as capturing
a left to right or a liberal to conservative alignment of preferences. Our analysis
indicates instead that the first and most important dimension captures disagreements
between the Justices over laws that are in the Executive’s direct interest, especially
when related to economic issues. As the data covers a period in which Brazil underwent
a highly transformative process of institutional strengthening and economic reform
(Alston et al. 2012), in which the Court played an active role as a political actor, it is an
important finding that this dimension has been the major guiding principle. Similarly,
given that the estimated ideal points on this dimension capture the Justices’ preferences
on federal economic policy they can be used by other researchers to conduct analyses or
test hypotheses where the Supreme Court Justices’ preferences are relevant.
        On the second dimension we identified preferences relating to the role of the
States of the federation and their autonomy to create laws and establish policies. Scree
plots of each period indicated that though the second dimension explains significantly
less of the variance than does the first dimension, it nevertheless has enough
explanatory power to compensate for the loss of parsimony entailed in using two rather
than one dimension (the scree plots for all nine periods are presented in Appendix 2).
The third dimension, on the other hand, provides insufficient marginal explanatory
power to warrant its consideration.


4
 The statistical program yields the ideal points but does not provide any information on what is the
content of each dimension. Identifying what overarching issues or characteristics explain each dimension
must be inferred by the research by comparing the estimated ideal points to specific salient votes and/or
voters. Identifying dimensions is thus, in part, an art.

                                                                                                        3
        After estimating the ideal point and identifying the dimensions we provide four
different applications using these measures to analyze the working and different
characteristics of the Brazilian Supreme Court. These applications serve both to show
the range of possibilities of these methods for studying Judicial Politics in Brazil and
other countries besides the US, as well as providing insights related to the functioning
of political institutions in Brazil. The first application is to identify the Court’s median
Justice in each of the periods. Recognizing which Justice is the median voter is key for
understanding the courts decisions’, as under some fairly general conditions the median
Justice’s policy choice will also be the choice of the Court majority. Yet, as Martin,
Quinn and Epstein (2005: 1279) argue, it is not always obvious how to locate and
identify the Court’s median. As we consider two dimensions it is possible for the
median to be a different justice in each dimension. In most periods however the median
in one dimension coincided with that in the other. Another interesting result we find is
that the median Justice in most periods is the Justice that has most recently joined the
Court. This ‘rookie effect’ suggests that the President has been able to closely influence
the Court`s decisions in our sample period. The second application also centers on the
notion of a median Justice. We use the estimated ideal points to consider the
possibilities for the current President (Rousseff) to remake the Court in the next years,
considering the fact that several Justices will be forcefully retired (70 years of age) in
the next two years. This follows the exercise performed in Martin, Quinn and Epstein
(2005) that used estimated Supreme Court Justices’ ideal points to assess the
conventional view that existed at the time (2005), that President George W. Bush would
be able to remake the Court.
        The third application is to consider what the estimated ideal points imply about
the validity of three different theories of judicial behavior; attitudinal, legal and
strategic. The main conclusion is that though different aspects of each of these theories
are confirmed, other are not, and in the end we are unable to refute any of the
explanations in favor of another.
        The final application is a look at some important individual cases using the
estimated ideal points. The NOMINATE method not only locates each Justice, the
Attorney General and the Executive’s Advocate in a unitary circle composed of two
dimensions, but it also situates for each individual case a dividing line that represents
the estimation of how these actors broke down in favor or against in that case. These
diagrams make visually explicit the degree to which the ideal points explain the votes in
each case and also show where it gets the votes wrong. One purpose of this application
is to show how this method can be used by researchers to gain insights in specific
seminal cases. One set of the cases we analyze is composed of the votes in the recent
high-profile Mensalão scandal, where high level officials and politicians were tried and
some condemned for a vote-buying scheme that was busted in 2005. The importance of
this case lies in the fact that the Brazilian judiciary has historically been loath to punish
the rich and powerful, opting instead for an excessive concern in guaranteeing
fundamental rights and due process, which the accused have often been able to
manipulate in their favor, leading to frequent impunity. The Mensalão trial broke all
expectations by harshly condemning powerful and well-connected politicians and will
probably become a watershed in the Supreme Court’s history. It thus warrants a close
examination of the votes using our ideal point estimates.

2 Estimation of Brazilian Supreme Court Justices’ Ideal Points
2.1 - ADIs – Direct Actions of Unconstitutionality


                                                                                           4
        The Direct Actions of Unconstitutionality (ADIs) are the main instrument of
judicial review in the Brazilian judicial system. In these actions, the Brazilian Supreme
Court decides over the constitutionality of laws or norms, with respect to the
Constitution. An action can be approved or rejected: if approved, the norm is declared
unconstitutional. An ADI cannot be decided individually by only one Justice, but by all
of them together. A norm will be considered unconstitutional when at least six of the
eleven Justices vote for it.
        A broad range of actors can file an ADI. The Court cannot act ex-officio, so the
claim of unconstitutionality must be brought by one of these actors. The list includes the
President, the Attorney General, State Governors, the Executive Committees of the
House or the Senate, political parties, the Bar Association, union confederations and
national associations or class entities. Federal and state norms or laws can be reviewed,
from any of the three branches: Executive, Legislative and Judicial. Therefore, a wide
range of interests can be involved in an ADI.
        According to the Constitution, every ADI must have the participation of the
Attorney General and the Advocate General of the Union (the Brazilian equivalent of
the Solicitor General of the United States). The Attorney General (known as ‘PGR’)
officiates as custos legis and issues an opinion, agreeing or disagreeing with the action.
The Court may or may not follow this opinion. On the other hand, the Advocate General
of the Union (known as ‘AGU’) should always ‘defend’ the law in question, arguing for
the rejection of the action, even if this law is a state law. However, this compulsory role
of the Advocate General has actually been abandoned in recent years and the Advocate
General frequently argues favorably to the approval of the action and the
unconstitutionality of the law. We interpret that because of this discretionary behavior
of the Advocate General of the Union, he represents the interests of the federal
government in the ADIs. Both the Attorney General (PGR) and the Advocate General
of the Union (AGU) are appointed by the President. The difference is that while the
Advocate General is an unconstrained choice of the President, who can nominate or
replace the Advocate at will, the Attorney General must be confirmed by the Senate and
has a fixed term. Since the Attorney General and the Advocate General of the Union
participate of every case, ideal points of these actors were also estimated, creating
useful points of reference to understand the Justices’ estimated ideal points.

2.2 Data
        We use a database of 756 Direct Actions of Unconstitutionality (ADI) judged by
the Brazilian Supreme Court (STF) from June 2002 to March 2012. This sample
includes only final decisions (injunctions decisions were not considered) and decisions
where the unconstitutional claim was actually analyzed (decisions regarding only
procedure law were not considered). Data was mainly compiled from information about
the actions available online on the Court’s webpage, and also from the STF’s archive.
        For the Justices’ votes, we use the database created by Jaloretto and Mueller
(2011), ranging from 2003 to October 2009. For the most recent years, votes were
directly compiled from the published decisions. We also compiled data whether the
Attorney General and the Advocate General of the Union agreed or disagreed with the
unconstitutionality claim made in the action.
        Votes for the rejection of the action (law considered constitutional) were coded
‘0’ and votes for the approval of the action (law considered unconstitutional) were
coded ‘1’. Votes for the ‘partial’ approval of the action were also coded ‘1’: since our
focus here is on the dissents, this seems an appropriate choice.


                                                                                         5
         In the period we analyzed (2002-2012), twenty one Justices appointed by eight
Presidents were part of the STF, as listed in Table 1. 5 Since Brazil has a multi-party
system, a brief summary may be useful. The current ruling coalition, led by Lula and
Rousseff’s Workers’ Party (PT) governs the country since January 2003 and appointed
half of the Justices in the Table. Before that, from 1995 to 2002, the country was
governed by President Cardoso, from the Social Democracy Party (PSDB), nowadays
the main opposition party and PT’s strongest adversary. Sarney and Collor suffered
strong criticism from the Workers’ Party when in office, but are currently important
political allies in the government’s coalition. Franco was Collor’s Vice President and
had a short term after Collor’s impeachment. Finally, Geisel and Figueiredo were the
last Presidents of the Brazilian right-wing military dictatorship (1964-1985).
                                            [Table 1 here]
2.3 Results
         Due to space limitations we present only the results for the 7 th, 8th and 9th period
in this section. These period span from 10/23/2009 to 03/02/2011, 03/03/2011 to
12/18/2011, and 12/19/2011 to 03/08/2012. These periods were lumped into a single
analytical unit because they encompass the end of President Lula`s second term and the
first term of President Rousseff. The period thus includes the last appointment by Lula
(Toffoli ) and the first two appointments by Rousseff (Fux and Weber). The results for
the other periods – 1st to 6th – are presented in Appendix 3.
         Figure 1 presents the estimated ideal points for each Supreme Court Justice
along two dimensions using the W-NOMINATE statistical package for R.6 The
numerical value for each Justice in the unit circle in Figure 1 is shown in Table 1. The
method requires that researcher tell the program the name of a conservative Justice in
order to orient the results in the intuitive right-left direction. In this case the chosen
conservative Justice was Gilmar Mendes, which is a rather uncontroversial choice. Each
Justice is given a data label that indicates the President who appointed him/her, with the
Presidents listed on the top right-hand corner. Table 2 shows the number of votes in the
period and indicates how many are correctly predicted using the estimated spatial model
and how many are incorrectly predicted. 7 An incorrect prediction takes place when there
is no way to draw a straight cutline that divides those who voted in favor of a
proposition from those who voted against.
                                        [Figure 1 here]
                                        [Table 2 here]
                                        [Table 3 here]
         Figure 2 shows the example of ADI 4568 that contested the constitutionality of
Law 12382/2011 that determined new rules for readjusting the minimum wage. The
Executive had introduced a new methodology to provide real gains to the minimum
wage as part of its social inclusion policy. At issue was not the methodology itself, but
rather the fact that the law removed Congress from the yearly procedure of readjusting
the minimum wage. Two Justices voted for the ADI – Aurélio and Britto – but it was
struck down by the majority of the Court. In this case it was possible to correctly
separate those who voted in favor and those against with a straight cutline. But if, for
example, Lewandowski had also voted in favor, then there would be one incorrectly
predicted vote.

5 There’s a mandatory retirement for the STF’s Justices at the age of 70, which explains the high number
of appointments.
6
  Poole et al (2011) is a good reference for the use of this software.
7
  We use only the non-unanimous roll-calls, but because the AGU (Executive`s Advocate) and the PGR
(Attorney General) the number of unanimous decisions is greatly reduced.

                                                                                                       6
                                          [Figure 2 here]
        The estimated ideal points exhibit a recurring pattern that is also present in the
previous periods (see Appendix 3). On the first dimension the AGU (Executive`s
Advocate) and the PGR (Attorney General) are located at one extreme with the Justices
at the other extreme of the graph. Also, Aurélio is almost always the most extreme
Justice in both dimensions. Another regularity is that there is more variation among the
Justices along the second dimension than there is along the first. Finally, a recurring
result is that the newest members of the Court tend to always hold more central ideal
points along both dimensions, possibly migrating to more extreme positions as they
gather more experience. This ‘rookie effect’ and other interpretations of these basic
results will be explored in the following sections.

3 Identifying Preference Dimensions
        This section describes our major contribution, which is to identify the nature of
the two dimensions along which disagreements take place in the Brazilian Supreme
Court. The first and most important dimension captures disagreements between the
Justices over laws that deal with economic policies promoted by the Executive. The
second dimension involves positions related to the role of the States of the federation
and their autonomy to create laws and establish policies. There is no technical way to
identify the content of each dimension, rather they must be inferred by confronting the
themes and details of each vote with the estimated ideal points and the estimated
location of the law in the graphs. Here we describe how we reached the conclusion
about the content of each dimension.
        In order to understand which kind of dissent the Justices have, it is necessary to
understand the nature of the two dimensions. The analysis of the published decisions of
the cases that created such divisions allowed us to understand the nature of the two
dimensions. In two kinds of cases the Justices were divided in where they showed up in
the two-dimensional graphs.
        In a group of cases that reveals the first dimension the AGU (Advocate General)
takes falls on one extreme followed closely by the PGR (Attorney General), while the
Justices take the other extreme, with some variation between them. In another group of
cases that reveals the second dimension the Justices Mello, Britto and Aurélio, together
with the AGU, voted in the opposite direction of the rest of the Court (and the PGR). As
we pointed out, the first dimension is related to dissents regarding federal acts,
especially when there is a relevant economic interest. The second dimension is related
to dissents regarding state laws and policies, and expresses different views on states’
autonomy and the role that the states should have in the Brazilian federation. The same
division into these two groups of cases was observed in other periods, presented in
Appendix 3.
        The voters closest to the right side of the graph tended to approve cases related
to federal laws with important economic interests and a potential loss for the federal
government in case of declaration of unconstitutionality. On the other hand, those
closest to the left side of the graph tended to reject those cases (voting for the
constitutionality of the act).
        Some specific ADIs can be provided as examples of this interpretation. Figure 2
shows the estimated ideal points for the court together with the estimated position of the
law, which in this case is the new law for the minimum wage (ADI 4568 of 2011). The
level of the minimum wage is of crucial importance for maintaining federal fiscal
balance given its impact on social security. Justices Aurélio and Britto voted for
approval of the action, against all the other voters. Other examples of important ADIs

                                                                                        7
discussed in this period are the ones contrary to the “second social security reform”
(rejected, against the votes of Mello, Britto and Aurélio), the creation of the new federal
environmental protection agency (approved, against the ‘votes’ of the AGU, the PGR
and Lewandowski – who have points closer to the left), the new basic education policy
(rejected, against the votes of Peluso, Mendes, Gracie, Lúcia and Aurélo – who have
points closer to the right).8 These divisions can easily be seen in the first dimension of
the graph.
        Justice Aurélio is an extreme point on the right side of the first dimension, in this
and in the other periods. He was frequently alone publicly criticizing acts and voting for
the approval of actions: if his understanding was followed by the majority of the Court,
the federal Executive would suffer important consequences. Some examples in this
period include actions regarding the omission of the federal government on providing
good education, the creation of state minimum wages and a tax reform by the Lula
government9. These actions were rejected, with Aurélio being the only vote in favor of
their approval.
        On the extreme opposite of Aurélio in this dimension is the AGU (Advocate
General). His position is frequently isolated, with the PGR (Attorney General),
defending the acts in question and arguing for the rejection of the ADI. Against the
opinions of these actors, the Supreme Court unanimously approved in this period
actions such as one regarding the distribution of federal taxes revenues to the states and
one regarding a large workers’ fund managed by the government.10
        Again, the relative isolation of Aurélio on one side and the AGU and the PGR
on the other side can be easily seen in the graph, confirming our interpretation that the
first dimension is related to the interests of the federal government. 11
        We proceeded in the same manner to understand the second dimension. For this
dimension, the votes of interest are the ones that divided the voters with the lowest
coordinates (Aurélio, Britto, Mello – besides the AGU) and the voters with higher
coordinates (the others). Justices Aurélio, Britto and Mello voted against the rest of the
Court in this period in ADIs regarding the unconstitutionality of state laws. In these
cases, the majority of the STF approved the actions (law considered unconstitutional),
while they defended the rejection of the ADI and the constitutionality of the act. There
were two main types of cases regarding the autonomy of the states in this and other
periods: those which examined if a state was legislating in an area that is exclusively
federal and those that examined if the organization of the states’ governments was
different from the organization prescribed by the 1988 Constitution. In both cases, the
approval of an action transfers relative power from the state level to the federal level.
        Hence, the lower a point in the graph, the stronger is the preference of that voter
for more autonomy for the states. It was fairly common during the last decade for the
Justices seen near the bottom of the graph to publicly express, in the decisions, their
views favorable to a larger role for the states in the federation.
        Once again, our interpretation that the second dimension refers to the autonomy
of the states can be confirmed with some examples. Some important ADIs in the period
regarding this dimension were the ones analyzing if the state of São Paulo could oversee

8 Respectively these are the ADIs 3138, 4029 and 4167.
9 ADIs 1698, 4432 and 4033.
10 ADIs 442 and 2736
11 An important caveat when comparing the ideal points of the AGU and the PGR with those of
the Justices is that the former do not really vote on the cases: they issue opinions before the
Justices decide. In the judgments, the Justices might bring up new issues, not exactly addressed
by the AGU and PGR in their opinions.
                                                                                                   8
nuclear activities (approved, against the votes of Mello, Britto, Aurélio and the AGU) or
if the state of Rio de Janeiro could pass a consumer protection law regarding energy
consumption (approved, against the vote of Aurélio). 12 In both cases, the Court
considered that only federal acts could treat these subjects. The divisions occurred in
these judgements can be seen in the graph, along the second dimension.
        Therefore, the graph estimated for this period by NOMINATE presents on the
right side those who did not defend federal acts, with the first dimension reflecting
differences in votes when the economic interests of the federal government are in
question, and towards the bottom of the graph those who defended state acts, with the
second dimension reflecting the issue of the autonomy of the states. The estimated
coordinates should be analyzed with these references in mind. Justices Aurélio and
Britto, for example, had the most extreme coordinates in right and below, voting
frequently for the approval of the ADIs against laws of interest of the federal Executive,
and for the rejection of the ADIs against state laws. These two different kinds of ADI
were also the determinants of the estimated coordinates in the other periods. Contrary to
the US, neither of the dimensions can be depicted as capturing a left to right or a liberal
to conservative alignment of preferences.
        In Appendix 2, the scree plot for this graph is shown in Figure A6. The decay of
the eigenvalues after the second dimensions confirms that two dimensions describe well
the behavior of the Court in the period. The first dimension, though, explains
significantly more of the variance than does the second dimension. The third dimension,
on the other hand, provides insufficient marginal explanatory power to warrant its
consideration. Scree plots for other periods are also presented in Appendix 2.
4 Applications Using Estimated Ideal Points
4.1 - Identifying the Median Justice and the ‘rookie effect’
        A spatial model allows for the identification of the median Justice, that is, the
most influential vote in the court. With the estimated coordinates, it is possible to
identify who is this Justice in each dimension and how the median ‘shifts’ with every
new configuration of the Court, as retiring Justices are replaced with new appointments.
In this section, we also analyze the result that the most recently appointed Justice tends
to be the median voter, which we call the ‘rookie effect.’
        The estimated coordinates shown in Table 4 reveal that Justice Mendes has the
median coordinates in both dimensions in the 7th, 8th and 9th period. It is noteworthy
that the median in one dimension need not to be the median in the other. Table 4 ranks
the Justices according to the percentage of ‘winning votes’ in the dissents of the period.
If the median is indeed the most decisive Justice, it is expected that he has a higher
percentage of winning votes, when compared to the other Justices – something that
indeed happened to some extent in this period and that occurred in other periods as well.
The Table shows Mendes as the winner in 96% of the dissents. In this period, Mendes is
not exactly the Justice with the larger percentage of winning votes, as was the case with
the median of the other periods, but this high percentage of winning votes is consistent
with the estimate Mendes as the median voter.
        It is noteworthy that the distance between Mendes ideal point and the points of
the other Justices is not related to the fact that we picked him as the conservative
Justice. The fact that Mendes was the median and had an ideal point near the center in
every other period may be counterintuitive for most observers of the Supreme Court,
but the ideal points estimate depends on the pattern of his votes in comparison with the
other Justices’ votes. The only consequence of our choice is that he always had positive

12 ADIs 1575 and 3905.
                                                                                         9
estimated coordinates (0 to 1) in the first dimension (placing him on the right side of the
graph), with the points of the other Justices being estimated from this referential.
        Even though only a few cases created dissent where the majority of the Court
was formed by only six Justices, in all periods it was possible to visualize a median
Justice, the one that belongs to the majority more often. There was actually a well
defined pattern, which we call the ‘rookie effect’: in a given period the median was, in
general, a Justice recently appointed to the Court, whose term started in the immediate
preceeding period. Hence, it seems that the Presidential appointments of the last decade
seem to have impacted the Court. The estimated median of the 2th period was Mendes
(who entered the Court in the 1th period), the median of the 3th was Peluso (who
entered in the 2th), the median of the 4th and 5th was Grau (who entered in the 3th), and
the medians of the 6th were Lúcia and Lewandowski (who entered in the 4th and 5th) 13.
Table 4 confirms that these Justices had a high percentage of winning votes (or even the
highest).
        Two possible explanations for the rookie effect are coherent with judicial
behavior models. One, coherent with the attitudinal model, is that the new Justice
actually comes to the Court to have a decisive participation, affecting the decisions in a
favorable way to the President who appointed him. The other explanation, coherent with
the strategic model, is that the new Justices seek the approval of their peers, avoiding
dissent and, as a consequence, being part of the majority more often.
        Even if this pattern of median voter estimates is purely coincidental, it is still
noteworthy that new Justices rarely have extreme points in the graph, given the low
level of dissent.

4.2 Can Dilma Rousseff ‘Remake’ the Court?
        The results presented above shed light on what to expect from the Supreme
Court’s composition in the coming years and on the possibilities for President Rousseff
to ‘remake’ the court. In her first two years in office, Rousseff had the opportunity of
appointing three Justices to the Court (Fux, Weber and Zavascki) and may appoint two
other Justices soon, with the mandatory retirement of Justice Britto and the expected
retirement of Justice Mello. We follow the exercise in Martin, Quinn and Epstein (2004)
to analyze the impact of these retirements on Rousseff’s ability to change the Court’s
median voter.
        Considering the median voter the most influential Justice of the Court, how
could new appointments made by Rousseff affect the Court’s decision? Martin, Quinn
and Epstein (2004) analyzed how the next President of the United States to be elected in
that year (George W. Bush or John Kerry) could use new appointments so that the
median Justice would be a Justice with preferences more closely in line with those of
his party, since the Court was rigorously divided between liberals and conservatives and
the median voter, Justice O’Connor, was about to retire. A similar analysis can be done
for the Brazilian Supreme Court, despite the fact that the results presented have shown
that such polarization between Justices appointed by Presidents from the different
parties do not exist in the STF.
        The graph estimated with the most recent data (Figure 1), referring to the 7th,
8th and 9th periods, does not show a divided court, as in Martin, Quinn and Epstein, but
rather a relatively cohesive group of eight Justices and a more isolated group of three

13
  This pattern could not be repeated in the 7th, 8th and 9th period because the Justice appointed in the
previous period (Direito) passed away a couple of years later and was no longer in the Court when the
votes of this period took place.


                                                                                                     10
Justices that dissent frequently in both dimensions. The same pattern was observed in
other periods: Justices Mello, Aurélio and Britto are part of the smaller group, voting
with more intensity against the interests of the federal Executive and favorably to the
autonomy of the states. The Justice estimated as the median voter was never a part of
the small group.
        An important difference between our analysis and the one made by Martin,
Quinn and Epstein is that there is a quicker turnover of the Brazilian Supreme Court’s
composition than in the US, given mandatory retirement. For example, the recently
appointed Justice Teori Zavascki will face the mandatory retirement only five years
after the beginning of his term. Martin, Quinn and Epstein (2005: 1315) believed, when
analyzing John Kerry’s possibilities regarding the median Justice, in a ‘near-historic
position to move the Court (…) in a direction that favors his vision of public policy’. In
Brazil, former President Lula alone appointed eight Justices when in office. That fact is
even more remarkable if we remember that Lula was the first President elected by the
Workers’s Party: before him, no Justice was ever appointed by his party or any other
close ally.
        Even though we do not observe in the Brazilian Supreme Court the polarization
that exists in its American counterpart and despite the fact that appointments for the
Court are more frequent, it is still interesting to study Rousseff’s possibilities of
remaking the STF. Rousseff has already replaced three Justices of the larger group:
Grau for Fux, Gracie for Rosa Weber and Peluso for Teori Zavascki. The most
interesting possibilities, though, reside in the future substitutions of Britto and Mello.
These Justices belong to the smaller group, the one inclined to invalidate the
Executive’s acts and to give a larger role for the States in the federation. Assuming that
Justices Fux, Weber and Zavascki have preferences similar to those of their
predecessors (Fux in fact had an ideal point close to the center of the graph), the
substitution of Justices Britto and Mello for new Justices more inclined to belong to the
larger group could change the Court’s dynamics in important ways.
        Britto and Mello’s retirements could isolate even more Justice Aurélio, in both
dimensions. As a consequence, the Supreme Court would be even more favorable to the
interests of the federal government and even less favorable to a larger autonomy of the
subnational entities. This translates into a stronger federal Executive for Rousseff in
both dimensions.
        In both dimensions, important issues currently appear in the federal legislative
debate. As the country’s growth slows down, there are frequent requests for the
continuity of the economic reforms agenda, which relates to the first dimension.
Congress is also debating a ‘new federative pact’, regarding the distribution of oil and
federal taxes revenues to the states, among other subjects that relate to the second
dimension. The results of these agendas could be brought to judicial review in the
Supreme Court, ‘remade’ by Rousseff.
        If Rousseff’s new appointments indeed isolate Aurélio, estimated graphs of
future periods would possibly present new dimensions. Since NOMINATE is based on
dissent and Justices Mello and Britto often diverged from the rest of the Court. New
types of dissent could emerge and gather importance as the issues that created the old
dissents become more consensual.
        We propose a simple exercise in order to understand the possibilities and
limitations that Rousseff has of shifting the median voter, following the approach of
Martin, Quinn and Epstein (2005). The first line of Figure 3 places the Justices
according to the last estimated coordinates in the first dimension, that is, the
configuration of the Court in this dimension after Justice Fux was appointed. We

                                                                                       11
indicate the median, Mendes, with a vertical black line. How could Rousseff get a more
favorable median with her next appointments?
                                       [Figure 3 here]
        Keeping in mind that the first dimension relates to the interests of the federal
Executive – especially in the economic area - Rousseff would prefer a median less
inclined to overturn these acts. Hence, it is of her interest that the new median is located
to the left to the current median (Mendes).
        With Gracie’s exit and the appointment of Weber, Rousseff had an opportunity
of shifting the median voter. Since Gracie was to the right of Mendes, the President
would have a more favorable median voter if Weber was placed anywhere in the
colored area, to the left of the previous median. As an example, assume that Weber
joined the Court between Barbosa and Peluso in this dimension, as indicated in the
second line of the Figure. That would make Peluso the median Justice, a median located
slightly more to the left in this dimension, which would be in Rousseff’s interest.
        Continuing with the exercise, the President had another opportunity with
Peluso’s retirement and the appointment of Zavascki. As before, to have a favorable
median, her interest is that Zavascki occupies any spot to the left of the previous median
(Peluso). Assuming Zavascki is placed, in the third line, between Barbosa and Weber,
the median Justice would be Weber.
        The exercise follows in the same manner for the following appointments. With
the retirement of Britto (who was to right of the median), Rousseff will appoint a new
Justice, yet without a name, and it is of her interest that he occupies any point to the left
of the previous median. Assuming, in the fourth line, that he occupies a point between
Toffoli and Fux, the median would shift from Weber to Zavascki. Not only would
Rousseff have a median appointed by her, but the surrounding Justices would also have
been her appointments, and the Justices on the right would be more isolated.
        With the expected exit of Mello, Rousseff would have before the end of her term
another opportunity of substituting someone more located to the right. As previously, it
is of her interest that the new Justice be located to the left of the median Zavascki (or
even Weber). In this fictitious example, in the fifth line, this Justice joins the Court
between Zavascki and Weber, and Zavascki would remain as the median. In our
exercise, Rousseff would have shifted the median voter and isolated Justices less
favorable to the interests of the federal government.
        The purpose of this exercise was only to analyze the President’s possibilities and
limitations. The examples in each line were chosen for this reason and were obviously
arbitrary. The final result would be similar if every new Justice occupied another point
on the colored area. Also, nothing precludes a new Justice from joining the Court
already as the median.
        Some caveats must be made. The exercise assumed that the points in this first
dimensions would be relatively stable as in Figure 3 we chose to present fixed ideal
points for the ‘old’ Justices. Another assumption behind the exercise is that Rousseff
has perfect information about her appointees and can anticipate their behavior when in
Court. Finally, the same comments made previously about the method have to be taken
into consideration in particular the fact that not all of the distances in the dimension are
due to dissents in votes regarding economic interests of the federal governments.
4.3 Analyzing Specific Cases with NOMINATE – The Mensalão Case
        Although the Direct Actions of Unconstitutionality (ADIs) are a frequent and
important type of case judged by the Supreme Court, they are not the only one. For
others types of cases, the Justices’ ideal points could have a different dispersion pattern,
since different types of cases can be related to different areas of law, with new patterns

                                                                                          12
of dissent. Indeed, the Court’s most notorious case, the Mensalão scandal, was a
criminal case, an unusual type of case for the STF.
        The Mensalão scandal was a vote-buying scheme busted in 2005. The ruling
Workers’s Party (PT) was accused of using public funds to buy political support for The
Lula government in Congress. Payments were made on a monthly basis, hence the name
mensalão (‘big monthly payment’ in Portuguese). The party’s most important
politicians were involved in the scheme, including Lula’s Chief of Staff, considered the
mastermind behind the scheme, the Speaker of the House, and the party’s Chairman.
Dozens of politicians from allied parties, businessmen and bankers were charged with
corruption, embezzlement, conspiracy, money laundering and other crimes. The trial,
broadcasted live on TV, took place during the last four months of 2012 drawing
unprecedented attention from society and media, that labeled it ‘the trial of the century’.
Against general expectations, given a tradition of impunity in Brazil, the most powerful
defendants were sentenced several years in jail. This happened despite the fact that Lula
and Rousseff had appointed eight of the eleven Justices of the Supreme Court. This
result was considered a watershed in the Supreme Court’s history, since the Brazilian
judiciary has historically been loath to punish the rich and powerful.
        Although there was no constitutional controversy in the case, the Supreme Court
still had to judge it because, according to the Constitution, National Congress members
can only be judged by the Court. Unlike the judicial review actions, in the Mensalão
case the Supreme Court judged a criminal case in the same way lower courts do, with
the important difference that the defendants were high profile politicians. Criminal cases
like this are not judged often by the Supreme Court, but get a lot of attention due to the
defendants’ status.
        We again estimated ideal points for the Supreme Court Justices, this time
applying NOMINATE to the Mensalão data. This was possible because there was a
large number of separate votes in this single trial: 38 defendants were accused of seven
different crimes. The sample we used has 113 votes: in each vote the Justices decided
for the conviction (coded ‘1’) or acquittal (coded ‘0’) of each defendant for each crime
he was being accused.
        Figure 4 presents the estimated ideal points for each Justice along two
dimensions. Table 5 presents the numerical value for each Justice in the unit circle and
Table 6 has additional information. An ideal point was also estimated for the Attorney
General (PGR), but not for the Advocate General (AGU). Unlike an ADI, the Advocate
General does not participate in criminal cases. The Attorney General, however, acts like
prosecutor. The Court’s composition is slightly different than before: Justice Gracie
retired and Weber was appointed by President Rousseff for her place, and because of
mandatory retirement Justice Peluso left the Court during the trial. Therefore, there are
only ten estimated Justices’ ideal points (and hence no median voter). Justice Mendes
was again considered the conservative Justice.
                                       [Figure 4 here]
                                       [Table 5 here]
                                       [Table 6 here]
        The estimates are significantly different from the ADIs’ estimates. The first
dimension is clearly related to votes more or less favorable to the defendants: the
extreme point at the right side of the graph is the ideal point of the PGR (Attorney
General), who called for condemnation of 36 defendants. The nearest Justice is Barbosa,
the case’s rapporteur (Justice randomly designated to direct the proceedings and write
an initial report) and the furthermost Justice is Lewandowski, the case’s ‘revisor’
(Justice designated to oversee the rapporteur’s report). This result is not surprising at

                                                                                        13
all: Barbosa and Lewandowksi had notorious disagreements about the case and their
heated arguments were repeatedly shown in news broadcast, especially those regarding
whether a defendant was guilty or not. The estimate for Justice Toffoli is also rather
intuitive: his participation in the trial was heavily criticized by the public opinion at the
time, since he had previously worked as a lawyer for the Workers’s Party campaigns
and at Lula’s Chief of Staff Office, allegedly the mastermind of the scheme. As
expected, Justice Toffoli indeed considered not guilty many of the defendants, including
his former boss. Unlike the first dimension, there’s no easy answer about the pattern in
the second dimension, which seem to be related to the isolation of Justice Aurélio in
some votes.
        The Mensalão trial estimates show that the estimation of ideal points for the
Brazilian Supreme Court Justices can be significantly different depending on the sample
used. In a criminal case, dissent is obviously not focused on the economic interests of
the Executive or on the autonomy of States of the federation. Justices who tend to agree
in constitutional matters could disagree in criminal ones: Justices Barbosa and
Lewandowski, for example, had very close estimated ideal points at the 6 th period
analyzed (see Appendix 3). This seems similar to the idea of ‘ideological drift’ defined
by Posner (2008): the tendency of judges to depart from the political stance of the party
of the President who appointed him when new issues arise with time. Justice Barbosa
was Lula’s first appointment to the Court and, almost a decade later, led the convictions
in the Mensalão trial, a result widely considered a historical setback for the Workers’
Party.
        The different pattern observed for the points also bring new insights on the
validity of judicial behavior models in the Brazilian Supreme Court. A common
division of the Court seen in the ADIs – Justices Aurélio, Mello and Britto against the
rest – is no longer seen here. Actually, the left-right division in the graph seems to
divide the Court between the most recent appointees (in the left) - those appointed by
Lula and Rousseff after the scandal was busted - and the Justices appointed before that
(in the right) (see again Table 1). This is an expected division according to the
attitudinal model in its purest form (the President’s party as a proxy for the Justices’
decision). Interestingly, the attitudinal model had not done particularly well in
explaining the estimated ideal points in the ADIs.
        Therefore, the Mensalão trial estimates indicate that some caution is important
while interpreting the estimated ideal points in the Direct Actions of Unconstitutionality
(ADIs), since they can be different in other types of cases. The Mensalão estimates also
show that a model such as NOMINATE has as an advantage its flexibility, allowing
estimation for different cases and samples.
5 Conclusion
       In recent years the Brazilian Supreme Court has been playing an increasingly
important role in mediating and shaping political choices. In addition the Court’s
influence is more visible and recognized by society than it has ever been. Although the
study of the Court has followed this increased interest, very little of this scholarship
uses quantitative methods to assess the Court’s impact or the determinants of its actions
and choices. Our W-NOMINATE estimates of several different Supreme Court
configurations in Brazil show that rather than aligning along a left-right or liberal-
conservative dichotomy, the Judges follow instead a configuration for and against the
Executive’s economic interests, along the first dimension, and for and against states’
autonomy to set the law, on the second. These results and others that we explore in the
paper show that the methods and theories we used, which were devised originally for
the US judicial system, can be profitably adapted to analyze other systems that have

                                                                                          14
some similarities but many difference. Our main objective in this paper has been to take
some first steps towards a larger research agenda that intends to apply these and other
quantitative methods to study the judicial system in Brazil and other Latin American
countries.
                                      References
ALSTON, L.; MUELLER, B.; PEREIRA, C.; MELO, M. Changing Social Contracts:
Dissipative Inclusion in Brazil, Journal of Comparative Economics, (forthcoming)
2013.
BAILEY, M.A. ‘Comparable Preference Estimates across Time and Institutions for the
Court, Congress, and Presidency,’ American Journal of Political Science, Vol. 51, No.
3, July, Pp. 433–448, 2007.
BLACK, D. On the Rationale of Group Decision Making. Journal of Political
Economy, v. 56, n.1, p. 23-34, 1948.
BOYD, C.; EPSTEIN, L.; MARTIN, A. Untangling the Causal Effects of Sex on
Judging. American Journal of Political Science, v. 54, n. 2, p. 389-411, 2010.
BRENNAN, T.; EPSTEIN, L.; STAUDT. Economic Trends and Judicial Outcomes: A
Macrotheory of the Court. Duke Law Journal, v. 58, p. 1192, 2009.
CAMINKER, E. Sincere and Strategic Voting Norms on Multimember Courts.
Michigan Law Review, v. 97, p. 2312–33, 1999.
COOTER, R. The Objectives of Private and Public Judges. Public Choice, v. 4, p. 107-
132, 1983.
DAHL, R. Decision Making in a Democracy: The Supreme Court as a National Policy-
Maker. Journal of Public Law, v.6, p. 279-295, 1957.
DRAHOZAL, C. Judicial Incentives and the Appeals Process. SMU Law Review, v. 51,
p. 469-503, 1998.
EPSTEIN, L.; KNIGHT, J., The Choices Justices Make. Washington: CQ Press, 1998.
186 p.
______ Toward a Strategic Revolution in Judicial Politics: A Look Back, A Look
Ahead. Political Research Quarterly, v. 53, p. 625-661, 2000.
EPSTEIN, L.; KNIGHT, J.; MARTIN, A. The Supreme Court as a Strategic National
Policymaker. Emory Law Journal, v. 50, p. 583-612, 2001.
EPSTEIN, L., MARTIN, A. D., SEGAL, J. A., and WESTERLAND, C. 2007. The
judicial common space. Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 23, 303-325.
EPSTEIN, L., A.D. MARTIN, K.M. QUINN and J.A. SEGAL. 2007. Ideological Drift
Among Supreme Court Justices: Who, When and How Important? Northwestern
University Law Review. 101: 1483-1542.
FARHANG, S.; WAWRO, G. Institutional Dynamics on the U.S. Court of Appeals:
Minority Representation under Panel Decision Making. Journal of Law, Economics and
Organization, v. 20, p. 299-330, 2004.
FEREJOHN, J.; WEINGAST, B. A Positive Theory of Statutory Interpretation.
International Review of Law and Economics, v. 12, p. 263-79, 1992.
GEORGE, T.; EPSTEIN, L. On the Nature of Supreme Court Decision Making.
American Political Science Review, v. 86, p. 323-37, 1992.

                                                                                     15
GIBSON, J. From Simplicity to Complexity: The Development of Theory in the Study
of Judicial Behavior. Political Behaviour, v. 5, p. 7-49, 1983.
JALORETTO, M.; MUELLER, B. O Procedimento de Escolha dos Ministros do
Supremo Tribunal Federal – Uma Análise Empírica. Economic Analysis of Law Review,
v. 2, p. 170-187, 2011.
LANNES, O.; DESPOSATO, S.; INGRAM, M. Judicial Behavior in Civil Law
Systems: Changing Patterns on the Brazilian Supremo Tribunal Federal. In: CICLO
2012 DO PROGRAMA DE SEMINÁRIOS CIEF-CERME-LAPCIPP-MESP, 2,
Brasília, 14. nov 2012.
LEONI, E.; RAMOS, A. Judicial Preferences and Judicial Independence in New
Democracies: the Case of the Brazilian Supreme Court. 2006. Available at:
http://eduardoleoni.com/workingpapers/
MARTIN, A.; QUINN, K. Dynamic Ideal Point Estimation via Markov Chain Monte
Carlo for the U.S. Supreme Court, 1953-1999. Political Analysis, v. 10, p. 135-53,
2002.
MARTIN, A.; QUINN, K.; EPSTEIN, L. The Median Justice on the United States
Supreme Court. North Carolina Law Review, v. 83, p. 1275-320, 2005.
POOLE, K.; ROSENTHAL, H. A Spatial Model for Legislative Roll Call Analysis.
GSIA Working Paper #5-83-84, 1983.
POSNER, R. What Do Judges and Justices Maximize? (The Same Thing Everybody
Else Does). Supreme Court Economic Review, v. 3, p. 1-41, 1993.
______ Foreword: A Political Court. Harvard Law Review, v. 119, p. 31-102, 2005.
______ How judges think. Cambrige: Harvard University Press, 2008. 400 p.
ROHDE, D.; SPAETH, H. Supreme Court Decision Making. San Francisco: W H
Freeman. 1976. 480 p.
RUGER, T. et al. The Supreme Court Forecasting Project: Legal and Political Science.
SEGAL, J.; SPAETH, H. The Supreme Court and the Attitudinal Model. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1992.
______ The Influence of Stare Decisis on the Votes of United States Supreme Court
Justices. American Journal of Political Science, v. 40, n. 4, p. 971-1003, 1996.
______ Majority Rule or Minority Will: Adherence to Precedent on the U.S. Supreme
Court. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999. 378 p.
______ The Supreme Court and the Attitudinal Model Revisited. New York: Cambridge
University Press 2002. 480 p.
VIANNA, L. W., B., M. BURGOS and P.M. SALLES. ‘Dezessete anos de
judicialização da política’. Tempo Social, Nov, vol.19, no.2, p.39-85, 2007.
WETSTEIN, M.E., C.L. OSTBERG, D.R. SONGER and S.W. JOHNSON. 2009.
Ideological Consistency and Attitudinal Conflict: A Comparative Analysis of the U.S.
and Canadian Supreme Courts. Comparative Political Studies. Vol. 1.
YOUNG, E.; BLONDEL, E. Does the Supreme Court Follow the Economic Returns?
A Response to ‘A Macrotheory of the Court’. Duke Law Journal, v. 58, p. 1759-1782,
2009.

                                                                                       16
Figure 1 – Estimated Ideal Points for the – 7th, 8th and 9th periods




    7th, 8th and 9th period: 23/10/2009 to 02/03/2011, 03/03/2011 to 18/12/2011, 19/12/2011 to
    08/03/2012. Chosen conservative Justice: Gilmar Mendes.

               Table 2 – Estimated Coordinates– 7th, 8th and 9th period
                                                    Coordinates
                               Justice        st
                                             1 dimension 2nd dimension
                               Mello                 0,644           -0,257
                               Aurélio               0,868           -0,496
                               Gracie                0,670            0,451
                              Mendes                 0,612            0,194
                               Peluso                0,607            0,033
                               Britto                0,697           -0,441
                              Barbosa                0,556            0,797
                                      *
                               Grau                   N/A              N/A
                            Lewandowski              0,451            0,509
                               Lúcia                 0,733            0,680
                               Toffoli               0,478            0,355
                                Fux                  0,511            0,031
                                       *
                               Weber                  N/A              N/A
                                AGU                  -0,880          -0,475
                                PGR                  -0,379           0,925
            *These Justices entered the court at the end of the period and do not have enough votes
            yield trustworthy estimates.




                                                                                                      17
               Table 3 – Summary estimates – 7th, 8th and 9th periods
            Number of roll calls   73 (56 omitted)
            ‘Yes’ predicted        505 of 522 - 96,7% correctly predicted
            ‘No’ predicted         230 of 244 - 94,3% correctly predicted

Figure 2 - ADI 4568 (2011)




Figure 3 – President Rousseff’s Subsequent Appointment Iterations – 1st
Dimension




                                                                            18
                   Figure 4 – Estimated Ideal Points for the Mensalão trial




                   Table 4 – % Winning Votes and the Median Justice
1st Period
Justice            Winning Votes                          7th, 8th and 9th Periods
Mendes             100%                                   Justice           Winning Votes
Sanches (Median)   100%
                                                          Gracie            97%
Mello              100%
                                                          Lewandowski       97%
Gracie             100%
                                                          Fux               96%
Alves              100%
                                                          Toffoli           96%
Jobim              100%
                                                          Lúcia             96%
Corrêa             98%
                                                          Mendes (Median)   96%
Velloso            96%
                                                          Barbosa           95%
Galvão             96%
                                                          Peluso            94%
Pertence           93%
                                                          Mello             91%
Aurélio            83%
                                                          Grau              89%
PGR                93%                                    Britto            83%
AGU                10%
                                                          Aurélio           62%
                                                          PGR               73%
                                                          AGU               38%




                                                                                            19
             Table 5 – Estimated Coordinates – The Mensalão trial
                            Justice                 Coordinates
                                           1st dimension   2nd dimension
                            Mello                       0,221          -0,756
                            Aurélio                     -0,172          0,985
                            Mendes                      0,228           0,200
                            Peluso                       N/A             N/A
                            Barbosa                     0,382          -0,051
                             Britto                     0,225          -0,679
                             Lúcia                      -0,455         -0,187
                        Lewandowski                     -0,978          0,206
                            Toffoli                     -0,915         -0,405
                            Weber                       -0,588          0,054
                             Fux                        0,323          -0,306
                             PGR                        1,000           0,015

               Table 6 – Summary estimates – The Mensalão trial
          Number of roll calls        74 (39 omitted)
          ‘Yes’ predicted             452 de 471 - 96,0% correctly predicted
          ‘No’ predicted              323 de 343 - 94,2% correctly predicted




Figure A1 – Scree plot – Dimension (horizontal axis) and eigenvalues (vertical axis)
                              7th, 8th and 9th period




                                                                                   20
