Macrodynamic Implications of Employee Profit Sharing as Effort Elicitation Device


                                       Gilberto Tadeu Lima
                                     Department of Economics
                                   University of São Paulo, Brazil
                                         giltadeu@usp.br
                                                  and
                                     Jaylson Jair da Silveira
                      Department of Economics and International Relations
                          Federal University of Santa Catarina, Brazil
                                    jaylson.silveira@ufsc.br



Abstract: We elaborate a macrodynamic model where the distribution of factor income is affected by
the possibility of profit sharing with workers. Firms choose periodically to compensate workers with
only a real base wage or a share of profits in addition to this real base wage as alternative effort-
elicitation strategies. As validated by empirical evidence, labor productivity is higher in profit-sharing
firms than in non-sharing firms. The frequency distribution of effort-elicitation strategies and labor
productivity across firms are co-evolutionarily time-varying, which then affects the dynamics of the
distribution of income between profits and wages and therefore the savings-determined growth rate.
Heterogeneity in effort-elicitation strategies across firms (and hence earnings inequality across
workers) can be a stable long-run equilibrium. In such a polymorphic equilibrium, the frequency of
profit-sharing firms varies positively (negatively) with the real base wage (profit-sharing coefficient).
As shown analytically and with numerical simulations, the micro- and macrodynamics of the economy
are crucially affected by the profit-sharing coefficient and the real base wage as bifurcation
parameters.
Keywords: Macrodynamics; profit sharing, coevolutionary dynamics, income distribution, economic
growth.

Resumo: Elaboramos um modelo macrodinâmico no qual a distribuição da renda dos fatores de
produção é afetada pela possibilidade de compartilhamento de lucros com os trabalhadores. As firmas
escolhem periodicamente entre duas estratégias alternativas de elicitação de esforço: compensar seus
trabalhadores somente com um salário real base ou com uma parcela salarial adicionalmente a esse
salário real base. Como validado pela evidência empírica, a produtividade do trabalho é maior nas
firmas que compartilham lucros que naquelas que não compartilham. A distribuição de frequência das
estratégias de elicitação de esforço e da produtividade do trabalho entre as firmas variam no tempo de
maneira coevolucionária, afetando, assim, a dinâmica da distribuição de renda entre salários e lucros e,
portanto, do crescimento econômico, a qual é determinado pela poupança. A heterogeneidade nas
estratégias de elicitação de esforço do trabalho entre as firmas (e, logo, a desigualdade de rendimentos
entre os trabalhadores) pode ser um equilíbrio de longo prazo estável. Nesse equilíbrio polimórfico, a
frequência de firmas que compartilham lucros varia positivamente (negativamente) com o salário real
base (coeficiente de compartilhamento de lucros). Como mostrado analiticamente e com simulações
numéricas, a micro e a macrodinâmica da economia são crucialmente afetadas pelo salário real base e
o coeficiente de compartilhamento de lucros como parâmetros de bifurcação.
Palavras-chave: Macrodinâmica, compartilhamento de lucro, dinâmica coevolucionária, distribuição
de renda, crescimento econômico.

JEL Codes: E11, E25, J33, O41.
Classificação Anpec: Área 4 – Macroeconomoa, Economia Monetária e Finanças.
1. Introduction
Employee profit-sharing arrangements have experienced rising (albeit fluctuating) incidence
in formal labor contracts in advanced economies in the last few decades (D’Art and Turner,
2004, Kruse, Blasi and Park, 2010). From a long-term standpoint, however, the presence of
employee profit sharing in (in)formal labor contracts has gone through several waves since
profit sharing was first conceived and introduced during the industrial revolution (Mitchell et
al., 1990, D’Art and Turner, 2006, Blasi et al., 2013).
        On theoretical grounds, connecting workers’ earnings to the profit performance of the
firm can be seen as potentially stimulating workers to increase commitment and effort, which
would result in a rise in their productivity. On empirical grounds, meanwhile, surveys find
that both employers and employees interpret profit sharing arrangements as contributing to
enhance firm performance along several dimensions (Weitzman and Kruse, 1990, and Blasi et
al., 2010). Arguably, profit sharing as a worker incentive device is subject to the free-rider
problem, given that the rewards from individual effort are usually shared with other workers.
Yet, there is evidence that such free-riding problem often appears to be overcome to some
extent by worker co-monitoring and reciprocity (Freeman, Kruse and Blasi, 2010). In fact,
Carpenter et al. (2016) provide experimental evidence that, although profit sharing may not be
an effective enough device to elicit more labor effort by itself, it may nonetheless suffice to
stimulate reciprocity-minded peers to report free riders given the cost imposed on them when
others shirk. As a result, teams with peer reporting and profit sharing may exert more effort at
work than those with profit sharing (or peer reporting) alone.
        In practice, profit-sharing plans vary a great deal, and the major ways in which they
differ usually involve what is shared (e.g., total profits or profits above some threshold level),
when and how sharing happens (e.g., in a deferred or non-deferred way, in cash or company
stocks) and with whom sharing is implemented (e.g., directly to workers or to some workers’
retirement or pension plan). Nevertheless, as there is survey evidence that the combination of
non-deferred and in-cash profit sharing is ranked first by employees as a motivation device
(Blasi et al. 2010), we draw on this evidence to specify the model set forth in this paper.
        There is considerable empirical evidence that profit sharing raises labor productivity.
Albeit the estimated size of the respective productivity gain varies from study to study, it is
often non-negligible. Weitzman and Kruse (1990) apply meta-analysis to sixteen studies and
discover that the productivity gain associated with profit sharing is positive at infinitesimal
significance levels. Doucouliagos (1995) applies meta-analysis to forty-three studies and also
find that profit sharing is positively associated with productivity. Cahuc and Dormont (1997)
use French data and find that profit sharing firms outperform other firms in both productivity
and profitability. Conyon and Freeman (2004) use U.K. data and discover that profit-sharing
firms usually outperform other firms in both productivity and financial performance. D’Art
and Turner (2004) use data for 11 European countries and find that profit sharing is positively
associated with productivity and profitability. Magnan and St-Onge (2005), using data for
Canada, find that firms adopting profit sharing enhance their profitability in comparison to
their own prior performance and to firms that are not adopting profit sharing. Meanwhile,
Robinson and Wilson (2006), employing U.K. data, and Kato et al. (2010), using Korean data,
find that profit sharing has a positive effect on productivity. Kraft and Ugarkovic (2006),
using data for Germany, find that profit sharing has a positive effect on profitability, although
Dube and Freeman (2010) use U.S. data and discover that profit sharing has a positive effect
on productivity only when accompanied by shared modes of decision-making. In a field,
quasi-experimental investigation, Peterson and Luthans (2006) could randomly assign profit
sharing at three of twenty-one establishments within a U.S. company, having detected that
productivity and profits rose in the profit-sharing establishments relative to the control group.

                                                1
         Motivated by all these suggestive pieces of empirical evidence, this paper sets forth a
macrodynamic model of capital accumulation and economic growth, in which the distribution
of income between wages and profits can feature profit sharing with workers. Firms are (and
remain) technologically heterogeneous with regard to the output to capital ratio. In attempting
to elicit effort (and hence productivity) from labor more effectively and profitably, firms can
behave heterogeneously regarding the adoption of employee compensation strategy. Workers
are (and remain) homogeneous skill- and qualification-wise, and firms periodically choose to
compensate workers with either a base wage or a share of profits on top of this base wage.
Also, consistent with the empirical evidence reported above, workers in sharing firms exhibit
higher productivity than workers in non-sharing firms.
         Even though firms can behave differently as to employee compensation strategy, any
existing heterogeneity in effort-elicitation strategies across firms (as well as the productivity
differential gained by sharing firms and the ensuing earnings inequality across workers), are
not time invariant, but instead co-evolve endogenously towards the long run as driven by an
evolutionary protocol. Therefore, our suggested evolutionary approach provides an alternative
framework for addressing what has been dubbed in the literature ‘the fixed wage puzzle’,
according to which, basically, the potential benefits of profit sharing in theory suggest that it
should be adopted in practice more frequently than it is normally found in empirical studies
(Jerger and Michaelis, 2011). In fact, our evolutionary framework seems appropriate to
explore potentially testable explanations for evidence such as that U.K. firms often switch
strategies of employee compensation, with the respective gross changes (which include profit
sharing) being far more numerous than the net changes (Bryson and Freeman, 2010). On a
general note, although our suggested evolutionary learning framework is applied in this paper
to an exploration of dynamics of choice of employee compensation strategy, we would invite
readers to contemplate the possibility that other instances of strategy (or, more broadly still,
behavior) switching are also subject to evolutionary learning.1
         From a macrodynamic perspective, we explore the implications of the evolutionarily
coupled dynamics of the frequency distribution of effort-elicitation strategies across firms and
the labor productivity differential obtained by profit-sharing firms for the distribution of
income between profits and wages and thereby the savings-determined capital accumulation
and economic growth.2 Hence, this paper joins a recent revival of interest on the determinants
of changes in factor (especially capital and labor) shares in aggregate income and the ensuing
implications of such changes for macroeconomic dynamics.3 In fact, although at least since
Kaldor (1961) the constancy of the labor share in income has been often regarded as one of

1
  For instance, Lima and Silveira (2015) offer evolutionary foundations to the nominal adjustment of the price
level to a monetary shock by introducing the notion of ‘boundedly rational inattentiveness’. A firm either pays a
cost (featuring a random component) to update its information to establish the optimal price or use costless non-
updated information to set a lagged optimal price. Instead of the standard replicator dynamic used herein, Lima
and Silveira (2015) use an asymmetric evolutionary protocol (only firms that choose not to pay the information-
updating cost rely on random pairwise comparisons of losses).
2
  Weitzman (1985) use a Keynesian model to claim that profit sharing can deliver full employment with low
inflation. If part of workers’ total compensation is shared profits, so that the base wage is lower, the marginal
cost of labor is lower and firms will be willing to hire more workers. As the marked up price is lower, a real
balance effect creates a higher aggregate demand and hence a higher desired output. In our model, in contrast,
the fraction of sharing firms and the average productivity are endogenously time-varying. Also, we explore the
implications of profit sharing for long-run economic growth in a supply-led dynamic model, in which the
distribution of factor income plays a key role as a source of savings.
3
  For instance, Walsh (2016) develops a sticky-price, sticky-wage model with workers and capitalists where the
distribution of factor income matters because wage income affects aggregate demand. Meanwhile, Broer et al.
(2016) set forth a two-agent version of the standard New Keynesian model (featuring a worker who receives
only labor income and a capitalist who receives only profit income) to explore how income inequality affects the
monetary transmission mechanism.
                                                       2
the key stylized facts underlying macroeconomic models, there is compelling recent evidence
on factor shares documenting otherwise. For instance, Piketty (2014), Piketty and Zucman
(2014) and Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) find a global decline in the labor share in the
last decades. In this context, an interesting question that arises is whether (and to what extent)
the broader sharing of profits by firms may eventually help reduce factor income inequality.
In our model, a broader sharing of profits can be formally represented by a greater proportion
of profit-sharing firms (for a given uniform profit-sharing coefficient) or a higher uniform
profit-sharing coefficient (for a given proportion of profit-sharing firms), or both together. As
a result, our model provides precise predictions about the implications of a broader sharing of
profits so represented in terms of factor income distribution and economic growth, in both the
short and the long run. One such prediction is that heterogeneity in effort-elicitation strategies
across firms (and the resulting earnings inequality across workers) can be a stable long-run
equilibrium. In such a polymorphic equilibrium, the frequency of profit-sharing firms varies
positively (negatively) with the real base wage (profit-sharing coefficient). Also, when there
is convergence to a long-run equilibrium, the average net profit rate and the growth rate are
both at their highest possible long-run equilibrium values. As shown analytically and with
numerical simulations, however, the long-run dynamics of the economy are crucially affected
by the profit-sharing coefficient and the real base wage as bifurcation parameters.
        In the model, one key feature of the evolutionarily coupled dynamics of the frequency
distribution of effort-elicitation strategies across firms and the productivity differential gained
by sharing firms is that there is strategic substitutability in the choice of compensation mode:
a firm’s decision to share profits has a negative payoff externality on potential sharing firms.
The reason is that this reduces the effort-enhancing earnings differential represented by the
excess of the compensation of workers in sharing firms over the compensation of workers in
non-sharing firms, which lowers the labor productivity differential obtained by a sharing firm.
Therefore, such externality differs considerably from the externality emphasized by Weitzman
(1985) when speculating about the obstacles to the conversion of all (or almost all) firms to
profit sharing. In Weitzman’s model, as briefly described in footnote 2, if one firm alone
converts to profit sharing it will hire new workers, but at the expense of driving down the pay
of its original workers. Hence, such a positive externality of a tight labor market may require
coordination to encourage people to convert to profit sharing. One possibility, in Weitzman’s
view, is to have the government reward profit-sharing workers, by preferential tax treatment
of share income, for their part in creating the positive externality of a tight labor market.4
        The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 lays out the structure of the
model as it describes the behavior of the economy in the short run. Section 3 specifies the
evolutionarily coupled dynamics of the distribution of effort-elicitation strategies across firms
and the productivity differential accruing to sharing firms. This section also explores the
implications of the specified evolutionary dynamics for the macrodynamics of the factor
shares in income and so the savings-driven capital accumulation and economic growth. The
final section summarizes the main conclusions reached along the way.
2. Structure of the model and its behavior in the short run
The economy is closed and without government activities, producing a single (homogeneous)
good for both investment and consumption purposes. Production is carried out by a large (and
fixed) population of firms, which use two (physically homogeneous) factors of production,
4
  Although the externality in our model differs from the one in Weitzman’s (1985) model, one similar issue
worth exploring is whether coordination is also needed in our model to induce the conversion to profit sharing.
Analogously, one possibility would be to have the government reward sharing firms by preferential tax
treatment. However worth exploring this possibility might be, especially in light of the evidence that several
countries use tax incentives to stimulate the adoption of profit sharing, we leave it for future research.
                                                      3
capital and labor, by means of a fixed-coefficient technology. Firms produce (and hire labor)
without facing any demand constraints, thereby being able to sell profitably all its output
production at the prevailing price level. However, the model is cast in real terms.
        In attempting to elicit effort from labor more effectively and profitably, an individual
firm chooses periodically between two employee compensation strategies: it compensates
workers with only a base real wage v (non-sharing effort-elicitation compensation strategy)
or a base real wage and a share of total profits   (0,1)  (profit-sharing effort-elicitation
compensation strategy). In a given period there is a proportion  [0,1]  of profit-sharing
(or type s) firms, while the remaining proportion, 1   , is composed by non-sharing (or type
n) firms. Consistent with the empirical evidence on profit sharing reported in the preceding
section, a profit-sharing firm is willing to play such effort-elicitation compensation strategy
because the resulting labor productivity gain is strictly higher than otherwise. Meanwhile,
productivity is homogeneous across workers in firms playing a given employee compensation
strategy. Given that, for simplicity, the real base wage is taken to be the same under both
effort-elicitation compensation strategies, a worker hired by a profit-sharing firm does receive a
higher total compensation than a worker hired by a non-sharing firm along the economically
meaningful domain given by strictly positive profits for sharing firms.5
         To keep sharp focus on the dynamics of the frequency distribution of effort-elicitation
compensation strategies and their implications for the distribution of factor income and hence
the rates of capital accumulation and economic growth, we simplify matters by assuming that
the real base wage, v , and the profit-sharing coefficient,  , remain constant over time. The
distribution of effort-elicitation compensation strategies across firms, ( ,1   ) , which is
given in the short run as a result from previous dynamics, may change beyond the short run as
driven by an evolutionary dynamic (the replicator dynamic). In the short run, for given values
of the base wage, profit-sharing coefficient, productivity differential, distribution of effort-
elicitation strategies and, then, individual and average profit shares, the short-run equilibrium
value of the growth rate is determined. As the economy evolves towards the long run, the co-
evolution of the distribution of effort-elicitation strategies and the productivity differential, by
leading to changes in the average net profit share, causes changes in the short-run equilibrium
value of the economic growth rate. Formally, we define the labor productivity differential as:
                     a
(1)               s,
                     an
where ai  X i / Li denotes labor productivity in firms of type i  s, n , X i is the total output of
firms of type i  s, n , and Li is the total employment of firms type i  s, n . For simplicity, we
normalize labor productivity in non-sharing firms, an , to one, so as to obtain as    1 in
(1). Profit-sharing firms can be intuitively portrayed as firms willing to bet on the possibility
of attaining a productivity differential,  , which is high enough to allow them to have a
lower (higher) total unit labor cost (unit net profit) than non-sharing firms. In fact, a sharing
firm envisages that such a productivity differential will be high enough so as to allow it to
have a higher net profit rate (i.e., net of shared profits) than a non-sharing firm. However, as
addressed in the next section, due to the presence of strategic substitutability in the choice of


5
  Empirical evidence shows that profit sharing has a meaningful effect on worker total compensation (Long and
Fang, 2012). As found in Capelli and Neumark (2004), total labor costs exclusive of the sharing component do
not fall significantly in pre/post comparisons of firms that adopt profit sharing, which suggests that profit sharing
tends to come on top of, rather than in place of, a base wage.
                                                         4
employee compensation strategy, the extra productivity gain accruing to profit-sharing firms
may fall short of the minimum level needed for the profit-sharing bet to prove successful.
       Using (1), the total profits of sharing and non-sharing firms are, respectively:
                                  v
(2)             Rs  X s  vLs  1   X s ;
                                  
and:
(3)             Rn  X n  vLn  (1  v) X n ,
which requires further assuming (to ensure economically meaningful values for the two factor
income shares) that v  an  1  as . Using (2) and (3), the shares of profit in output of sharing
and non-sharing firms in the short run are given, respectively, by:
                    R        v
(4)            s  s  1 ;
                    Xs       
and:
                        Rn
(5)            n          1 v .
                        Xn
The profit share expression in (4) denotes the proportion of gross profits in the output of
sharing firms, since an exogenously given fraction of such profits,   (0,1)  , is shared
with workers. Using (4), the unit net return of sharing firms in the short run is given by:
                        (1   ) Rs             v
(6)             sc                 (1   ) 1   ,
                            Xs                  
Using (5) and (6), the short-run value of the average net profit share can be expressed as:
                                                 v
(7)                                                     (1   )(1  v) .
                  sc  (1   ) n   (1   ) 1 
                                                 
        As for capital productivity, to keep sharp focus on our main issue of interest of the
effect of profit sharing on the rates of capital accumulation and economic growth, we simplify
matters by assuming that the maximum output that can be produced by fully utilizing one unit
of capital, k , is an exogenously given constant common to all firms:
(8)               k s  kn  k ,
where ki  X i / Ki is the output to capital ratio (and K i is the total capital stock) of firms of
type i  s, n .
        Using (2)-(5) and (8), the (gross) profit rates of sharing and non-sharing firms in the
short run can then be expressed as follows:
                       Rs     vX
(9)            rs        1   s  k s ;
                       Ks    Ks
and:
                        Rn          X
(10)           rn          (1  v) n  k n .
                        Kn          Kn
Using (6) and (9), the net profit rate of sharing firms in the short run is then given by:
                        (1   ) Rs             vX
(11)           rsc                  (1   ) 1   s  k sc .
                            Ks                    Ks
                                                      5
Thus, using (10) and (11), the short-run value of the average net profit rate is given by:
                                                        v                     
(12)           r c   rsc  (1   )rn  k  (1   ) 1    (1   )(1  v)  .
                                                                             
Therefore, a comparison between (7) and (12) shows that the average net profit share and the
average net profit rate always move in the same direction.
       As assumed earlier, the population of firms, the base wage, v , the labor productivity
in non-sharing firms, an , the profit-sharing coefficient,  , and the output to capital ratio
(which is common to all firms), k , all remain constant over time. The short run period t is
defined as a time frame in which the aggregate capital stock, K t , the labor supply, N t , the
productivity differential of profit-sharing firms, as ,t  t , the frequency distribution of effort-
elicitation compensation strategies across firms, t , and therefore the distribution of factor
income as given by the average net profit share,  tc , can all be taken as predetermined by
previous dynamics.6
        The model economy is populated by firm-owner capitalists and workers. The latter
inelastically provide labor and receive solely a base wage when they are hired by non-sharing
firms. Meanwhile, workers in sharing firms also receive a share of the latter’s profit income,
which is the entire surplus over the respective base wage bill. We assume that workers’ total
compensation is entirely spent on consumption, and capitalists save a fraction,   (0,1)  ,
of their net profit income. Capitalists save in order to finance capital accumulation, and all
their net profit income not consumed is automatically and immediately invested. Thus, firms
manage to sell all their output production at the current price, given that aggregate demand
automatically and immediately adjust to remove any excess aggregate (and individual) supply
in the product market. In the short-run product market equilibrium, aggregate investment, I t ,
is then identically equal to net aggregate saving, St .
       Using (8)-(11), the net aggregate saving as a proportion of the capital stock in period t
can be expressed as follows:
       St       (1   ) Rs ,t  Rn ,t 
(13)                                    t ks s ,t  (1  t )kn n    k t s ,t  (1  t ) n  .
                                                       c                                    c

       Kt                K t           
By substituting (13) in the product market equilibrium identity given by It / Kt  St / Kt , and
assuming that capital does not depreciate, we obtain the short-run equilibrium growth rate:
(14)              gt* (t , t )   k t sc,t (t , t )  (1  t ) n  .
In the short-run equilibrium, the growth rate depends on parametric constants in conjunction
with the productivity differential and the frequency distribution of effort-elicitation strategies,
which are predetermined in the short run and co-evolve evolutionarily towards the long run.
Given that economic growth is driven by capital accumulation from capitalists’ saving, the
short-run equilibrium growth rate varies positively with the saving propensity and the average
net profit share. Thus, given the frequency distribution of effort-elicitation strategies and the
productivity differential, a higher profit-sharing coefficient, by virtue of lowering the average
net profit share, reduces the growth rate in the short-run.


6
  As in the next section we explore the behavior of the economy in the transition from the short to the long run,
thereafter we attach a subscript t to the short-run value of all variables (be they endogenous or predetermined).
                                                                6
3. Behavior of the model in the long run
In the long run we assume that the short-run equilibrium value of the rate of economic growth
is always attained, with the economy moving towards the long run due to changes in the
aggregate stock of capital, K , coming from changes in the individual stocks of capital, K s
and K n , the supply of available labor, N , the labor productivity differential,  , and the
distribution of effort-elicitation compensation strategies,  . Given that the maximum output
that can be produced by fully utilizing one unit of capital is an exogenously given constant k
common to all firms, it follows from (8) that K s ,t / Kn,t  k . Meanwhile, to sharpen focus on
the evolutionarily coupled dynamics of the distribution of effort-elicitation strategies and the
productivity differential as state variables, and their resulting macrodynamic implications, we
further assume, for convenience, that the supply of available labor grows endogenously at the
same rate as the aggregate capital stock.7
        Let us derive the dynamics of the labor productivity differential. In a given short-run
period t there is a fraction t [0,1]  of firms, which may vary from one period to the
next one, using the profit-sharing strategy. The complementary fraction 1  t is made up of
firms that compensate workers with solely the base wage. Let yt  t ys ,t  (1  t ) yn be the
average earnings of workers in period t , where ys ,t  v   Rs ,t Ls ,t and yn  v represent the
earnings of a worker in a profit-sharing firm and a worker in a non-sharing firm in period t ,
respectively. Hence, the differential between the higher earnings and the average earnings can
be written as ys ,t  yt  (1  t ) Rs ,t Ls ,t for all t [0,1]  . As suggested by the empirical
evidence recalled reported earlier, we assume that the extent to which labor productivity in
profit-sharing firms is greater than labor productivity in non-sharing firms varies positively
with the relative earnings differential represented by ys ,t  yt . In implicit form, we consider
the following effort-elicitation differential function:
(15)                      t 1  f ( ys ,t  yt )  f  (1  t ) Rs ,t Ls ,t  ,
where we assume that f ()  0 and f ()  0 for all earnings differential ( ys ,t  yt )                  . We
further assume that                  lim         f ( ys  y )  0 . Thus, in accordance with the empirical evidence
                                  ( ys  y )

that the productivity gains arising from profit sharing are not unlimited, the effort-elicitation
differential in (15) rises at a non-increasing rate and tends to become insignificant for very
large values of the relative earnings differential.8 We can use (2) to re-write (15) as follows:
(15-a)                    t 1  f  (1  t )(t  v)  .
        As re-written in (15-a), the effort-elicitation differential function has an intuitive
interpretation. Given that  t is the output per worker of a profit-sharing firm and v is the


7
  Consequently, the constancy of the productivity differential and the distribution of effort-elicitation strategies
in the long-run equilibrium guarantee the constancy of both the average labor productivity and the average
employment rate. In fact, using (1) and (8)-(9), the average employment rate in the short-run equilibrium is
                    
        L*s ,t  L*n ,t            K
e  *
                   t  (1  t )  t k , where the expression in square brackets is the weighted average of the
                    t
    t
         Nt                         Nt
inverse of the individual productivities as ,t   t and an ,t  1 .
8
  In the meta-analyses in Weitzman and Kruse (1990) and Doucouliagos (1995), the magnitude of the estimated
effect of profit sharing on labor productivity is usually around 3 to 7 percent.
                                                                     7
respective unit cost of labor, it follows that  t  v is the profit per worker of a profit-sharing
firm and  (t  v) is the amount of profit per worker of a profit-sharing firm which is shared
with its workers. Thus, given  t and t , the next-period effort-elicitation differential varies
positively with the profit-sharing coefficient and negatively with the base wage. Meanwhile,
given  t , v and  , the next-period effort-elicitation differential varies positively with 1  t ,
the proportion of non-sharing firms in a given period, which is an indicator of the prospects of
not receiving any shared profits in the next period. Since an increase in 1  t so acts as an
incentive on workers in profit-sharing firms in the next period to exhibit a higher productivity
differential, it follows that  (1  t )(t  v) can be interpreted as reflecting how valuable it is
to work for a profit-sharing firm.
        In fact, it follows from (15-a) that t 1 t   (t  v) f   (1  t )(t  v)   0 for all
t [0,1]  and for any  t  v , where the latter condition was assumed earlier to ensure
strictly positive gross profits for profit-sharing firms in (2). The greater the proportion of
sharing firms in a given period, the smaller the effort-elicitation differential between sharing
and non-sharing firms in the next period. The substance of this result is that one individual
firm’s decision to follow the profit-sharing effort-elicitation strategy in a given period, by
reducing  (1  t )(t  v) for a given  t and consequently making it less valuable to workers
to be employed by a sharing firm in the next period, has a negative payoff externality on all
other sharing firms. Therefore, there is strategic substitutability in the firms’ choice of effort-
elicitation compensation strategy. Meanwhile, if all firms choose to adopt the profit-sharing
effort-elicitation strategy (t  1) , it follows that the relative earnings differential represented
by ys ,t  yt   (1  t )(t  v) vanishes. In this case with all firms sharing profits, given that
productivity is uniform across firms, and should be higher than the average productivity when
all firms pay only the base wage, we assume that f (0)  1 (recall that productivity in non-
sharing firms was normalized to one). When all firms play the non-sharing strategy (t  0) ,
the potential relative earnings differential given by ys ,t  yt   (t  v) takes its maximum
value. In this case, a non-sharing firm switching strategy to the profit-sharing mode reaps the
largest possible extra effort-elicitation gain, since f  (t  v)   f  (1  t )(t  v)  for all
t  (0,1]     and for any  t  v .
      To facilitate the derivation of analytical results on the existence and stability of long-
run equilibrium solutions and to implement numerical simulations, in what follows we
assume a specific functional form for (15-a) given by:
(16)          t 1     (1  t )(t  v) ,
where   1 is a parameter ensuring that f (0)  1 in (15-a).
        Some intuitive rationales can be suggested for the extra effort-elicitation gain in (15)-
(16). First, the average earnings can be reasonably interpreted by workers as a rule-of-thumb,
conventional estimate of their fallback position or outside option under uncertainty. It follows
that workers who are shared profits in addition to receiving a base wage generate an extra
effort-elicitation gain (comparatively to the effort-elicitation gain they would generate if paid
solely a base wage) which varies positively with the excess of the higher earnings over their
fallback position or outside option. Besides, the average earnings can be plausibly construed
by workers as a reasonable reference point against which a compensation package featuring a
base wage and shared profits should be compared when they are resolving how much above-
                                                     8
normal productivity to fairly generate in return. Consequently, above-average earnings can be
plausibly interpreted by workers as fairly warranting the generation of above-normal levels of
productivity. Interestingly, Blasi, Kruse and Freeman (2010) suggest an intuitive rationale for
profit-sharing compensation based on reciprocity and gift exchange (as these notions are
articulated in Akerlof (1982)): a “gift” of higher worker compensation through profit sharing
increases worker morale, and workers reciprocate with a “gift” of greater productivity. More
broadly, a “gift” of profit-sharing compensation over and above a standard base wage can be
intuitively seen as assisting to create and reinforce a sense of shared interests and the value of
a reciprocal relationship.
        While the frequency distribution of effort-elicitation compensation strategies is given
in the short run, an individual firm revises periodically its choice of compensation strategy in
a way described by the following replicator dynamic:9
(17)              t 1  1  t (rsc,t  rtc )  t (1  t )( sc,t   n )k ,

where rt  t rs ,t  (1  t )rn is the average net profit rate, which is given by (12), and the latter
        c       c


equality is obtained using (10) and (11), so that  sc,t and  n are given by (5) and (6),
respectively. According to the replicator dynamic represented in (17), the frequency of the
profit-sharing effort-elicitation strategy across firms increases (decreases) exactly when it has
above-average (below-average) payoff.
        Using (5) and (6), the replicator dynamic in (16) becomes:
                                              v               
(17-a)            t 1  t 1  (1  t ) (1   ) 1 
                                                       (1  v )  k.
                                        t                   
Thus, the state transition of the economy is determined by the system of difference equations
(16) and (17-a), whose state space is   {(t , t )  2 : 0  t  1, t  v} .
        We can show that the dynamic system represented by (16) and (17-a) has two long-run
equilibria featuring survival of only one effort-elicitation strategy in each. These are
monomorphic (pure-strategy) equilibria which we denote by E1 and E2 . We can also show
the possible existence of a third long-run equilibrium, now featuring the survival of both
effort-elicitation strategies. This is a polymorphic (mixed-strategy) equilibrium which we
denote by E3 .
         Note that t 1  t  0 for any t {0,1, 2,...} satisfies (17-a) for any state (t ,0)  .
In this case, it follows that t 1  t   for all t {0,1, 2,...} in (16) if, and only if, the
(potential) effort-elicitation differential is given by:
                                v
(18)             t 1   t        ,
                                1 
where   1 is implied by our assumptions about the magnitude of the respective parameters.
Therefore, one of the two monomorphic long-run equilibria of the system, E1 , is given by the
state ( ,0)   , which nonetheless features the non-sharing effort-elicitation compensation
strategy as the only survivor.



9
 This replicator dynamic can be derived from a model of (social or individual) learning as in Weibull (1995, sec.
4.4).
                                                              9
        Meanwhile, if t 1  t  1 for any t {0,1, 2,...} , the difference equation in (17-a) is
satisfied for any state (t ,1)  and, given (16), it follows that t 1  t   for all
t {0,1, 2,...} if, and only if, the value of the effort-elicitation differential is given by:
(19)                1.
Therefore, the other monomorphic long-run equilibrium of the system, E2 , is represented by
the state ( ,1)   , which features the profit-sharing effort-elicitation compensation strategy
as the only survivor. However, due to the existence of strategic substitutability in the choice
of employee compensation strategy, it follows that    .
        Finally, if t 1  t   *  (0,1)  for any t {0,1, 2,...} , the difference equation in
(17-a) is satisfied if, and only if, the individual profit shares in (5) and (6) (and therefore the
profit rates in (10) and (11)) are equalized. Given that the effort-elicitation differential (which
is equal to the level of effort-elicitation in profit-sharing firms) is the only adjusting variable
among the determinants of the profit shares in (5) and (6), the latter become equalized if, and
only if, the value of the effort-elicitation differential is given by:
                       (1   )v
(20)             *             ,
                         v 
where we assume that v   , so that  *  1 . Furthermore, due to the existence of strategic
substitutability in the choice of employee compensation strategy, it follows that    *   .
Meanwhile, given that t 1  t   * for all t {0,1, 2,...} , it follows that t 1  t for all
t {0,1, 2,...} in (17-a) if, and only if:
                         v  (1   ) *
(21)            *                         .
                            ( *  v)
Given that  *  1  v , the denominator in (20) is strictly positive. Hence, in order to ensure
that  *  0 , we assume that   v  (1   ) *  0 . The latter inequality, upon substitution of
(20) in it, is satisfied when the following inequality holds:
                       (   1)v
(22)                            .
                          v
Note that our assumptions on the magnitude of the respective parameters imply that
  (0,1)  . Now, in order to ensure that  *  1 , we assume that
   v  (1   ) *   ( *  v) . The latter inequality, upon substitution of (20) in it, is satisfied
when the following inequality holds:
                         (   1)v
(23)               2                 .
                       v  2v  
Note that our assumptions on the magnitude of the respective parameters imply that
  (0,1)  and    . Therefore, if the conditions in (22)-(23) are satisfied, there exists a
third long-run equilibrium represented by the state ( * ,  * )   , denoted by E3 , which
features the survival of both effort-elicitation compensation strategies in the long run. The
existence of a long-run equilibrium of the dynamic system given by (16) and (17-a) is
summarized in the proposition that follows.
Proposition 1: For a given vector of parameters ( ,  , v, k ) , the dynamic system represented
by (16) and (17-a) has two monomorphic long-run equilibria given by
                                                   10
                 v 
E1  ( ,0)           ,0   and E2  ( ,1)  ( ,1)  . And if      , there is also a
               1        
                                                                    *   v  (1   ) * 
polymorphic long-run equilibrium given by E3  ( ,  )    ,                               ,
                                                            *  *

                                                                            ( *  v)     
             (1   )v
where                 ( ,  )  .
         *

               v 
        It can be checked that the productivity differential in the polymorphic equilibrium
varies negatively (positively) with the profit-sharing coefficient (real base wage). In the same
equilibrium, the proportion of sharing firms varies with these parameters as follows:
         *    1                        *   2 v  (  1   )v 2
              2     0           and                                      0,
          (v  1)                       v         (v  1)2 v 2
where it can be checked that the numerator of the second expression is positive for any   1
and   (0, v)  .
       Meanwhile, the stability properties of the evolutionary long-run equilibria identified in
Proposition 1 are established in the following proposition.
Proposition 2: For a given vector of parameters ( ,  , v, k ) , the long-run equilibria of the
dynamic system represented by (16) and (17-a) exhibit the following stability properties:
                                                                      v 
   i.   If 0     , the monomorphic equilibrium given by E1  ( ,0)    ,0   is a
                                                                    1        
        repulsor and the monomorphic equilibrium given by E2  ( ,1)  ( ,1)  is an
        attractor;
 ii.    If      , the monomorphic equilibria E1 and E2 are repulsors, whereas the
                                                                    v  (1   ) * 
        polymorphic equilibrium given by E3  ( ,  )    ,                            , where
                                                *   *       *

                                                                       ( *  v)      
               (1   )v
        *              , is an attractor; and
                 v 
                                                                              v 
 iii.   If     v , the monomorphic equilibrium given by E1                   ,0   is an
                                                                            1      
        attractor and the monomorphic equilibrium E2  ( ,1)  is a repulsor.
Proof: See Appendix.
       Interestingly, the dynamic system given by (16) and (17-a) also undergoes a
bifurcation at    . This bifurcation features a change in both the stability property of the
monomorphic equilibrium given by ( ,1)   and the existence status of the polymorphic
equilibrium given by ( * ,  * )   . If the threshold given by    is crossed from below
(above), the bifurcation features the monomorphic equilibrium given by ( ,1)   ceasing to
be an attractor (a repulsor) to become a repulsor (an attractor), and by the polymorphic
equilibrium given by ( * ,  * )   , which is an attractor, coming (ceasing) to exist. The
dynamic system given by (16) and (17-a) also undergoes a bifurcation at    . This
bifurcation features a change in both the stability property of the monomorphic equilibrium
                                                  11
given by ( ,0)   and the existence status of the polymorphic equilibrium given by
( * ,  * )   . If the threshold represented by    is crossed from below (above), the
bifurcation is characterized by the monomorphic equilibrium given by ( ,0)   ceasing to
be a repulsor (an attractor) to become an attractor (a repulsor), and by the polymorphic
equilibrium represented by ( * ,  * )   , which is an attractor, ceasing (coming) to exist.
        In order to appropriately complement the analytical results derived above about the
dynamics of the system, we now perform some illustrative numerical simulations. In Figure 1,
the parameters of the model are given by the following empirically plausible values:
capitalists’ propensity to save,   0.4 ; minimum labor productivity differential,   1.05 ;
and output to capital ratio, k  0.3 . We typically set the profit-sharing coefficient at   0.05
and the real base wage at 0.6 .10




Figure 1. Single bifurcation and trajectory diagrams.

        In Figure 1, the left panels picture limit sets for the frequency of profit-sharing firms
by means of parameter basins with respect to the profit-sharing coefficient, with
  (0,0.6)  (top) and the real base wage, with v  (0,1)  . The right panels, meanwhile,
describe the trajectory over time of the frequency of profit-sharing firms (top) and
productivity differential (bottom), with an emphasis on their transitional dynamics. We avoid
detecting only local dynamics by specifying initial conditions at some distance from the long-
run equilibria. In the left panels, we set initial values given by   1.1 and   0.01 , and set

10
  All these numerical simulations (along with the respective graphical representations) were obtained with the
open-source software iDMC, version 2.0.10, available at https://code.google.com/archive/p/idmc/downloads.
Meanwhile, the source code used to generate the numerical results presented in this section is obtainable upon
request to the authors.
                                                        12
5000 transient iterations (i.e. the number of iterations omitted before plotting begins) and
5000 iterations to be plotted.
        In Figure 1, two single parameter bifurcation diagrams and two trajectory diagrams are
shown to illustrate the dynamics of the system given by (16) and (17-a) with numerical
simulations. In the top left panel, the bifurcation undergone by the system at     0.07 and
    0.14 is shown. The phase transition from the monomorphic equilibrium given by all
firms playing the sharing strategy to the monomorphic equilibrium with no firm playing the
sharing strategy occurs as the profit-sharing coefficient rises from zero. The transition as such
takes place along the range of values of the profit-sharing coefficient for which the
polymorphic equilibrium exists and is an attractor. In the bottom left panel, meanwhile, it is
shown the bifurcation undergone by system at two different values of the real base wage,
which are associated with the respective bifurcation values of the profit-sharing coefficient
according to (22) and (23). In any case, as the real base wage rises from zero, the phase
transition now occurs from the monomorphic equilibrium given by no firm following the
sharing strategy to the monomorphic equilibrium with all firms following the sharing strategy.
The transition as such occurs along the corresponding range of values of the real base wage
for which the polymorphic equilibrium exists and is an attractor.
        In the right panels, multiple trajectories of the state variables are displayed. In the top
panel, the value of the initial condition for the frequency of profit-sharing firms is increased
from   0.1 to   0.9 with a change of 0.2 in each variation. Simulations are color-
indicated and the number next to each color identifies which simulation is represented by that
color. In the bottom panel, the labor productivity differential varies from its assumed initial
condition also in response to the respective variation in the profit-sharing coefficient from
each of its assumed initial conditions, as these two state variables co-evolve over time. The
convergence of the dynamic system to the polymorphic long-run equilibrium (we set the
profit-sharing coefficient at   0.1 so as to ensure it; see top left panel) takes place close to
the end of the 1250 iterations that we set to be plotted.
        Let us now compute the long-run equilibrium values of the distribution of factor
income and the growth rate in each one of the three economically relevant ranges of the
profit-sharing coefficient specified in Proposition 2. We can use (7) to establish:
(24)     ( ,0)   ( * ,  * )   n  1  v ,
and:
                                                v
         (  ,1)   sc (  )  (1   ) 1 
                                                  
(25)                                                  ,
                                         
where the first equality in (24) follows from the fact that E3  ( * ,  * ) is defined implicitly by
the condition given by  sc ( * ,  * )   n  0 (recall from (5) that the profit share of non-sharing
firms is exogenously given). Hence, the value of the average net profit share is the same in the
monomorphic equilibrium given by E1  ( ,0) and in the polymorphic equilibrium given by
E3  ( * ,  * ) . When    , given that    , it follows that  ( ,0)   ( ,1) , as can be
verified using the Appendix, so that, using (14), we then obtain that g ( ,0)  g ( ,1) . When
     , since  *   , we have  ( ,0)   ( * ,  * )   ( ,1) , so that (14) yields
g ( ,0)  g ( * ,  * )  g ( ,1) . Meanwhile, when    , since  *   , it follows that
 ( ,0)   ( ,1) , as can again be verified using the Appendix, so that, using (14), we then
obtain that g ( ,0)  g (  ,1) . Therefore, if the economy converges to a long-run equilibrium

                                                          13
(which may not occur when      , given that the condition in (A.8) in the Appendix may
not be satisfied), the coupled evolutionary dynamics of profit-sharing adoption and
productivity gain takes the economy to a position in which the average net profit share, the
net profit rate and the rate of economic growth are all at their highest possible long-run
equilibrium levels.
        Finally, although it is possible the emergence of a stable long-run equilibrium with
strategic dualism, the evolutionary dynamic in (17) ensures that the (net) rates of profit of the
coexisting effort-elicitation strategies become equalized. However, in our one-sector model,
net profit rate equalization is brought about in the long run not by market competition with
capital mobility across sectors, but by evolutionary competition with firms (along with their
capital stock) mobility across alternative effort-elicitation compensation strategies.
4. Conclusions
        This paper is motivated by various pieces of suggestive empirical evidence. First, from
a long-term historical perspective, there has been persistent heterogeneity in worker
compensation strategies across firms, and profit-sharing arrangements have experienced an
oscillating popularity. Second, profit sharing arrangements are productivity-enhancing, and
attitude surveys find that employers and employees perceive profit sharing as contributing to
improve firm performance in several dimensions. Third, there is survey evidence that non-
deferred and in cash profit sharing is ranked first by workers as motivation device. Fourth,
firms switch modes of worker compensation (which include profit sharing) with reasonable
frequency, with the gross changes in modes being more numerous than the net changes. Fifth,
earnings inequality across observationally homogeneous workers does exist, is of a non-
negligible magnitude and is persistent over longer time spans.
        In this paper, firms are modeled as periodically choosing to compensate workers with
solely a base wage or a share of profits in addition to this base wage. The frequency
distribution of effort-elicitation compensation modes and labor productivity in the population
of firms are modeled as co-evolutionarily time-varying. The paper also investigates how such
co-evolution at the micro level affects and the macrodynamics of the distribution of factor
income and economic growth.
        When the profit-sharing coefficient is relatively low, there are two long-run equilibria,
one featuring all firms sharing profits and the other with no firm sharing profits. The former is
an attractor, while the latter is a repulsor. When the profit-sharing coefficient is relatively
high, the economy has the same two evolutionary long-run equilibria. However, the long-run
equilibrium with all firms sharing profits is a repulsor, while the long-run equilibrium with no
firm sharing profits is an attractor. When the profit-sharing coefficient is at a relatively
intermediate level, there is a third long-run equilibrium, one that features heterogeneity in
employee compensation strategies across firms, and therefore earnings inequality across
workers. In this case, the long-run equilibria featuring survival of only one strategy are
repulsors, while the long-run equilibrium with coexistence of both compensation modes can
be an attractor. In fact, as shown analytically and with numerical simulations, the long-run
dynamics are crucially affected by the profit-sharing coefficient and the real base wage as
bifurcation parameters.
        Meanwhile, when there is convergence to a long-run equilibrium, the average net
profit rate and the growth rate are both at their highest possible long-run equilibrium values.
Moreover, there is net profit rate equalization even in the long-run equilibrium with
coexisting effort-elicitation strategies across firms and the resulting earnings inequality across
workers. This equalization is an outcome of the evolutionary competition involving the


                                               14
alternative effort-elicitation employee compensation modes between which firms periodically
choose.
References
Akerlof, G. (1982) ‘Labor contracts as partial gift exchange’, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
87, 543-69.
Blasi, J., R. Freeman, C. Mackin and D. Kruse (2010) ‘Creating a bigger pie? The effects of
employee ownership, profit sharing, and stock options on workplace performance’, in
Douglas Kruse, Richard Freeman and Joseph Blasi (eds.), Shared Capitalism at Work,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Blasi, J., D. Kruse and R. Freeman (2010) ‘Epilogue (and Prologue)’, in Douglas Kruse,
Richard Freeman and Joseph Blasi (eds.), Shared Capitalism at Work, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Blasi, J., R. Freeman and D. Kruse (2013) The Citizen’s Share: Putting Ownership Back into
Democracy, New Haven: Yale University Press.
Broer, T., N.-J. H. Hansen, P. Krusell and E. Öberg (2016) ‘The New Keynesian
Transmission Mechanism: A Heterogeneous-Agent Perspective’, NBER Working Paper No.
22418, July.
Bryson, A. and R. Freeman (2010) ‘How does shared capitalism affect economic performance
in the United Kingdom?’, in Douglas Kruse, Richard Freeman and Joseph Blasi (eds), Shared
Capitalism at Work, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Cahuc, P. and B. Dormont (1997) ‘Profit-sharing: does it increase productivity and
employment? A theoretical model and empirical evidence on French micro data’, Labour
Economics, 4, 293–319.
Capelli, P. and D. Neumark (2004) ‘External churning and internal flexibility: Evidence on
the functional flexibility and core-periphery hypotheses’, Industrial Relations, 43(1), 148-82.
Carpenter, J. P., A. Andrea and P. Akbar (2016) ‘Profit sharing and peer reporting,’ IZA
Discussion Papers 9946, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).
Caselli, F. (2005) ‘Accounting for cross-country income Differences,’ in Phillipe Aghion and
Steven Durlauf (eds.), Handbook of Economic Growth, Amsterdam: North-Holland Press,
679–741.
Caselli, F. and J. Feyrer (2007) ‘The marginal product of capital’, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 122(2), 535–568.
Conyon, M. and R. Freeman (2004) ‘Shared modes of compensation and firm performance:
U.K. evidence’, in Richard Blundell, David Card and Richard Freeman (eds.), Seeking a
Premier League Economy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
D’Art, D. and T. Turner (2004) ‘Profit sharing, firm performance and union influence in
selected European countries’, Personnel Review, 33(3), 335–350.
D’Art, D. and T. Turner (2006) ‘Profit sharing and employee share ownership in Ireland: A
new departure?’, Economic and Industrial Democracy, 27(4), 543–564.
Doucouliagos, C. (1995) ‘Worker participation and productivity in labor-managed and
participatory capitalist firms: A meta-analysis’, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 49(1),
58–77.
Dube, A. and R. Freeman (2010) ‘Complementarity of shared compensation and decision-
making systems: evidence from the American labor market’, in Douglas Kruse, Richard
Freeman and Joseph Blasi (eds.), Shared Capitalism at Work, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Farebrother (1973) ‘Simplified Samuelson conditions for cubic and quartic equations’, The
                                              15
Manchester School, 41(4), 396–400.
Freeman, R., D. Kruse and J. Blasi (2010) ‘Worker responses to shirking under shared
capitalism,’ in Douglas Kruse, Richard Freeman and Joseph Blasi (eds.), Shared Capitalism at
Work, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Jerger, J. and J. Michaelis (2011) ‘The fixed wage puzzle: why profit sharing is hard to
implement?’, Economics Letters, 110(2), 104-106.
Kaldor, N (1961) ‘Capital accumulation and economic growth,’ in F. A. Lutz and D. C.
Hague (eds.), The Theory of Capital, New York: St. Martin’s Press, pp. 177–222.
Karabarbounis, L. and B. Neiman (2014) ‘The global decline of the labor share’, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 129(1), 61–103.
Kato, T., J.H. Lee and J.-S. Ryu (2010) ‘The productivity effects of profit sharing, employee
ownership, stock option and team incentive plans: Evidence from Korean panel data’, in T.
Eriksson (ed.), Advances in the Economic Analysis of Participatory and Labor-Managed
Firms, Volume 11, Bingley: Emerald, pp. 111–135.
Kraft, K. and M. Ugarkovic (2006) ‘Profit sharing and the financial performance of firms:
evidence from Germany’, Economics Letters, 92, 333–338.
Kruse, D., J. Blasi and R. Park (2010) ‘Shared capitalism in the U.S. economy: Prevalence,
characteristics, and employee views of financial participation in enterprise’, in Douglas
Kruse, Richard Freeman and Joseph Blasi (eds.), Shared Capitalism at Work, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Kruse, D., R. Freeman and J. Blasi (2010) ‘Do workers gain by sharing? Employee outcomes
under employee ownership, profit sharing, and broad-based stock options’, in Douglas Kruse,
Richard Freeman and Joseph Blasi (eds.), Shared Capitalism at Work, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Lima, G. T. and J. J. Silveira (2015) ‘Monetary neutrality under evolutionary dominance of
bounded rationality,’ Economic Inquiry, 53(2), 1108–1131.
Long, R. J. and T. Fang (2012) ‘Do employees profit from profit sharing? Evidence from
Canadian panel data’, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 65(4), 899–927.
Magnan, M. and S. St-Onge (2005) ‘The impact of profit sharing on the performance of
financial services firms,’ Journal of Management Studies, 42(4), 761–791.
Mitchell, D. B., D. Lewin and E. E. Lawler (1990) ‘Alternative pay systems, firm
performance, and productivity’, in Alan S. Blinder (ed.), Paying for Productivity,
Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 15–88.
Peterson, S. and F. Luthans (2006) ‘The impact of financial and nonfinancial incentives on
business-unit outcomes over time’, Journal of Applied Psychology, 91(1), 156–165.
Piketty, T. (2014) Capital in the Twenty-First Century, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Piketty, T. and G. Zucman (2014) ‘Capital is back: Wealth-income ratios in rich countries
1700–2010’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3), 1255–1310.
Robinson, A. M. and N. Wilson (2006) ‘Employee financial participation and productivity:
An empirical reappraisal’, British Journal of Industrial Relations, 44(1), 31–50.
Walsh, C. E. (2016) ‘Workers, capitalists, wages, employment and welfare’, Department of
Economics, University of California, Santa Cruz, mimeo.
Weibull, J. W. (1995) Evolutionary Game Theory, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Weitzman, M. (1985) ‘The simple macroeconomics of profit sharing’, American Economic
Review, 95, 937–953.
Weitzman, M. and D. Kruse (1990) ‘Profit sharing and productivity’, in Alan S. Blinder (ed.),

                                             16
Paying for Productivity, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 95–140.

Appendix – Proof of Proposition 2 on the stability properties of the long-run equilibrium
The Jacobian matrix evaluated around the monomorphic equilibrium ( ,0)   is:
                           (  v)          
(A-1) J ( , 0)                               ,
                   0 1   s ( )   n  k 
                              c



                            v
where  sc ( )  (1   ) 1   and  n  1  v .
                            
Let  be an eigenvalue of the Jacobian matrix in (A.1). The eigenvalues of the Jacobian
matrix in (A.1) are given by:
(A.2) 1             and       2  1  [ sc ( )   n ]k .
Given that 0    1 , it follows that 1  1 .
Let us investigate the absolute value of  2 . We want to find out under what condition(s) it
follows that 1  2  1 . Per (A.2), it follows that 1  2  1 obtains if, and only if,
2  [ sc ( )   n ]k  0 .
Given that 0   sc ( )  1 and 0   n  1 , we find that 1   sc ( )   n  1 . Since the output to
capital ratio, k , typically satisfies the condition given by 0  k  1 (see, e.g., Caselli, 2005,
and Caselli and Feyrer, 2007), it follows that 2  k  [ sc ( )   n ]k . Note that
                            v
 sc ( )   n  (1   ) 1    (1  v) is increasing in  . Given (20), it then follows that
                            
                                                             (   * )        (v 2  2v   )3
 s ( )   n  0 . Since     0 at    and
   c    *                               *
                                                                                                   0 for all
                                                                        
                                                                                (v  1)3 v(v   )
v  (0,1)          and   1 , if    , we then obtain    * , so that  sc ( )   n  0 and hence
[ sc ( )   n ]k  0 . Thus, it follows from    that 2  1 . Meanwhile, if    , so that
   * , it follows that  sc ( )   n  0 and hence [ sc ( )   n ]k  0 . Thus, it follows from
   that 2  1 . As it turns out, at    the system undergoes a bifurcation characterized
by a change in both the stability property of the monomorphic equilibrium ( ,0)   and the
existence status of the polymorphic equilibrium ( * ,  * )   . If the threshold given by   
is crossed from below (above), the bifurcation is characterized by the monomorphic
equilibrium ( ,0)   ceasing to be a repulsor (an attractor) to become an attractor (a
repulsor), and by the polymorphic equilibrium ( * ,  * )   ceasing (coming) to exist. In any
case, this completes the demonstration that the long-run equilibrium with no firm playing the
profit-sharing strategy, ( ,0)   , is an attractor if    and a repulsor if    .
The Jacobian matrix evaluated around the monomorphic equilibrium ( ,1)   is:
                     0        (   v)          
          J ( ,1)                               ,
                     0 1   s (  )   n  k 
(A.3)                           c




                                                                  17
where  sc ( )  (1   ) 1  (v /  ) and  n  1  v .
Let  be an eigenvalue of the Jacobian matrix in (A.3). In this case, the eigenvalues of the
Jacobian matrix is (A.3) are also easily computed:
(A.4) 1  0           and      2  b  1   sc ( )   n  k .
Therefore, the local stability of ( ,1)   depends on the absolute value of  2 . Given (A.4),
it follows that 1  2  1 obtains if, and only if, 0   sc  f (0)    n  k  2 .

Since 0   sc ( )  1 and 0   n  1 , it follows that 1   sc ( )   n  1 . Therefore, given that it is
typically the case that 0  k  1 , we can infer that  sc ( )   n  k  2 .

                                                v
It can be seen that  sc ( )   n  (1   ) 1    (1  v) is increasing in  . Given (20), it follows
                                                
                                                                            (    * ) (1  v)v
that  sc ( * )   n  0 . Given that    *  0 at    and                                     0 for all
                                                                                        (v   ) 2
 v  (0,1)  and   v , if    , we then obtain    * , so that  sc ( )   n  0 and therefore
 sc ( )   n  k  0 . Thus, it follows from    that 2  1 . Meanwhile, if    , so that
   * , it follows that  sc ( )   n  0 and hence  sc ( )   n  k  0 . Thus, it follows from
   that 2  1 . As it turns out, at    the system undergoes a bifurcation characterized
by a change in both the stability property of the monomorphic equilibrium ( ,1)   and the
existence status of the polymorphic equilibrium ( * ,  * )   . In fact, if the threshold given
by    is crossed from below (above), the bifurcation is characterized by the monomorphic
equilibrium ( ,1)   ceasing to be an attractor (a repulsor) to become a repulsor (an
attractor), and by the polymorphic equilibrium ( * ,  * )   coming (ceasing) to exist. In any
case, this completes the demonstration that the long-run equilibrium with all firms playing the
profit-sharing strategy, ( ,1)   , is an attractor if    and a repulsor if    .
The Jacobian matrix evaluated around the polymorphic equilibrium ( * ,  * )   is:
                                 (1   * )        ( *  v) 
                                                                
(A.5) J ( * ,  * )   *                      v                .
                          (1   * )(1   ) * 2 k      1
                                             ( )               
                                                                
Let  be an eigenvalue of the Jacobian matrix in (A.5). We can set the characteristic equation
of the linearization around the equilibrium as:
                        a        b
(A.6)      J  I                         2  (a  1)  (a  bc)  0 ,
                          c      1 
                                                                                      v
where a   (1   * )  0 , b   ( *  v)  0 , and c   * (1   * )(1   )           k  0.
                                                                                    ( * )2
We can use the Samuelson stability conditions for a second order characteristic equation to
determine under what conditions the two eigenvalues are inside the unit circle. Based on
Farebrother (1973, p. 396, inequalities 2.4 and 2.5), we can establish the following set of
simplified Samuelson conditions for the quadratic polynomial in (A.6):

                                                               18
(A.7) 1  a  bc  (a  1)  a  1 and a  bc  1 .
Let us prove that these conditions are satisfied if a  bc  1 .
First, note that 1  a  bc  a  1 simplifies to bc  0 , which is trivially satisfied given that b  0
and c  0 .
Meanwhile, the second inequality, a  bc  1 , can be expressed as follows:
                           v(1   ) * ( *  v)k 
(A.8) a  bc   (1   ) 1 
                          *
                                                      1.
                                   ( * )2         
Substitution of (20) and (21) in the expression a  bc yields:
                      [  v(  1   )]{v(  1)  k (v   )[v 2    v(  1  2 )]}
(A.8-a)    a  bc                                                                              .
                                                (1  v)v 2 (1   )
Note that at   v it follows that a  bc  1 . Besides, we have that:
                                                           k (v  1)3 (v   )  kv3 (   1)2
                        (v   ){[k (v  2)  1]v   k}                       
          (a  bc)                                              (  1)2             2
(A.9)                                                                                         0
                                                    (1  v)v 2
if we assume that the following condition is satisfied:
                v  kv(2  v)
(A.10)                      .
                      k
Thus, since a  bc  1 at   v and given (A.9), it follows that the inequality in (A.8) holds for
all   (0, v)  . As a result, by assuming that (A.10) is satisfied, we can conclude that for all
  ( ,  )  (0, v)  the stability condition in (A.8) is satisfied as well, so that the
polymorphic equilibrium represented by ( * ,  * )   is an attractor.




                                                       19
