                                                                                                     1

                            Brazil at Crossroads:
    A Critical Assessment of Developmentalist Policies in PT Governments
               Daniela M. Prates*, Barbara Fritz** and Luiz Fernando de Paula***

Abstract: Brazil with its policies of combining growth with income redistribution gained high
attention especially since the Global Financial Crisis. These policies often have been labelled
as developmentalist. Now, with a deep economic crisis, the question arises how far
developmentalist policies were responsible for this downturn and what sort of developmentalist
policies were implemented. To address these questions, we first deliver a more precise
definition of different variants of developmentalism. Second, based on stylized facts of the
Brazilian economy in the period of three successive leftist governments between 2003 and
2016, we classify relevant macroeconomic, social and industrial policies. Thus, we can see that
different types of developmentalist policies came to application to a certain degree, with the
dominance of re-distributional policies fostering domestic consumption. However, there were
also orthodox policy elements to be found especially within macroeconomic policies and to a
highly varying degree over time. Most remarkably, we found the later part of the period under
analysis characterized by permanent changes in the policy mix, and a final and frustrated
orthodox attempt to revert the crisis. We thus conclude that not only has developmentalism per
se been a fallacy, but rather its lack of conceptual clarity at the theoretical level, and incoherent
policy coordination at the policy level in the case of Brazil.
Key words: developmentalism; Brazilian economy; economic policy
JEL Classification: E61; E65; 010

Resumo: O Brasil, com políticas que resultaram em crescimento econômico com redistribuição
de renda, se tornou uma referência internacional após ter se recuperado rapidamente do
contágio da crise financeira global. Essas políticas são frequentemente caracterizadas como
desenvolvimentistas. Com a profunda crise econômica, a questão que emerge é se as políticas
desenvolvimentistas foram responsáveis por esta crise e que tipos de políticas
desenvolvimentistas foram implementadas. Para responder essas perguntas, primeiro são
apresentadas definições das diferentes variantes do desenvolvimentismo. Em seguida, baseadas
em fatos estilizados, as políticas econômicas (macroeconômica, social e industrial) são
classificadas no período de quatro governos do PT (2003/2016). Diferentes tipos de políticas
desenvolvimentistas foram aplicadas, mas em graus diferenciados e com predomínio de
políticas redistributivas que fomentaram o consumo interno. No entanto, também estiveram
presentes políticas ortodoxas, especialmente no plano macroeconômico. Conclui-se que não
somente o desenvolvimentismo em si foi uma falácia, mas também que houve falta de clareza
conceitual em âmbito teórico e coordenação deficiente nas políticas adotadas.
Palavras-chave: desenvolvimentismo; economia brasileira; política econômica

Área 2 - Economia Política


*
   Professor of Economics at the Institute of Economics of the UNICAMP and CNPq researcher; prates@
unicamp.br.
**
    Professor of Economics at the Institute for Latin American Studies at the Freie Universität Berlin;
barbara.fritz@fu-berlin.de
***
    Professor of Economics at Faculdade de Ciências Econômicas (FCE) and Instituto de Estudos Sociais e
Políticos (IESP) of the Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (UERJ) and CNPq researcher;
luizfpaula@terra.com.br
                                                                                              2

1. Introduction

Within few years, Brazil went through extreme ups and downs. At the beginning of the 2010s,
the country had become an international reference not only for weathering rather well the
effects of the Global Financial Crisis (GFC). The country also gained special attention for
being able to recover the path of economic growth with income distribution recorded over
2004-2007. This combination was so remarkable because it was going against the global trend
especially in terms of income concentration. A few years later, the country found itself in its
worst economic crisis for decades. Its per capita GDP was more than 10% smaller by the end
of 2016 than in 2013 and both the share of industrial production at the national level and its
participation in exports fell significantly. Beyond the political upheaval that ended with the
impeachment of the president Dilma Roussef in August 2016 amid an extensive corruption
scandal, there is a heated debate about the economic reasons of the crisis.
This debate encompasses supporters and opponents of the strategy followed by successive
Brazilian governments over more than a decade, which many have labelled, even if with
different prefixes, as ‘developmentalist’ (Ban, 2012; Bielschowsky, 2015). Following Fonseca
(2014), developmentalism is a rather ambiguous term by definition, nurtured both by
theoretical concepts and economic policy experiences. Yet, a common denominator, shared by
academics as well as explicitly expressed by the Brazilian governments in this period
(Ministério de Planejamento, 2003) has been the aim to combine sustained economic growth
with productive restructuring and income distribution by giving the State an active role.
In this paper, we evaluate the recent experience of developmentalism in Brazil since the GFC
based on a Keynesian-structuralist theoretical approach. According to this approach, the
interplay of monetary and financial asymmetries results in a key influence of the dynamics of
the international economy on the performance of peripheral emerging economies such as
Brazil, mainly through the boom-bust cycles of capital flows. Consequently, these asymmetries
also constrain the policy space in these economies, shaping the degree of autonomy of
economic and social policies. Yet, the specific mix of policies adopted depends on domestic
factors, specifically the institutional framework and political power relations.
As there has been, in political terms, a continuum of four successive governments led by the
Partido dos Trabalhadores (PT, Workers’ Party) since 2003, we also include the years before
the outbreak of the GFC. Our analysis covers the period from 2003 to mid-2016, i.e. four terms
led by the PT, the first two by the well-known Luis Inácio Lula da Silva and the others by
Dilma Rousseff, whose second government lasted only one year and a half due to her
impeachment.
We ask if and how a developmentalist approach can be blamed for the dramatic downturn at the
end of this period. Hence, we address a lacuna in the current literature on the Brazilian case,
which tries to explain this downturn at analyzing the economic outcome in terms of the
complex interdependence among income redistribution, demand and changes of production
patterns. Conversely, we look into the policies applied and ask how they can be classified in
terms of their paradigmatic background.
To address our research question, we derive three main hypotheses. First, we assume that a
wide range of policies were applied, of which some can be labelled as developmentalist, but it
is needed further specification in terms of the type of developmentalist approach applied by
policy makers. Our second hypothesis is that not all policies adopted during this period can be
labelled as developmentalist. Third, the significant and repeated changes of the policy mix over
time were conditioned by the external context, but also shaped by domestic factors.
                                                                                                    3

Then, the main contribution of this paper is        to assess the economic policies during PT
governments, analyzing if these policies can be     considered developmentalist and, if they can,
what type of developmentalist policies were          implemented. A second contribution is to
introduce a differentiation of developmentalist     approaches from a macroeconomic point of
view.
The following section presents the different variants of the concept of developmentalism. The
third section, firstly, presents stylized facts of the external context and details of our theoretical
approach; and, secondly, summarizes the macroeconomic outcomes of the Brazilian economy
in the period under review. The fourth section sums up the economic and social policies
applied from 2003 to mid-2016 while the fifth proposes a periodization for the time span
analyzed and a typology of policies during PT governments along the different
developmentalist and non-developmentalist variants. Finally, the sixth section concludes. It is
worth to mention that we deviate from the standard structure of first introducing empirical
evidence and subsequently the theoretical framework, because we present highly selective
empirical evidence in terms of policy outcomes, based on the concepts of developmentalism, in
order to then come to our main contribution of policy analysis.

2. Concepts of developmentalism

The concept of developmentalism is a rather ambiguous term per definition. It involves two
perspectives, which are intertwined, but are not the same neither from an epistemological
viewpoint nor in daily practice: i) a phenomenon of the ‘material world’, i.e. a set of practices
of economic policies proposed and/or executed by policy makers; and ii) a phenomenon of the
‘world of ideas’, i.e. a set of ideas proposed to express theories, concepts or visions of the
world. The former expresses itself also as political discourse, while the second seeks to form a
school of thought (Fonseca, 2014, p.30).
The origin of developmentalism is related both to studies of development in the 1950s and the
Latin American structuralist approach, which sought to understand the specificities of
underdevelopment and how to overcome it. Classic developmentalism departed from the idea
that the typical division of labor between developed and developing economies created a
structural balance of payments constraint and impaired domestic growth. As a phenomenon of
the ‘material world’, developmentalism translated to national-developmentalist strategies
supporting that industrial development was the most efficient way to achieve an increase in
productivity and in national income; thereby retaining the ‘fruits’ of technical progress in
peripheral economies. Latin American structuralism, also known nowadays as ‘classic
developmentalism’, used the metaphor ‘center-periphery’ to translate the productive and
technological asymmetries of the international order and saw industrialization as the only way
for the peripheral economies to gain access to part of the technical progress from the developed
economies, allowing them at the same time to progressively raise the living standard of the
population (Prebisch, 1950; see also Ocampo, 2001).
The current debate is intensively nurtured and intertwined with the economic policy discourse
and policy making, especially in Latin American countries where leftist parties dominated
governments in many countries until recently. Updated concepts of developmentalism gained
space in semi-mature economies of the continent, which are featured by a more diversified
productive structure and the risk of premature de-industrialization. This also resulted from
profound discontentment with policies based on the economic orthodoxy, also dubbed as
‘Washington Consensus’. Indeed, the region that has the highest degree of economic inequality
in the world experienced a stagnation or even further worsening of inequality though the period
of liberalization. Within the critical assessment of the orthodox agenda of domestic market
                                                                                                              4

liberalization, trade and financial openness and reduction of the role of the State, income
distribution emerged at the center of public debate.
Within this renewed debate, we identify two major new concepts: social developmentalism
(SD) and new developmentalism (ND). These have updated classic developmentalism and
added new dimensions. Both clearly reject the neoclassical idea of welfare maximization by
specializing on comparative advantages at the global level, similar to classic
developmentalism, at seeing structural external constraints caused by integration of peripheral
economies in the global market as the cause of lacking economic dynamism at the domestic
level. Thus, they support a national strategy of economic development with an active role of
the state to achieve structural change towards (re-) industrialization, resulting in social
transformation (Fonseca, 2014, p. 41; Bielschowsky, 2015).
To facilitate the analysis of policy coordination, we analytically disaggregate the concepts into
three different layers of policy aims, targets and tools.1 When comparing SD and ND, they are
rather similar in their policy aims as both seek to achieve productive change with income
redistribution. But, they clearly differ regarding the targets and tools to achieve these aims.
SD is closer to the classic developmentalist approach, as it continues focusing on the shortage
of domestic demand to push investment into productive diversification. Yet, while the former
sees income redistribution more as an outcome of structural change pushed by State action, SD
gives the aim of a more equal income distribution a prominent role2 for increasing domestic
mass consumption, which would push economic growth and productive change (Lavinas,
2017). The structural balance of payments’ constraint would be mitigated by export growth
induced by scale effects and industrialization as well as fostered by domestic demand, given
the complementarity between domestic and foreign markets. It also could be supplemented, at
least temporarily, by the expansion of the natural resource-intensive sector and its supply
chains (Bielschowsky, 2012; Biancarelli, 2015).
Differently, ND has a predominantly macroeconomic perspective and is more inspired by the
development path of Asian emerging markets with their marked strategy of export surplus. It
sees two hindering factors for development: first, the tendency towards currency overvaluation
as a result, mainly, of the specialization in commodity exports;3 second the net flows of foreign
capital, stimulated by the policy of growth-cum-foreign savings. Also, the tendency of wages
to increase below productivity due to the availability of an unlimited supply of labor. Here, the
aim of (re-) industrialization is directly linked to the target of an export surplus of
manufactured goods, pushing for further investment in this sector. With this, the country
should be enabled to avoid incurring into external debt. In this view, the exchange rate plays
the key role to influence both imports and exports. An improvement in the income
redistribution basically would result from (formal) job creation in the manufacturing sector and
from wages increasing along productivity gains (Bresser-Pereira, 2011).
Regarding the policy tools attached to each of these approaches, Carneiro (2012) notes that the
reflections regarding SD are rather fragmented. This holds especially for the first generation of
papers (Bastos, 2012; Bielschowsky, 2012; Carneiro, 2012), where the focus is exclusively on
policies oriented towards redistribution and shifting production patterns, as follows:
       Wage policies, being the minimum wage a powerful policy instrument to foster wage
        increases especially in the lower income range;
       Social transfers targeted towards the poorer part of the population;


1
  For an extended comparative analysis to the two recent developmentalist concepts see Fritz et al. (2017).
2
  This should be reflected rather quickly in a significant reduction of the Gini index.
3
  This is also discussed as the phenomenon of Dutch disease.
                                                                                                5

      Stimulus to consumer credit;
      Public investment especially in (physical and social) infrastructure, seen as crucial for
       directly creating demand, but especially for giving incentives for private investment;
      Industrial policies and subsidized financing by public banks, designed to further
       stimulate private investment.
Macroeconomic considerations are mainly included in a second wave on publications on SD.
Rossi (2014) makes an explicit attempt to include monetary, fiscal and exchange rate policy
tools, but this remains rather imprecise.
Within ND, Bresser-Pereira (2011) offers a well-developed theoretical approach and clearly
deduces the policy tools necessary for this strategy of export-led growth:
      Priority is given to currency devaluation and subsequent maintenance of the exchange
       rate at a level where domestic industry becomes internationally competitive. If
       necessary, this undervalued currency should be supported by capital controls.
      Other macroeconomic instruments, such as monetary and fiscal policies, are thought to
       support this nominal and exchange rate level, at maintaining price stability.
      Industrial policy is a secondary policy tool and should be targeted exclusively towards
       exports, as only these are seen as the engine for investment and growth at the domestic
       level, until catching up with advanced economies.
      Wages, at the short term, might lose in terms of purchasing power as a consequence of
       the currency devaluation. In the medium term, however, wages should grow along
       productivity gains to prevent spurring inflation and to maintain the functional
       distribution between wages and profits. Income redistribution is expected to stem from
       additional job creation in the manufacturing sector.
      Redistributive policies are included as an addendum in later publications (Bresser-
       Pereira et al. 2015), reacting to the heated debate around re-distributional issues, which,
       however, are not vital to the ND strategy of export-led growth.

3. Empirical assessment of outcomes based on stylized facts

Before analysing the policies adopted in Brazil from 2003 to mid-2016 in section 4, this
section summarizes the changes in the external context overtime as well as the economic
outcomes of the Brazilian economy during this period through stylized facts regarding the most
relevant goals targeted by developmentalist approaches.

3a. External context

Over the period under consideration, the external context underwent important changes. From
2003 to the threshold of the GFC, the international economy was characterised by a very
favourable scenario in terms of trade (high commodity prices and external demand) and capital
flows. Yet, after the double speed recovery and the new ‘twin boom’ of commodity prices and
capital flows from mid-2009 to 2010, the international setting deteriorated. The global trade
volume increased at a much lower rate in comparison to the pre-crisis setting, commodity
prices begun to fall in 2012 and capital flows to emerging economies lost momentum from
2011 (Figure 1 and Table 1 in Appendix).
Supporters and opponents of developmentalist policies agree on the positive influence of the
benign external environment before the GFC on the Brazilian economy. However, they
                                                                                                                               6

definitely diverge on the role of its deterioration since 2011 on the recent crisis: while
orthodox authors put the blame on these policies (Barbosa Filho and Pessoa, 2014); social
developmentalist authors (Bastos, 2015) stress the dominance of external shocks.
We follow herein a Keynesian-structuralist approach4, which emphasizes the center-periphery
asymmetries of the international economy (Prebisch, 1950) and the resulting higher
vulnerability of peripheral economies to external shocks. Yet, in the post-Bretton Woods era,
although current account (specially, terms-of-trade) shocks have remained relevant,
particularly in commodity dependent economies, financial shocks have assumed the leading
influence due to monetary and financial asymmetries.

        Figure 1. World Trade (annual change in percent) and capital flows (USD billion)
          15                                                                                                         1400000


                                                                                                                     1200000
          10

                                                                                                                     1000000
           5

                                                                                                                     800000
           0
                                                                                                                     600000

           -5
                                                                                                                     400000

          -10
                                                                                                                     200000


          -15                                                                                                        0
                  2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015    2016


                           Non-resident capital inflows to Emerging economies                  Global Trade


                Source: IMF (2017). Authors’ elaboration.

The monetary asymmetry is a consequence of the so-called currency hierarchy, namely,
currencies are hierarchically positioned according to their degree of liquidity, which relates to
their ability to perform the three functions of money internationally. The key currency
(currently, the US dollar) is placed at the top of the hierarchy; the currencies of other center
countries or regions (such as the yen and the euro) are in intermediate positions and at the
bottom are the currencies issued by peripheral economies that are incapable of fulfilling these
functions. Yet, this asymmetry has revealed itself more deleterious due to financial
asymmetries, which refer to the patterns and magnitude of capital flows to peripheral countries
that joined financial globalization, becoming ‘emerging economies’. Firstly, capital flows
towards these economies depend mainly on exogenous sources, rendering them permanently
vulnerable to their reversal by virtue of changes in the monetary conditions in the center as
well as by the rise in the liquidity preference of global investors. Secondly, despite the residual
nature of capital flows directed to those economies, their potentially destabilizing effects on
local financial markets and exchange rates are significant, since the volume allocated by global
investors is not marginal in relation to the size of these markets.
Therefore, according to this approach, the interplay of the monetary and financial asymmetries
results in a key influence of the international economy dynamics on the performance of

4
    For more details, see Fritz et al. (2017) and Paula et al (2017).
                                                                                              7

peripheral emerging economies such as Brazil, mainly through the boom-bust cycles of capital
flows. Consequently, these asymmetries also constrain the policy space in these economies,
shaping the degree of autonomy of economic and social policies (Paula et al, 2017). Yet, the
specific mix of policies adopted depends on domestic factors, among which the institutional
framework and political power relations.

3b Stylized facts of outcomes

3b.1 Growth performance
The Brazilian economy had an unprecedented performance from 2004 to mid-2008 compared
to the 1980s and 1990s, with an average growth rate of 4.8% per year. During the pre-crisis
boom, the main engine of growth was household consumption (which responds to the biggest
share of the Brazilian GDP, around 60%). Another novelty of this period was the continuous
credit growth to households and enterprises.
In line with other emerging economies (Canuto and Leipziger, 2012), the recession caused by
the contagion effect of the GFC was brief. In contrast, due to its distinct cyclical behaviour,
investment recorded an abrupt reduction in face of the contagion effect of the GFC, being the
main responsible factor along with exports for the recession in the first half of 2009; while
household consumption mitigated the decline in aggregate expenditure. The economy
recovered quickly and in 2010 the GDP recorded a growth rate of 7.5%; investment and
consumption contributed to that healthy economic recovery.
Growth, however, began to slow down in late 2010. The deceleration intensified in 2012,
turning into the worst economic recession since at least the Great Recession of the 1930s
(Table 1 in Appendix). After the GDP growth of 3.9% in 2011, economic growth dropped to
1.7% p.a. on average in 2012-2014 (2.0% p.a in the case of industrial output) and declined
sharply to -3.6% over 2015-2016. A set of shocks that reached the economy over those two last
years contributed to the crisis, among which a deterioration in the terms of trade, accelerated
inflation due to a de-freezing of monitored service prices and strong currency devaluation, and
a hydric crisis. The recession, which was further fuelled by a tightening of monetary and fiscal
policies, produced declining wages and profits. This also caused a huge slowdown in credit
supply that occasionally resulted in a credit crunch, further delaying the recovery of the
economy (Figure 2).
Finally, economic growth in 2003-2013 was followed by a sharp reduction in unemployment
rate, from 12.4% in 2003 to 5.1% in 2013 (this rate increased to 8% in 2015 due to the
recession). The combination between low employment and increase in real wages contributed
to the improvement in social indicators, as we will see in the next subsection.
                                                                                                       8

Figure 2. Credit supply by ownership (%)*




Source: Central Bank of Brazil (2016). Authors´ elaboration.
(*) Growth rate compared to 12 months before with data in real values (deflated by IPCA)

3b.2 Income distribution: functional and personal
An important and unique feature of the Brazilian economy performance over the period under
consideration was the reduction in inequality, a trend also observed in other Latin America
countries (Fritz and Lavinas, 2015). In the case of Brazil, the process of income redistribution
encompassed both the personal dimension, with a reduction of the Gini index, and the
functional one, with an increase of the wage share in total income. On the other hand, poverty
rate fell down sharply from 35.8% of the population in 2003 to 13.3% in 20145 (Table 1 in
Appendix).

However, analysing the dynamic of top incomes based on income tax data between 2007 and
2013, Gobetti and Orair (2015) conclude that the Gini index of household survey data
overestimates improvements in the personal income distribution. In other words, the level of
inequality and concentration of income in Brazil is significantly higher than what has been
estimated by this type of data. Upon their estimation, income concentrated by the 0.1% and the
10% richest households comes to 10.9% and 54.1% of disposable income of households,
respectively.

3b.3 Productive re-structuration and external vulnerability
The third aim of developmentalism is the so called structural change or re-industrialization that
refers to the reallocation of productive resources from the traditional sector (especially
agriculture) to the manufacturing sector (mainly those segments of higher technological
sophistication). Yet, over the period of 2008-2015, the fall of this sector’s share in the GDP
that had started in the 1990s gained momentum.


5
    Poverty index is the percentage of the population with household income lower than poverty line.
                                                                                             9

Moreover, since 2008, this descending trajectory has been accompanied by increasing deficits
in manufacturing goods trade balance along with surplus in non-manufacturing goods,
certainly fostered by the appreciation of the domestic currency in real terms until 2012 (see
section 4). Even with a subsequent reverse in the appreciation trend, however, profitability of
exports increased only slightly. In this setting, industrial output firstly stagnated and, from
2013, begun to fall. Meanwhile, retail sales and the import coefficient of industry inputs kept
growing, indicating a substitution of domestic production by imports both in final and
intermediary manufacturing goods (Paula et al., 2015).
In terms of external vulnerability, results are mixed. Considering external liquidity, the
situation improved thanks not only to the policy of foreign exchange (FX) reserves
accumulation (see section 4), but also to the reduction in the currency mismatch associated
with a change in the composition of the short-term gross external liability. This change
stemmed from two simultaneous trends: a decrease in external debt and a rise in foreign
portfolio investment in the domestic market. Further, the increasing current account deficit
(CAD) between 2009 and 2014 was financed almost fully by foreign direct investment (FDI).
In 2015 and 2016, the FDI was higher than the CAD by 0.8 and 3.0 percent. Thus, in the short
term, Brazil did not face an external constraint, what explains, along with the dirty floating
regime, why a balance of payment crisis did not break out despite the huge outflow of foreign
portfolio investments amid a deep economic crisis (Table 1 in Appendix).
On the other hand, external solvency deteriorated, as the growth rate of the total net external
liability was greater than the one of exports. The situation rather worsened when considering
only the exports of manufactured products, characterized by lower price volatility and higher
income-elasticity than commodities. From this perspective, the country’s capacity of
generating autonomously foreign currency to serve its external liability decreased during the
period covered (Table 1 in Appendix).

4. Public policies over 2003-2016
In this section, we analyze public policies implemented during Lula da Silva’s and Dilma
Roussef’s terms. Based on this assessment, we will elaborate in section 5 a typology of these
policies along the different developmentalist and non-developmentalist strategies. This
typology, in turn, will enable us to answer our research question and confirm (or not) the
hypothesis presented in the introduction.

4a. Macroeconomic policies

The first term of Lula da Silva’s government (2003-2006), following a confidence crisis in
2002 with a massive speculative attack against the Brazilian currency, was characterized by the
continuity of the combined macroeconomic policy adopted after the 1999 currency crisis,
namely, inflation targeting, primary surplus targets and a dirty floating exchange rate regime.
Under this framework, both fiscal and monetary policies were kept mostly orthodox, featured
by a wide primary surplus and the maintenance of a high real interest rate (albeit with a
decreasing path), while the currency appreciated gradually (Figures 3 and 4).
                                                                                               10

Figure 3. Policy rate (SELIC interest rate - % p.a.) and real effective exchange rate (June
1994 = 100)




Source: Central Bank of Brazil (2017). Authors´ elaboration.

Figure 4. Exchange rate (BRL/USD) – Jan/1999-Aug/2016
4,50

                                                                                     4.05
4,00
                      3.81

3,50
                                3.13
3,00                                                                                    3.21

2,50                                               2.39                       2.38

                                                                       2.05
2,00               2.32


1,50
                                                  1.59          1.59
1,00
       2004.11




       2013.08
       1999.01
       1999.08
       2000.03
       2000.10
       2001.05
       2001.12
       2002.07
       2003.02
       2003.09
       2004.04

       2005.06
       2006.01
       2006.08
       2007.03
       2007.10
       2008.05
       2008.12
       2009.07
       2010.02
       2010.09
       2011.04
       2011.11
       2012.06
       2013.01

       2014.03
       2014.10
       2015.05
       2015.12
       2016.07




Source: Central Bank of Brazil (2017).

Amid a positive external environment in terms of trade and capital flows, the high interest rate
stimulated speculative operations through portfolio investment and FX derivatives. These
operations along with the current account surplus resulted in a significant currency
appreciation. The interventions of the monetary authority in the FX market in 2005 did not
curb this appreciation, but came out with the buildup of FX reserves. The so called
precautionary demand for reserves contributed to the decrease of net public external debt
(Table 1 in Appendix) and the improvement in the country’s external liquidity (see subsection
3b). Moreover, in this period bank credit to the private sector recorded a significant growth,
                                                                                              11

stimulated, among other factors, by the implementation of payroll-deductible credit operations,
which reduced bank risk and, consequently, the cost of loans to households.
Yet, both the currency appreciation trend and the credit boom were reversed in September
2008, when the contagion effect of the global financial crisis resulted in huge capital outflows.
This marked the beginning of the second phase under analysis here.
The Brazilian authorities responded to the financial crisis by adopting a number of
countercyclical measures (Barbosa, 2010; Paula et al., 2015): (i) to avoid the spread of the
credit crunch, the Central Bank of Brazil adopted a series of liquidity-enhancing measures; (ii)
the BCB intervened in the FX markets; (iii) the state-owned banks were encouraged to expand
their credit operations to compensate for the deceleration in the credit supply by private banks
(Figure 2); and (iv) the Ministry of Finance undertook fiscal measures to stimulate aggregate
demand.
Such countercyclical reaction was possible, to a large extent, due to the policy space created by
the shift towards a net creditor position in foreign currency of the Brazilian government.
Consequently, the currency devaluation favored public finance. In the context of quick
recovery of the economy and a new surge of capital flows to emerging economies from the
middle of 2009, Brazil faced again huge short-term inflows boosted by a still high differential
between the internal and external interest rates. As the BCB resumed the exchange rate policy
adopted before the crisis, Brazil’s currency recorded a huge appreciation in 2009 (Figure 4).
In this setting, the Ministry of Finance started imposing regulations on capital flows, starting
with a tiny financial transaction tax on foreign portfolio investments in October 2009. One year
later, these regulations were strengthened with the first measure targeting FX derivatives
operations and administrative controls. Moreover, the Central Bank of Brazil adopted macro
prudential regulations to curb the domestic credit boom, fostered by countercyclical policies.
In mid-2011, during Roussef’s first term, a gradual change was introduced for what the
government itself called the ’New Macroeconomic Matrix’, to boost growth. The regulatory
toolkit on spot and derivatives’ FX markets had been further broadened as the previous
measures had only mitigated the currency appreciation trend underlying the deterioration in
competitiveness of Brazil’s manufacturing sector in both external and domestic markets (Prates
and Fritz, 2016; Paula and Prates, 2015). It was completed by a progressive reduction both in
the policy rate and the primary fiscal surplus. The interplay of the new FX regulations, the
monetary policy loosening and the increase in the risk aversion of global investors due to the
worsening of the euro crisis eventually came out with the intended depreciation of the Brazilian
currency (Figure 4).
Additionally, the government used a wide range of instruments: a nominal freeze of relevant
public tariffs (energy and gasoline) for price stabilization purposes, the use of state-owned
banks to reduce bank spreads, etc. Furthermore, due to the economy’s positive fiscal
performance in the first half of 2011, the Ministry of Finance adopted several fiscal stimulus
measures, especially tax exemptions that mainly favored the domestic manufacturing sector.
These exemptions were gradually extended, aimed at increasing the international
competitiveness of this sector, damaged by both currency appreciation and greater competition
in the external markets (see subsection 4b). It is worth mentioning that in the first year these
measures did not change the overall fiscal policy stance.
Yet, in April 2013, due to an increasing inflation rate, the BCB restarted to rise gradual and
continuously the policy rate (Figure 3), and removed regulations on FX operations due to
signaling by the Federal Reserve that its quantitative easing policy would to be withdraw soon
(‘tapering’). At the same time, the Brazilian government further enlarged tax exemptions, and
tried to intensify investment in infra-structure. Moreover, affected by the decline of oil prices
                                                                                                              12

and the first effects of ‘Lava-jato’6 operation, Petrobras reduced its investments, with a strong
impact on overall investment (Afonso and Fajardo, 2015).
Compared with the policies launched to counter the GFC contagion effect, the countercyclical
fiscal policies implemented in 2012-2014, with the use of tax exemptions instead of public
expenditures, were very limited, with small aggregate impact on production and employment.
The same holds for public investment, which was significantly higher over 2006-2010.
In 2015, after the re-election of Dilma Roussef, the government shifted its economic policy
somehow radically towards a more orthodox policy stance. The main aim of the economic
policy was to implement fiscal adjustment mainly by the side of public expenditures,
understood as fundamental for retaking the agents’ confidence as a pre-condition for economic
recovery. For this purpose, the Brazilian government committed itself to a primary fiscal
surplus of 1.2% of GDP, implementing a set of measures to reduce public expenditures (mainly
by the budget contingency), re-adjusted monitored prices (energy and oil), while the BCB
further increased its policy rate from 10.92% p.a. in October 2014 to 14.14% p.a. in August
2015. Due to strong devaluation in 2015, the BCB had to intervene in the FX market to reduce
exchange rate volatility and to offer exchange rate hedging to private agents, with the use of
swap operations.
The efforts of fiscal adjustment failed as fiscal revenues dropped dramatically in 2015, so that
the Ministry of Finance had to revise its fiscal targets. Due to the recession and increasing
interest payments, the public nominal deficit increased even more in 2015. Net public debt over
GDP, which had recorded its lowest level during the period under analysis in 2013 with 30.5%,
again grew steeply (to 46% of GDP in 2016). Gross debt over GDP increased even more, from
51.5% to 69.6% in the same period. This means that government’s assets (mainly, foreign
reserves and loans to public banks) shrunk in relative terms, contrary to the period 2010-2014,
when they rose significantly (Table 1 in Appendix).
At the beginning of 2016, Nelson Barbosa, the new Finance Minister, announced his agenda of
measures for the year: establishing a limit for the growth of government’s current and
personnel expenses, untying of part of tax revenue, simplification of the tax system, and a
pension reform, the proposal of which was not presented to the public. Its great challenge was
to establish a strategy of fiscal consolidation, which, among other things, would be able to
reverse the upward trend of public spending that contradictorily compromised the capacity of
the Brazilian State to implement public policies in the long term. As for 2016, the spread of
political crisis virtually paralyzed the government’s actions, making impossible the adoption of
any economic policy agenda until the impeachment of President Roussef in 2016.

4b. Industrial policies

After a long time span of almost complete absence of industrial policies, three programs of
industrial policy were launched during the period analyzed here, each of them containing a
different focus. Industrial policy in this period oscillated between two types of strategies: to
prioritize high-tech sectors and to select national champions in industries with comparative
international advantages, such as agribusiness, steel and mining, as well as to favor sectors
damaged by strong foreign competition (Almeida and Novais, 2014, p.211).
The first program called PICTE (‘Politica Industrial, Tecnológica e de Comércio Exterior’ –
‘Industrial, Technology and Foreign Trade Policy’) was launched in 2004 aimed to address
Brazil’s external vulnerability, emphasizing an active policy of adding value to exports based
6
  ‘Car Wash operation is an investigation being carried out by the Federal Police of Brazil and the Court since
March 17, 2014. Initially a money laundering investigation, it has expanded to cover allegations of corruption at
the state-controlled oil company Petrobras.
                                                                                                            13

on innovation. To this end, three areas were defined: (i) incentives for strategic sectors (capital
goods, software, semiconductors, pharmaceuticals and medicines), through specific programs;
(ii) horizontal actions to stimulate innovation and technological development, international
integration via exports and modernization of institutional environment; and (iii) priority to
three areas considered relevant for national technological development: biotechnology,
nanotechnology and renewable energy.
With the rapid and intensive improvement of Brazilian terms of trade from 2004, which
resulted in substantial surpluses in the trade balance, priorities for industrial policy changed
(Kupfer, 2013). The ‘Productive Development Policy’ (PDP) was launched in May 2008, in a
context where, according to the underlying diagnosis, Brazil had received the investment grade
due to its sound economic fundamentals (low inflation, fiscal surplus, etc.). The main policy
objective was then set to foster growth and productive investment in the domestic market. For
this purpose, the PDP set ambitious investment goals (from 17.6% of GDP in 2007 to 21.0% in
2010) and a increased participation of Brazilian exports in world trade.7 The changing global
scenario led to the launch of a third program, called ‘Plano Brasil Maior’ (PBM – Plan Bigger
Brazil), in August 2011, with continuous modifications in the following years in view of
worsening global economic conditions. The initial objectives of the PBM were creating
capabilities aiming at the productive and technological consolidation of value chains, but the
intensification of international competition in domestic and foreign markets forced the plan to
be directed to the defense of the domestic market and the recovery of systemic competitiveness
conditions (Kupfer, 2013). Given the speed of the penetration of imported goods in Brazil, the
government adopted compensatory measures to minimize the impact on domestic
manufacturing output. The measures included the expansion of subsidized credit by BNDES
and further tax and social security payment exemptions, causing significant fiscal costs with
limited effects on industrial production.
Kupfer (2013), in doing a balance of industrial policies in the period analyzed here, concludes
that they remained an auxiliary line of macroeconomic policies, but often in conflict with these.
Their effectiveness was reduced by different systemic determinants that were outside their
scope, the most important being the strong currency appreciation until 2011 and very high
interest rates.

4c. Social policies

Highly active social policies were one of the major traits of policy orientation during the period
examined in this paper. These policies were crucial for attaining the aim of income
redistribution, which would foster domestic consumption. The two main factors that
contributed to improve income distribution was the huge increase in the minimum wage
(66.9% in real terms from December 2003 to December 2014) and the policy of income
transference due to both increase of the pension benefits and ‘bolsa familia’ program.
The most important instrument certainly was the increase of the minimum wage (Figure 5).
The rule for adjusting such wage adopted over this period was to add the inflation of the
previous year and the GDP growth rate of the second year before the relevant one. In this way,
high economic growth resulted in high real wage increases as in Brazil wages of low qualified
workers in the public and in the private formal and informal sector, as much as public pension
payments, are all linked to the minimum wage. Within this institutional setting, minimum wage
policy turned a powerful re-distributional instrument.

7
  Almeida and Novais (2014) criticized PDP for its absence of reciprocity mechanisms along the lines adopted in
South Korea. According to Kupfer (2013) the PDP had a more countercyclical role and less than the expected
function of providing stimulus to the investment pattern of the economy.
                                                                                                14


Figure 5. Minimum wage – nominal and real*




Source: IPEADATA (2017). Authors’ elaboration
(*) Deflated by the National Index of Consumer Prices (INPC)

Another social policy instrument that gained high national and international visibility was the
conditional cash transfer program Bolsa Família. It was designed to combat extreme poverty,
and achieved an almost complete coverage of very poor families with kids in school age in the
country. Its costs for public spending together with other anti-poverty programs remained very
low.
Finally, fiscal policy was completely absent in the area of redistribution policies. While in
OECD countries taxes are responsible for the bulk of public re-distribution, in Brazil the tax
system even has a slightly regressive effect, as Lustig et al. (2014) show.

5. An assessment of public policies in the PT governments

When we assess the policies adopted during the four PT governments, we find significant and
repeated changes in the policies over time. Even if for some aspects exact and uniform
periodization is rather difficult, we also find that these changes were largely associated to the
external context. As pointed out in section 3, it is possible to identify three different phases in
the relevant period, which defined the limits and possibilities of the domestic economic and
social policies: the first one before the GFC, benign in terms of trade and financial flows to
emerging economies; the second one, from September 2008 to 2010, featured by the GFC, the
double speed recovery and the new ‘twin boom’; the third one, from 2011, with the
deterioration of external conditions due to the slowdown of both world trade volume and
capital inflows and the boost in commodity prices (Figure 1 and Table 1 in Appendix).
Hence, these same periods are used herein to elaborate a typology of policies along the
different developmentalist and non-developmentalist strategies. Yet, the last phase (2011 to
mid-2016) is split into two sub-phases in view of the changes in economic policies in Dilma’s
second term that were shaped, largely, by domestic factors, especially the political confidence
                                                                                                              15

crisis triggered by a mix of economic crisis and corruption scandal, which made President
Roussef loose political majority (Table 5).
The first phase from 2003 to September 2008 was marked by an orthodox macroeconomic
policy. Moreover, following the path of other emerging economies, from 2005 the favorable
external context had enabled Brazil to adopt the precautionary strategy of accumulating FX
reserves, which had a key role in reducing external vulnerability. This policy stance was mixed
with increasing elements of social developmentalism, namely, the formation of a market of
mass consumption. That was boosted by increasing the minimum wage in real terms,
stimulating private credit, as well as rising households’ purchasing power in a setting of
lowering prices of imported goods due to the currency appreciation. However, as industrial
policy was mostly oriented towards strengthening exports, this policy field can be
characterized as new-developmentalist, even if it has a secondary place in this perspective.
A second phase, from October 2008 to 2010, was the time when ‘we were all Keynesians’. In
the context of the contagion effect of the GFC, Lula’s second term launched a more flexible
fiscal policy, including an increase in public investment, promoted a countercyclical role of
state-owned banks and boosted social policies, further increasing the real minimum wage and
anti-poverty programs8. These measures, coherent with social developmentalism, were taken
with some pragmatism and departed from what we labelled as orthodox policies before the
crisis. In a second stage, when the economy recovered, the government adopted price-based
capital controls and macro-prudential regulations on the credit market to curb, respectively, the
currency appreciation and the credit boom. Although these two types of financial regulation
(Ocampo, 2012) were included to some degree in the conventional toolkit of macroeconomic
recommendations after the 2008 global crisis (Blanchard et. al., 2010), they fit within the new
developmentalist approach.
The transition period, from the second to the third phase (2011 –2014), is difficult to be set,
and classification becomes especially difficult. This phase was characterized by strong
oscillation in the macroeconomic policy between orthodoxy and developmentalism. One could
interpret the so-called ‘New Macroeconomic Matrix’ as influenced by new developmentalism
prescriptions, due to the currency devaluation and the decreasing policy rate, but other
elements of this approach were not present, especially regarding fiscal policy in 2013-2014.
This policy was not only increasingly expansive, but also supply side-oriented instead of
focusing on the public demand side. Then, they were even criticized by social
developmentalists (Bastos, 2015). However, from 2013, a more orthodox approach in terms of
monetary and exchange rate policies towards inflation stabilization was resumed. At the same
time, in the first Roussef´s government, the pillars of social developmentalism of the first two
phases were maintained, i.e. minimum wage increases, stimulus to private credit, an active role
of public banks and of industrial policies. Yet, public investment decreased in 2010-2014, so it
is imprecise to define Roussef’s macroeconomic policy in this field as social developmentalist.
As we have already pointed out, the second Roussef’s government (2015-2016) was marked by
a radical shift, with the implementation of orthodoxy mainly in the field of fiscal and monetary
policies. As for the exchange rate policy, Central Bank of Brazil implemented a strategy to
reduce volatility and provide a hedge against exchange rate risk, but did not intend to be
involved with the determination of the exchange rate. In terms of social policies there were no
significant changes. As we have seen in the former section, the rule for minimum wage
readjustment remained in place, although high inflation in 2015-2016 and low growth in the
years before limited real wage increases.



8
    Morais and Saad-Filho (2011) points out the hybrid feature of the economic policies implemented since 2006.
                                                                                                  16

As we can conclude from section 4, the ambiguity and lack of coordination of economic
policies combined with the worsening in the international scenario can explain the downturn in
the Brazilian economy, especially since 2014. On the contrary, orthodox economists assign the
downturn to the implementation of developmental policies in Brazil (Barbosa Filho and
Pessoa, 2014).

Table 5. Typology of policies
                           2003 – Aug. 2008 Sept. 2008 - 2010             2011 – mid 2016
                                              Lula during GFC
                                                                   Dilma I           Dilma II
                            Lula before GFC     and double
                                                                (2011 – 2014)     (2015 – 8/16)
                                              speed recovery
Macroeconomic policies
  Monetary policy                ORT          ORT; ND; ORT        ND; ORT              ORT
  Exchange rate policy           ORT             ORT; ND          ND; ORT              ORT
  Fiscal policy                  ORT             SD; ORT         ORT; (SD)             ORT
Social policies                   SD                SD               SD                SD
Public investment                 SD                SD              (SD)               ORT
Financial policies                SD                SD               SD                ORT
Industrial policies               ND                SD               SD                SD
Source: Authors' elaboration.
Notes:
   - Strategy in parenthesis: influenced by a certain strategy.
   - ORT: orthodoxy policies; SD: social developmentalist policies; ND: new
       developmentalist policies.
   - Classifications separated by “;”: temporal sequence of strategies within one phase.

5. Summary and Conclusions

Recent approaches of developmentalism are characterized in general terms by the aim to
combine sustained economic growth with productive restructuring and income distribution by
giving the State an active role. Our assessment of the experience of policies during the long
period of PT-led governments in Brazil from 2003 to mid-2016 with focus on the years after
the GFC, shows that, when using this broad definition, we could not label this period as
developmentalist inasmuch the macroeconomic policies were, predominantly, orthodox.
When taking a closer look, we can confirm our first hypothesis. We find more than one recent
type of developmentalist strategy available at the conceptual level. The two most relevant
concepts we identified, social and new developmentalism, show significant differences. On the
one hand, within the new developmentalist approach, it is given priority to manage macro
prices such as the exchange rate in order to prevent the appreciation of the domestic currency
and, thus, to achieve an export surplus in manufactured goods. On the other hand, the social
developmentalist approach favored re-distributional policies to foster domestic demand and
domestic diversified investment.
So, when asking if developmentalism could be blamed for the recent economic crisis, the
question should also consider what type of developmentalist concept we should account for in
this context. We support herein that the use of the same label for varied approaches without
                                                                                                 17

clarifying their similarities and differences, and the absence of a broader attempt to bring these
views together to a more consistent approach (which might inspire policies in a more coherent
manner) is a major weakness of this recent debate.
Regarding the classification of policies applied, it seems that these followed more explicitly the
social developmentalist version. Not only social policies, but also sub-fields of economic
policies, such as public investment and financial policies regarding credit access of lower
income households and the outstanding role given to public banks, can be attributed to this
concept. The core of new developmentalist policies, the policy of achieving an undervalued
currency, were applied only for a rather limited period of time, which started actually in 2010
and ended rather quickly with the worsening of the external context.
Second, when concretely assessing the macroeconomic policies applied during this period, it is
clear that they were highly orthodox or conventional during the first phase. Yet, against
widespread interpretation, we cannot find a clear pattern of shifting macroeconomic policies
towards a more developmentalist stance in uniform terms after the GFC. Rather, the second
phase, of reaction to the spillovers of the financial crisis in center economies, is shaped by anti-
cyclical policies that were global standard in this context, but applied rather cautiously in
Brazil especially with regards to monetary policy. And the third phase is characterized by a
mixture of policies, which changed in an astonishingly quick manner and include all kinds of
paradigmatic orientation, including orthodox policies. This, for instance, applies to the
monetary policy from the second half of 2012 on, and features especially president Roussef’s
second term. In its struggle against a widening and mutually nurturing economic and political
crisis, that term was dominated by orthodox policies.
This takes us to conclude that our third hypothesis has higher relevance than expected. To our
surprise, we encountered a number of difficulties to find clear criteria both in terms of
periodization and classification, as the policy changes especially in the areas of monetary,
exchange rate and fiscal policies were highly frequent and irregular. Policies should not be
expected to be a pure result of theoretical considerations or a mechanistic reaction to the
changing nature and intensity of external constraints, but they are highly dependent on
institutional path dependency and concrete circumstances, in interplay with specific interests.
However, it is clear that the external context strongly shaped policy options over the period.
Regarding the third phase, the swift shifts in the relevant macroeconomic policy fields certainly
had to do with necessary adjustments to a volatile international environment, characterized by
unstable international capital flows and decreasing commodity prices on the one hand, and the
need to reactivate the domestic economy in a context of sharpened international competition,
on the other hand. Beyond this, however, they may also reflect accumulating domestic
conflicts among economic actors over the re-distributional aims and outcomes of public
policies, which grew acute with the enlarging of the political corruption affair involving the
governing parties.
Overall, we have to state that the several changes in the policy mix certainly could not increase
investors’ confidence in public policies in Brazil in this period due to an astonishing lack of
clearness regarding its economic strategy. On this, we conclude that it is difficult to interpret
developmentalist approaches per se as a fallacy, even if this recent experience in Brazil might
not be helpful in further spreading such concepts. We detect the major weaknesses rather the
lack of both a conceptual clearness regarding this approach and a coherent policy strategy at
the level of policy formulation and execution. As we have pointed out in this paper, the
ambiguity and lack of coordination of the economic policies in the analyzed period combined
with the worsening in the international scenario can explain the downturn in the Brazilian
economy.
                                                                                               18

References
Akyuz, Y. (2014), “Internationalization of finance and changing vulnerabilities in Emerging
       and Developing Economies”, UNCTAD Discussion Papers, No. 217.
Almeida, J.S. and Novais, L.F. (2014), “Indústria e política industrial no contexto pós-crise”, in
        Novais, L.F. et al. (eds.), A Economia Brasileira no Contexto da Crise Global, São
        Paulo, FUNDAP.
Archer, D. (2005), “Foreign exchange market intervention: methods and tactics”, BIS Papers n.
        24.
Balbim, R. (2105), “Para além do Minha Casa Minha Vida: Uma política de habitação de
        interesse social?” IPEA, Texto para Discussao 2116.
Barbosa Filho, F. H. F. and Pessoa, S. (2014), “Desaceleração recente da economia”, in CDPP
        [Centro de Debate de Políticas Públicas] (ed.). Sob a Luz do Sol: uma agenda para o
        Brasil, pp. 15-30.
Barbosa, N. (2010), “Latin America: counter-cyclical policy in Brazil: 2008-09”, Journal of
        Globalization and Development (1(1), pp. 1-12.
Bastos, P.P. (2015), “Austeridade para quem? A crise global do capitalismo neoliberal e as
        alternativas no Brasil”. Instituto de Economia da UNICAMP, Texto para Discussao
        257.
Bastos, P.P. (2012). “A economia política do novo-desenvolvimentismo e do social
        desenvolvimentismo”, Economia e Sociedade 21, special issue, pp. 779-810.
Bielschowsky, R. (2015), “Structuralist reflections on current Latin American development”,
        in: Fritz, B. and Lavinas, L. (eds.), A Moment of Equality for Latin America?
        Challenges and Limits for Redistributive Policies, Burlington: Ashgate, pp. 129-144.
Blanchard, O., Dell’ Ariccia, G., and Mauru, P. (2010), “Rethinking macroeconomic policy”.
        IMF Staff Position Note SPN/10/03.
Central Bank of Brazil (2016). http://www.bcb.gov.br/pt-br/#!/n/SERIESTEMPORAIS, access
        in 03 October 2016.
Bresser-Pereira, L.C. (2011), “From old to new developmentalism in Latin America”, in
        Ocampo, J.A. and Ros, J. (eds), The Oxford Handbook of Latin American Economics,
        Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 108-130.
Bresser-Pereira, L.C. (2015), “Reflecting on new developmentalism and classical
        developmentalism“. FGV São Paulo, Working Paper 395.
Canuto, O. and Leipziger, D. M. (2012, eds.), Ascent after decline: Regrowing global
        economies after the great recession, Washington D.C: World Bank.
Canuto, O. (2016), “Brazil’s way out”, in: Project Syndicate, 6 September.
Carneiro, R.M. (2012), “Velhos e novos desenvolvimentismos”, Economia e Sociedade 21,
        special issue, pp. 749-778.
Carvalho, L. and Rugitsky, F. (2015), “Growth and distribution in Brazil in the 21st century:
        revisiting the wage-led versus profit-led debate”. Working Paper n. 2015-25,
        Department of Economics, FEA-USP.
Central Bank of Brazil (2016). http://www.bcb.gov.br/pt-br/#!/n/SERIESTEMPORAIS, access
        in 03 October 2016.
Fonseca, P.D. (2014), “Desenvolvimentismo: a construção do conceito”, in Calixtre, A.,
        Biancarelli, A. and Cintra, M.A. (eds). Presente e Futuro do Desenvolvimento
        Brasileiro, Brasilia: IPEA, pp. 29-78.
Fritz, B., Paula, L.F. and Prates, D. (2017), “Developmentalism at the Periphery: Can
        Productive Change and Income Redistribution be Compatible with Global Financial
        Asymmetries?” desiguALdades Working Paper No. 101.
Fritz, B. and Lavinas, L. (2015, eds.), A Moment of Equality for Latin America? Challenges
        and Limits for Redistributive Policies. Burlington: Ashgate, 2015.
                                                                                            19

Gobetti, S.W. and Orair, R. (2015), “Progressividade Tributária: a agenda esquecida”.
        Concurso de Monografia em Finanças Públicas, Tema 3 – Tópicos especiais.
IBGE (2016), http://www.ibge.gov.br/home/mapa_site/mapa_site.php#indicadores, Access in
        02 February 2016.
IMF (2017) World Economic Outlook Database. Washington D.C: International Monetary
        Fund.
IPEADATA (2016), http://www.ipeadata.gov.br, access in 04 October 2016.
Kupfer, D. (2013), “Dez anos de política industrial”, Valor, 08/07/2013.
Lavinas, L. (2017), The Brazilian Paradox: The Takeover of Social Policies by
        Financialization. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Lustig, N., C. Pessino, J. and Scott (2014), “The Impact of Taxes and Social Spending on
        Inequality and Poverty in Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Mexico, Peru, and Uruguay”,
        Introduction to the Special Issue Public Finance Review 42, pp. 287-303.
Mello, G.S. (2015), “Diagnóstico dos governos Dilma Rousseff: do “industrialismo” à virada
        neoliberal”. Manuscript, IE/UNICAMP, Campinas.
Morais, L. and Saad-Filho, A. (2011). “Da economia política à política econômica: o novo-
        desenvolvimentismo e o governo Lula”. Revista de Economia Política, 31(4): 507-527.
Ocampo, J.A. (2012), “The case for and experience with capital account regulations“, in
        Gallagher, K.P., Griffith-Jones, S. and Ocampo, J.A. (eds), Regulating Global Capital
        Flows for Long-Run Development, Boston, MA: Pardee Center Task Force Report, pp.
        13-22.
Ocampo, J.A. (2001), “Raúl Prebisch and the development agenda at the dawn of the twenty-
        first century”, CEPAL Review 75/1, pp. 25-40.
Orair, R. (2016), “Investimento público no Brasil: Trajetória e relações com o regime fiscal”,
        Texto para Discussao IPEA n.2215, July.
Paula, L. F., Fritz, B. and Prates, D.M. (2017), “Keynes at the periphery: Currency hierarchy
        and challenges for economic policy in emerging economies”, Journal of Post
        Keynesian Economics, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01603477.2016.1252267.
Paula, L.F., Modenesi, A.M. and Pires, M.C. (2015), “The tale of the contagion of two crises
        and policy responses in Brazil: A case of (Keynesian) policy coordination?”, Journal of
        Post Keynesian Economics 37(3), pp. 408-435.
Paula, L.F. and Prates, D.M. (2015), “Cuenta de capitales y la regulación de derivados del
        mercado de divisas: la experiencia reciente de Brasil”, Investigación Económica,
        LXXIV(291), pp. 79-115.
Prates, D.M. and Fritz, B. (2016) “Beyond capital controls: regulation of foreign currency
        derivatives markets in the Republic of Korea and Brazil after the global financial
        crisis”, Revista de la CEPAL, v. 118, pp. 193-213.
Prebisch, R. (1950), “The economic development of Latin America and its principal
        problems”. New York: United Nations Department of Economic Affairs/mimeo.
Rosa, R.S. and Biancarelli, A.M. (2016), “Determinantes do processo de “desdolarização” do
        passivo externo brasileiro”. Proccedings of 440 National Meeting of Anpec.
Tavares, M.C. (2015), “Prefácio”, in: Medeiros, C.A., Inserção Externa, Crescimento e
        Padrões de Consumo na Economia Brasileira, IPEA, Brasília, pp. 9-14.
UNCTAD (2008): Trade and Development Report, September.
20
