Representative Agent, Rational Expectations, and General Equilibrium
     Theory in Lucas’s Theoretical Framework: Some Considerations1


                                                    Hugo Chu2
                                                hugochu@usp.br




                                                    ABSTRACT
Robert E. Lucas Jr. is considered the “architect” of modern macroeconomics. His
equilibrium approach to the business cycles has provoked a major change in the
understanding of macroeconomic phenomena since the late 1960s. In this article
I attempt to describe historically how he put together the main elements that
formed the body of his theoretical framework, namely, the optimizing
representative agent, the contingent-claim approach to general equilibrium
analysis, and the modeling of the rational expectation hypothesis. Lucas’s
Expectations and the Neutrality of Money, published in 1972, is the first article
containing all elements aforementioned. To reach such a result, he collaborated
with Leonard Rapping in 1969 (their first article) and later developed a joint work
with Edward Prescott in 1971. Furthermore, we also argue that the way Robert
Lucas saw business cycles can be considered an inevitable progress in
macroeconomics.

Keywords: Robert Lucas, Business Cycles, Representative Agent, General
Equilibrium, Rational Expectations.

JEL Codes: B2, B22


Área 1 – História do Pensamento Econômico e Metodologia




1
  I thank Unioeste-Francisco Beltrão for financial support. In preparing for this version I have greatly benefited from
suggestions and comments by Pedro Garcia Duarte and Guilherme de Oliveira. All caveats protecting these courteous
people apply.
2
  University of São Paulo (FEA/USP) and State University of West Parana (Unioeste-Francisco Beltrão).
1. Introduction

      Robert E. Lucas Jr. is widely regarded by the majority of the profession as
the most influential macroeconomist since the late 1960s, having his works
reshaped the way business cycles are comprehended. The main line of argument
pursued by Lucas was that the “recurrent character of business cycles” should
never have been diverted from the original interpretation of the interwar
economists, particularly, Friedrich von Hayek’s view by which the incorporation
of cyclical phenomena into the system of general economic equilibrium, although
in apparent contradiction, is the crucial problem of trade theory and therefore a
significant challenge for economists.3
      Indeed, Lucas not only took up that challenge but also, as a by-product of
his research agenda, pushed further economists’ understanding of the correct
way to evaluate economic policies. As will be argued in this essay, Lucas
succeeded in solving the problem proposed by Hayek through a combination of
neoclassical assumptions such as the optimizing behavior of a representative
agent, the contingent-claim hypothesis of the Arrow-Debreu-McKenzie general
equilibrium theory, along with a novel way of introducing rational expectations
into the framework.
      In other words, for Lucas, besides the cyclicality of the phenomena at hands,
which provides invaluable insights to economists, the decisive advance toward its
understanding was the development and application of new theoretical as well as
quantitative methods, for in the author’s view: “There is no reason to view our
ability to think as being any less limited by available technology than our ability
to act” (Lucas, 1980, p. 286). This essay aims at providing a brief historical
context by which Robert Lucas’s economic and mathematical ideas came to be
amalgamated since the end of the 1960s and which turned out to be the New
classical research agenda.
      Apart from this introduction, the article has three more sections. Section two
explores Lucas’s (and Leonard Rapping’s) attempt at formulating a
macroeconomic model where representative agents (firm and consumer) behave
optimally the whole time, that is, maximize their profit and utility functions
continually in the context of a general equilibrium framework. Section three
describes how in later articles he used a more sophisticated general equilibrium
model to better his approach after Edmund Phelps (1970) made him realize his
model was incomplete. To do so, we begin by discussing how his 1971 paper with
Edward Prescott provided him with the ultimate tools (the modeling of rational
expectations) to finally build a macroeconomic theory erected under a general
equilibrium framework, materialized in his well known “Expectation and the
Neutrality of Money”, published in 1972. Furthermore, still in section three, we
give a concise historical overview of how the dynamic programming developed by
Richard Bellman enabled the writings of the two papers just mentioned. Section
four presents some final thoughts.

3
 In the article “Understanding Business Cycles”, published in 1977, Robert Lucas points to F. A. Hayek (1933) as the
main “intellectual ancestor” behind his rationale for pursuing the understanding of business cycles as equilibrium
phenomena. In this paper we simply take such a point of view for granted and build the historical context by which we
understand Lucas succeeded. However, we do recognize the controversy it generated. Kevin Hoover (1988) dedicated
an entire chapter of his book to analyzing whether the New Classical research program was indeed an “Austrian
Revival.” Also, in a good survey of the issue, Jorge Soromenho (1998) rejects the idea. Interestingly, in an interview,
Lucas (1998) himself admits that Hoover convinced himself that he had misread Hayek.

                                                                                                                     2
2. Lucas and Rapping’s Attempt at Modeling an Optimizing Representative
Agent within a General Equilibrium Framework

       Robert Lucas and Leonard Rapping published two important and
interrelated papers in 1969. The first article “Real Wage, Employment and
Inflation” (1969a) came out in the Journal of Political Economy, while the second
“Price Expectations and the Phillips Curve” (1969b) was published in the
American Economic Review. The papers appeared while both authors were still
associate professor of economics at Carnegie-Mellon University.4 In those articles,
Lucas and his co-author inaugurated a new tradition in macroeconomics, a
theoretical development that later became known as the new classical school of
economic thought. According to Hoover (1988) the seed of such rationale came
from Milton Friedman’s now famous presidential address at the American
Economic Association in 1967 and later published as an article in the American
Economic Review in 1968 entitled “The role of monetary policy.”
      In that paper, Milton Friedman reinterpreted the Phillips curve, a tool that
had only been recently incorporated into the Keynesian theoretical framework5,
using neoclassical principles and reached a different conclusion. That is, the
short run Phillips curve is feasible as long as workers do not understand that a
rise in nominal price – caused by an increase in aggregate demand through an
expansionary monetary policy, for example – is in fact lowering their real wage:
although their money wage is increasing they cannot keep up with the price level.
As a result, they supply more labor and unemployment falls (firms hired more
workers). But Friedman argued that workers’ mistakes do not happen indefinitely
and sooner or later they adjust their price expectations or the future course of
inflation. The resulting demand for higher money wages from workers will make
firms to cut back on productions, dismiss labor and thus bring the economy back
to a natural rate of unemployment (the unemployment rate before government
intervention).

              The natural rate therefore is the equilibrium rate of unemployment to
              which the stable private economy tends to return once disruptive
              influences, such as attempts of governments to manipulate aggregate
              demand, are removed. Friedman believes that the economy is usually
              reasonably close to the natural rate and, when displaced from it, tends
              to return to it. (Hoover 1988: 25)

     Some interesting events took place after this episode. First, following
Friedman’s criticism of the Phillips curve as proposed by Samuelson and Solow
(1960), the new version was restated as the expectation-augmented Phillips curve
in the literature. Such a version became therefore associated to the possible
existence of a vertical graph coupled with the notion of a natural rate of
unemployment. A significant part of the Keynesians versus Monetarists debate in
the 1970s centered on the existence of this long run or vertical version of the
theory (Snowdon and Vane, 2005, p. 178-9). Second, and directly related to our

4
  Robert Lucas moved to the University of Chicago in 1975 and remains there up to this day. Leonard Rapping moved
to the University of Massachusetts in 1982 and died in 1991 at the age of 57.
5
  Hoover (1988) argues that the Phillips curve was adopted by the Keynesians in the 1960s as a tool to explain inflation.
The reason is that before world war II, as inflation was not a problem in a historical context of high unemployment,
there was a dearth of adequate theorizing on the subject.

                                                                                                                       3
work, even the Keynesians who adopted the expectations-augmented version of
the Phillips curve downplayed the message of an equilibrium nature of
unemployment implicit in Friedman’s analysis, that is, where a certain
unemployment rate was the result of optimal choices by agents. In other words:

             For Friedman, the natural rate of unemployment represented frictional
             unemployment, which he took to be voluntary in the sense that it was
             the outcome of the utility- or profit-maximizing choices of individual
             workers and firms. (Hoover 1988: 26)

      Lucas and Rapping (1969a) did not address the issue of the Phillips Curve
explicitly, for their focus was on the correlation between price levels and
employment. Nevertheless, it showed that the short run equilibrium was
attainable in the labor market through worker’s utility and firm’s profit
maximization process. In the long run, given the authors’ modeling of the
(adaptive) expectations, no change in the labor supply occurred at all and hence
(even considering that it was not their focus) it could be interpreted as if the
Phillips curve disappeared. Such results provided a more rigorous, model-based,
way to corroborate with Milton Friedman’s (1968) and Edmund Phelps’s (1968)
ideas.6
      What can be observed from the intellectual context above is that Lucas and
Rapping (1969a) did not only try to interpret the Phillips curve as consistent with
equilibrium in the labor market, but also introduced the artifice of an optimizing
representative agent into macroeconomic modeling. In other words, the 1969a
paper consisted as a first incursion into a new development in theoretical
macroeconomics since it raised the property of market clearing in the labor
market as well as pushed for the modeling of a representative agent’s
optimization problem. The focus of this section is therefore on what consisted of
Lucas’s efforts to carry on this research agenda. Lucas did this by also launching
harsh criticism of the Keynesian macroeconomics, according to which they (the
Keynesians) tried to provide microfounded7 models of the macroeconomy in the
1960s, but “(…) fell short of incorporating the discipline of the optimization
problem into the general equilibrium framework” (Hoover, 2012, p. 20).
      In 1981, Lucas published a book entitled Studies in Business-Cycle Theory, a
compilation of his most important papers on the subject written up until that
year. In the introductory chapter of the volume it is possible to get a flash of the
rationale behind his engagement with microfounded models in general and with
optimizing representative agent in particular.

             My first research directly related to business cycle was a joint project
             undertaken in collaboration with Leonard Rapping, “Real Wages,
             Employment, and Inflation,” on the determination of aggregate
             employment and wages in the US economy. Our objective at the time, as

6
  Edmund Phelps (1967, 1968) should also be credited with having reached the same conclusion that did Milton
Friedman.
7
  The microfoundation literature is an extremely rich and contentious one and is certainly beyond the scope of this
paper. The reason is that our approach is restricted to the discussion of models consisted of representative agents who
solve optimization problems and not their methodological or historical merits for macroeconomic modeling. Many
important books address this issue with the necessary depth and width: Weintraub (1979), Kirman (1992), Janssen
(1993), King (2012) and Duarte and Lima (2012). Many important papers also contribute to the subject: Weintraub
(1977), Backhouse and Boianovsky (2006), Duarte and Lima (2012), Duarte (2012), Hoover (2012), just to name a few
examples.

                                                                                                                     4
             is clear enough from the introduction to our paper and such defensive
             efforts as note 3, was not to challenge the current, Keynesian orthodoxy
             but rather to contribute to it by constructing a “micro-economic
             foundation” for the wage-price sector of macroeconometric models. Our
             strategy in attempting this was to try to rationalize the employment
             decisions of individuals households and firms in a manner modeled after
             Friedman and Modigliani’s work on the household consumption
             decision, Eisner and Jorgenson’s work on the investment decision of
             business firms, or Friedman and Meltzer’s work on the demand for
             money. (Lucas 1981: 2-3, emphasis added)

     Notwithstanding Lucas recognized the microfoundation project taken up by
earlier Keynesians, for him it was of limited use. A scholar in New Classical
macroeconomics explains that for Lucas:

             The microeconomics of the various functions mainly served to suggest a
             list of regressors to “explain” their target variables. The regressors
             themselves were, in effect, merely rules of thumb – decisions rules for
             particular environments. Lucas (1977: 220-21) did not deny that
             macroeconometric models constructed in this manner could well mimic
             the behavior of the actual economy, but appealing to the main theme of
             his famous article “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique” (1976),
             he argued that the regressions would not isolate the invariants in the
             economy and that conditional forecasting (policy analysis) requires such
             invariants. (Kevin Hoover 2012: 20)

       It is important to notice that even though Lucas’s own work (with Rapping)
can be framed into that “old-style microfoundation”, since it did not do more than
provide the microeconomic bases for a Keynesian function8, Hoover (2012, p. 46)
calls attention to the fact that their first 1969 article: “(…) has strong claims to be
the first paper in the New Classical traditional and the fount of the representative
agent program.” In other words, the overriding difference between Lucas and
Rapping’s (microfoundation) research program and those before them was the
explicit use of a representative agent. A second contribution of that seminal paper
was the attempt at connecting explicitly such microeconomic-optimizing-behavior
of economic agents to fluctuations in wages and prices and, in that way, by
understanding the responses of economic agents to cyclical movements of
economic variables as optimal decisions, they advanced toward the formulation of
a general equilibrium account of the business cycle. By doing this, Lucas was
moving a step closer to the challenge posed by Hayek (1933) and raised in his
1977 paper.

             We were aware, of course, that working toward a competitive-
             equilibrium account of the cyclical behavior of employment would be
             viewed in some circles as quixotic or even subversive, but we supposed
             that the basis for this widespread view was no deeper than the belief
             that such an account was not possible to devise. Since each of us had
             had some classroom success in discussing the behavior of employment


8
  Lucas and Rapping (1969a) derive an aggregate labor supply function through household decisions involving the
choice between work and leisure.

                                                                                                             5
             over the cycle in price-theoretical terms, the task did not seem at all
             forbidding, and we proceeded with it. (Lucas 1981: 2-3)

     In other words, it can be claimed here that Lucas and Rapping’s innovative
approach does not stem solely from their contribution to the rise of
microeconomics to study macroeconomic phenomena, by way of a representative
agent9, but as well as from their effort to show how it could be integrated into a
general equilibrium framework. It can also be claimed that no theoretical
innovation precedes another. It is interesting to observe then that the
microeconomic-optimizing-behavior and the general equilibrium approach to
macroeconomics seem to be completely internalized in today’s core of
macroeconomic theory. The attachment of the first to the second (or the other
way around) in a modeling process became almost natural to the extent that
Backhouse and Boianovsky (2006), in writing about modern macroeconomics,
affirm that:

             Microeconomic theories of individual optimization are central to the
             main results that differentiate contemporary macroeconomics from the
             already-forgotten theories of the decades immediately following the
             Second World War. (Backhouse and Boianovsky 2006: 1)

    In fact, in the 1980s, a little more than a decade after Lucas and Rapping
(1969a) published their paper, the macroeconomics landscape seemed to have
been tilted in favor of the now established new classical macroeconomics school.
Thomas Sargent, also a leading scholar in the new movement, wrote is his 1982
paper “Beyond Demand and Supply Curves in Macroeconomics”, published in the
American Economic Review, that in this new approach:

             (…) the content of optimizing dynamic economic theory was to deliver
             cross-equations restrictions across the distributed lags in decision
             rules, on the one hand, and the equations for the motion of the
             variables that appear in agent’s objective functions and which they care
             about predicting, on the other. (Thomas Sargent 1982: 382, emphasis
             added)

      At the same time, the cited author continued, the investigative method “(…)
drives the analyst toward explicitly formulating dynamic general equilibrium
models at the level of objective functions, constraints sets, and market-clearing
conditions of their counterparts” (Sargent, 1982, p. 382). In this last passage it is
clear that it contains contributions from Edward Prescott to the new classical
literature in terms of rational expectation modeling, an issue I will tackle in
section three.
      Even without explicitly mentioning that there exists a general equilibrium
framework behind microeconomic theories of individual optimization, those
familiar with such a modern approach in macroeconomics recognize it
immediately. In fact, the opposite could also be shown to be true: today’s core of
macroeconomics, denominated dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE),


9
 The representative agent microfoundational program is the standard narrative in the microfoundations literature.
Hoover (2012) challenges this view by rescuing various microfoundational programs that existed prior to Lucas and
Rapping’s incursion into the field. Duarte and Lima (2012) also make this point clearly.

                                                                                                               6
has in it the term general equilibrium, a microeconomic characteristic based on
the widespread use of representative agent.10

3. Dynamic Programming, Rational Expectations, and General Equilibrium

       “Real Wage, Employment and Inflation” (1969a) became a watershed in the
macroeconomics literature by incorporating a microfoundation program, based
upon the use of representative agent, as well as by the authors’ strive to make
widespread use of the concept of general equilibrium theory to the understanding
of business cycle. In this section, my aim is to get a little deeper into the
historical developments related to this latter research. I will begin by briefly
arguing that the term general equilibrium initially used in Lucas and Rapping
(1969a) had to be better qualified before Lucas and Prescott (1971) could
effectively make use of it. Besides, the essential step toward a successful
elaboration of a general equilibrium framework required the proper modeling of
rational expectations, which was achieved in their joint work.

3.1 Lucas’s Exploration of the Arrow-Debreu Contingent-Claims Framework

     As a matter of fact, Lucas (1981: 6) recalls that the best thing that happened
to his paper after it was published was that Edmund Phelps came across the
article and decided to include it in a book he was editing called “Microeconomic
Foundation of Employment and Inflation Theory.” The book came out in 1970. In
a conference organized to celebrate the publication, Phelps, according to Lucas,
observed that no paper had satisfactorily addressed the subject of general
equilibrium theory, including the Lucas’s (and Rapping’s) one. In the volume:

           Phelps’ introductory essay dealt with this general-equilibrium issue in
           an informal but concrete way. Much of our discussion at the conference
           involved questions that seemed to stand in the way of casting this
           argument in modern mathematical form. (Lucas 1981: 7)

     Then, Lucas explains that:

           “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money” was an attempt to do this.
           This paper’s ties to the Phelps essay turned to be stronger than I had
           seen when I began work on it. The initial idea simply was to situate
           some Lucas-Rapping households in a monetary economy, subject the
           system to stochastic shocks to the money supply, and see what would
           happen. Samuelson’s intergenerational monetary economy offered a
           convenient analytical setting because it both fit the two-period
           consumer maximization problem Rapping and I had studied and the
           function of “money” in it was so clearly defined. The idea of defining an
           equilibrium as a point in a space of functions of a few “state variables”
           was one that Prescott and I had utilized in “Investment under
           Uncertainty.” This analytical device had forced Prescott and me to be
           precise as to the meaning of terms like information and expectations and
           led us to formulate and utilize Muth’s rational expectations hypothesis
           in exactly the way I then used it in “Expectations and the Neutrality of

10For a thorough analysis of the History of Macroeconomics in general and the contributions of
Robert Lucas Jr. in particular see De Vroey (2016).

                                                                                                 7
         Money.” In short, the needed ingredients for a general-equilibrium
         formulation seemed to be readily at hand.” (Lucas 1981: 7)

     In hindsight two messages seem clear. First, despite Lucas and Rapping’s
incursions into the comprehension of business cycles in a general equilibrium
perspective at the end of the 1960s, the task had been an incomplete one.
Second, prior to the writing of his 1972 paper, in which he fully modeled Muth’s
rational expectation, Lucas pushed for the use of the Arrow-Debreu intertemporal
general equilibrium in macroeconomics (or with contingent-claim hypothesis). In
other words, between his first incursion into the “discipline of optimization
problems”, as summarized in his 1969a paper, and the point where all needed
ingredients to formulate a general equilibrium framework was available,
understood as his 1972 article, Lucas tried to work out the contingent-claim
hypothesis in macroeconomics. It paid off since:

         Although Lucas frequently makes reference to general-equilibrium and
         to the Arrow-Debreu model, he applies very little of the technical work
         in general equilibrium theory to his macroeconomic models. His
         references tend to be casual, in much the same way as Friedman (1968:
         8) famously defines the natural rate of unemployment by reference to
         the Walrasian general-equilibrium model, while never actually deriving
         a natural rate in such a model. Lucas’s “Expectations and the
         Neutrality of Money” (1972a) is an exception. It is a general-equilibrium
         model in the spirit of Arrow and Debreu. (Hoover 2012: 48)

     In fact, in Lucas’s view, it is natural to put to good use available tools in
microeconomic theory, in general, and the Arrow-Debreu framework (with
contingent-claim hypothesis), in particular. Lucas:

         (…) was willing to excuse the theoretical choices of Keynesian
         economists as the product of the exigencies of the great depression and
         the absence of appropriate tools. But economists after the development
         of the Arrow-Debreu contingent-claims framework can no longer be
         excused. New classical microfoundations begins with the optimization
         problems of individual agents. These are incorporated into a dynamic
         general-equilibrium model based in the contingent-claims framework.
         (Hoover 2012: 20)

     What is the contingent-claim hypothesis anyway? In the Arrow-Debreu static
general equilibrium paradigm agents’ preferences are defined over goods
consumed in the present. In an intertemporal or dynamic setting, agents’
preferences are defined over goods deliverable in all future time periods and for
each possible state of nature (Donaldson and Selden, 1981). Such future markets
are defined in the literature as contingent markets and its validity the fulfillment
of the “contingent-claim hypothesis”. Robert Lucas argues that there exist two
ways to interpret a contingent claim equilibrium. The first one states that:

         (The contingent claim equilibrium) is as a description of an economy in
         which all state-contingent prices are determined in advance, in the
         clearing of a single grand future market. On this interpretation,
         individual traders may assess the probabilities of the occurrences of


                                                                                  8
          future states of nature, but with prices determined in advance, the
          issue of expectation does not arise. (Lucas 1980: 285).

Alternatively, still according to the author, the second interpretation states that:

          (The contingent claim equilibrium) is as being determined via a
          sequence of “spot” markets, in which current prices are set given
          certain expectations about future prices. On this second interpretation,
          one needs a principle to reconcile the price distributions implied by the
          market equilibrium with the distributions used by agents to form their
          own views of the future. (Lucas 1980: 285).

     In Lucas’s view it was John Muth (1961) who formulated the principle for
such a reconciliation. The afterward developed notion by which both distributions
could not differ in systematic way was called “rational expectation.” As I will later
attempt to show in this text, the formalization of the rational expectations
hypothesis within the Arrow-Debreu contingent claim framework was carried out
only in “Investment under Uncertainty” a joint work by Lucas and Prescott in
1971. Yet this endeavor was only made possible given Lucas’s insistence in
formulating business cycles models within a general equilibrium framework,
according to which was not only an act of honoring one’s intellectual ancestor,
but also a way to demonstrate the limits of interventionist policies brought about
by the Keynesian revolution (Lucas, 1977). Thus, the importance of such
framework is that:

          (…) the contingent claim interpretation of a competitive equilibrium
          model considers all information to be simultaneously and freely
          available to all traders and many important results are crucially
          dependent on this assumption. It was soon recognized by many
          researchers that the idea of viewing a commodity as a function of
          stochastically determined shocks is an invaluable one also in situations
          in which information differs in various ways among traders. Indeed, it is
          this idea that permits one to use economic theory to make precise what
          one means by information, and to determine how it is valued
          economically. (Lucas 1980: 285)

     Along the same line, Lucas (1980, p. 286) argues that: “It is now entirely
practical to view price and quantity path that follow complicated stochastic
processes as equilibrium ‘points’ in an appropriately specified space”. In order to
conclude this discussion, without implying the inexistence of controversies,
equilibrium models of business cycles:

          (…) are models that utilize the contingent claim point of view described
          in the last section in an essential way, and in which prices and
          quantities are taken to be always in equilibrium. In these models, the
          concepts of excess demands and supplies play no observational role and
          are identified with no observed magnitudes. In contrast to the static
          equilibrium models available in the 1940s, equilibrium models of this
          new class seem to do about as well in fitting time series as do models
          based on the neoclassical synthesis. (Lucas 1980: 287)



                                                                                       9
      It is interesting to observe that although a complete general equilibrium
framework would appear only with the paper published in 1972, the contingent
claim formulation had already helped open the way for novel understanding in
the field of applied economics, especially those involving uncertainty.
      Without advancing too much on the issue of the next section, I argue that it
was only after the application of new tools related to dynamic programming,
undertaken with Prescott in a 1971 paper to deal with expectation, that a
complete general equilibrium model was finally acquired. I will also argue in the
final section that “Expectation and the Neutrality of Money” (1972) is the third in
a series of three of Lucas’s papers which gave rise, some would argue directly or
indirectly, to the dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model, a
baseline model of today’s macroeconomics.

3.2 The Pioneering use of Dynamic Programming in Economics, Rational
Expectations, and the Resulting importance of Lucas and Prescott (1971)

      “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money” (1972) by Robert Lucas is
arguably the first article to weave all the three elements raised before into a single
model: a representative agent with optimizing behavior, a general equilibrium
framework, and the modeling of rational expectations. In Chari’s (1998) words
that paper “(…) is sometimes heralded as revolutionary, marking the beginning of
the end of ‘Keynesian’ economics and the birth of ‘rational expectations’
economics.” The successful “artificial model economy” (Lucas, 1980) represented
in that paper depended in large part upon the modeling of rational expectations,
as mentioned before, carried out first in Lucas and Prescott (1971). In this section
I also describe briefly some historical aspects of the development of dynamic
programming, a mathematical tool engendered during world war II (WWII), and
which consisted on the mathematical underpinning of Lucas’s theoretical
advancement.
     By far the most important event to steer the massive use of applied
mathematics, statistics and economics, in general, and of dynamic programming,
in particular, was the need to provide the highest degree of efficiency required in
times of war efforts11 in activities such as the allocation and stockpiling of
resources (weapons, for example) and the minimization of time to accomplish
various duties, a reasoning and a practice Judy Klein (2007) called “the science of
economizing.” “The more the military could rely on mathematics to design
mechanism and operations, the more they could save on time and scarce
resources”. (Klein 2007: 5). A key figure in this undertaking was Richard
Bellman, a mathematician working for the RAND corporation12 in the 1950s and
1960s with allocation models and control processes “(…) consistent with an
economic way of thinking.” (Klein, 2007, p. 6). During the early1950s, Bellman
solved dynamic optimizations problems by way of functional equations he helped


11
   It does not need to be necessarily a hot war like the WWII to provide the incentives to apply mathematical tools
discussed above. The cold war between the U.S.A and the former USSR also worked as a substantial influence in the
process. Indeed, most of the mathematical applications used took place following WWII.
12
   Right after WWII, in March 1946, the US army air force began with the Douglas aircraft company a project, called
project RAND, aimed at providing the military with researches in decision problems. The contributions would come
from the field of applied mathematics, statistics and economics. The project became independent in may 1948 and has
been operating under the name RAND CORPORATION ever since. It is still located in Santa Monica, California,
United States, where it was born.


                                                                                                               10
generalize. This research program is called dynamic programming. Judy Klein
argues that:

         (…) the context for Bellman’s first formulation of a dynamic
         programming protocol was the uniqueness of nuclear warfare, including
         decision-making with regard to strategic bombing and allocation of
         scarce fissionable material for atomic bombs. In the latter half of the
         1950s, the major application of Bellman’s marriage of dynamic
         programming and control engineering was determining and maintaining
         optimal trajectories – particularly those formulated for a race of the two
         superpowers – the USA and the USSR – in outer space. (Klein 2007: 12)

    In fact, already in the 1950s, given the exposure of Bellman’s scientific
pursuits in the meetings of the econometrics society, many of the mathematical
models he helped create or improve were later used in microeconomics and in
macroeconomics.

         In the contexts of management science and operations research,
         microeconomists, usually with funding from the Office of Naval
         Research or the US Air Force’s contract with the RAND corporation,
         were the first economists to use Bellman’s generalized recursive
         optimization. As the space race heated up in the late 1950s, optimal
         control theory presented two approaches that economists could
         appropriate for their own theories on economic growth: Pontryagin’s
         elegant application of his maximum principle to the calculus of
         variations and Bellman’s heuristic application of his principle of
         optimality to dynamic programming. (Klein 2007: 43)

    However:

         It was not until after Robert Lucas and Edward Prescott’s 1971
         Econometrica article on “Investment under Uncertainty” that
         macroeconomists began to systematically apply Bellman’s state-
         transition methods of recursive optimization to their theories of rational
         expectations, business cycle theory, and economic growth. (Klein 2007:
         44)

      The authors’ motivation in the paper was to broaden the existing empirical
literature on the demand for investment goods by including a group of
explanatory variables labeled “future demand” composed of sales, profits and
stock price indexes. Given the uncertainty of such future demand, the firm is
imbedded with a optimizing behavior that depends on the way it forms
expectations. In practical terms it requires the modeler to formulate the problem
by postulating some forecasting rule for firms.

         Typically the forecasting rule postulated takes the form of anticipated
         prices being a fixed function of past prices – “adaptive expectations.”
         But it is clear that if the underlying disturbances (in our case, the
         demand shift) has a regular stochastic character (such as a Markov
         process), forecasting in this manner is adaptive only in a restrictive and
         not very interesting sense. Except for an unlikely coincidence, price


                                                                                11
           forecasts and actual prices will have different probability distributions,
           and this difference will be persistence, costly to forecaster, and readily
           correctible. (Lucas and Prescott 1971: 660)

     In an innovative solution the paper proposed “(…) go to the opposite extreme,
assuming that the actual and anticipated prices have the same probability
distribution, or that price expectations are rational.” (Lucas and Prescott 1971:
660)

     In Lucas’s 1972 paper, referring to what he thought were his main
contributions, he wrote:

           The substantive results developed below are based on a concept of
           equilibrium search which is, I believe, new (although closely related to
           the principles underlying dynamic programming) and which may be of
           independent interest. In this paper, equilibrium prices and quantities
           will be characterized mathematically as functions defined on the space
           of possible states of the economy, which are in turn characterized as
           finite dimensional vectors. This characterization permits a treatment of
           the relation of information to expectations which is in some ways much
           more satisfactory than is possible with conventional adaptive
           expectations hypotheses. (Lucas 1972: 67)

     A series of important papers followed. “Econometric Testing of the Natural
Rate Hypothesis” (Lucas 1972b), “Some International Evidence on Output-
Inflation Tradeoffs” (Lucas 1973) and “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique”
(Lucas 1976). According to Snowdon and Vane (2005, p. 221), collectively these
papers had a vast influence in determining the research direction in
macroeconomics in the last quarter of the twentieth-century.

4. A Summing Up

      In this text I have tried to demonstrate how Robert Lucas Jr. applied a
variety of economic concepts to the understanding of business cycles and ended
up building a theoretical body that interpreted them in a equilibratory sense. By
attaining continuous market clearing results by way of modeling both the
optimizing behavior of representative agents and rational expectations Lucas gave
rise to a new school in macroeconomics denominated new classical school
(despite the fact that Lucas never saw any usefulness in applying such labels). It
has been claimed in this paper, however, that the research program he helped
inaugurate was not a smooth one in the sense he pieced together all necessary
elements at once. In fact, from the time he tried to make Keynesian contributions
in the 1960s to the point he became its fiercest critic Lucas scrutinized one of the
most modern tools available in economics (the contingent-claim hypothesis) and
combined it with others he rescued (representative-agent and dynamic
programming) in a period that spans roughly fifteen years.13
      Did Lucas’s project represent scientific progress in economics, for example,
in a inductivist sense described by Weintraub (2002)? It can be argued that much
of Lucas’s work in the 1970s opened up the road for the advent of new

13After a period doing research in business cycles, Robert Lucas shifted his interest to economic
growth in mid 1980s where he also made seminal contributions.

                                                                                              12
macroeconomics research agendas like the Real Business Cycles and the New
Keynesian in the 1980s. By late 1990s, Goodfriend and King (1997) coined the
term “new neoclassical synthesis” to a movement many economists recognized as
the theoretical, empirical, and methodological fusion of the two schools
aforementioned and by which the resulting theoretical body is a new class of
models called dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models. Along this
line “(…) if you tell a story that in a synthesis you merge the strengths of the
schools that preceded it, how can one oppose the view that synthesis means
progress?” (Duarte 2012: 219).




                                                                             13
References


BACKHOUSE, R.; BOIANOVSKY, M. (2006). Whatever Happened to
Microfoundations. In: Proceedings of the 34th Brazilian Economics Meeting –
Brazilian Association of Graduate Program in Economics (ANPEC).

CHARI, V. V. (1998). Nobel Laureate Robert E. Lucas, Jr.: Architect of Modern
Macroeconomics. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12 (1): 171-186.

DE VROEY, M. (2016). A History of Macroeconomics from Keynes to Lucas and
Beyond. New York: Cambridge University Press.

DONALSON, J. B.; LARRY, S. (1981). Arrow-Debreu Preferences and the
Reopening of Contingent Claims Markets. Economics Letters, 8: 209-216.

DUARTE, P. G. (2012). Not Going Away? Microfoundations in the Making of a New
Consensus in Macroeconomics. In: Pedro G. Duarte; Gilberto T. Lima (eds.),
Microfoundations Reconsidered: The relationship of Micro and Macroeconomics in
Historical Perspective. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, pp. 190-229.

DUARTE, P. G; LIMA, G. T. (2012). Privileging micro over macro? A history of
conflicting positions. In: Pedro G. Duarte; Gilberto T. Lima (eds.),
Microfoundations Reconsidered: The relationship of Micro and Macroeconomics in
Historical Perspective. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, pp. 1-18.

FRIEDMAN, M. (1968). The Role of Monetary Policy. American Economic Review.
(58) 1: 1-17.

GOODFRIEND, M; KING, R. (1997). The New Neoclassical Synthesis and the Role
of Monetary Policy. In: Bernanke, B; Rotemberg, J. (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 1997. Cambridge: MIT Press, pp. 231-283.

HAYEK, F. A. (1933). Monetary Theory and the Trade Cycle. New York: Sentry
Press.

HOOVER, K. (1988). The New Classical Macroeconomics: A Sceptical Inquiry.
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
HOOVER, K. (2012). Microfoundational Programs. In: Pedro G. Duarte; Gilberto
T. Lima (eds.), Microfoundations Reconsidered: The relationship of Micro and
Macroeconomics in Historical Perspective. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, pp. 19-61.

JANSSEN, M. C. W. (1993). Microfoundations: A Critical Inquiry. London:
Routledge.




                                                                           14
KING, J. E. (2012). The Microfoundations Delusions: Metaphor and Dogma in the
History of Macroeconomics. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.

KIRMAN, A. P. (1992). Whom and What does the Representative Agent Represent?
The Journal of Economic Perspective, 6 (2): 117-136.

KLEIN, J. (2007). Cold War, Dynamic Programming, and the Science of
Economizing: Bellman Strikes Gold in Policy Space. First Annual Conference on
the History of Recent Economics.

LUCAS Jr., R. E. (1972a). Expectations and the Neutrality of Money. In: Robert E.
Lucas Jr. (ed.), Studies in Business Cycles theory. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1981:
66-89.

LUCAS Jr., R. E. (1972b). Econometric Testing of the Natural Rate Hypothesis. In:
Robert E. Lucas Jr. (ed.), Studies in Business Cycles theory. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell, 1981: 90-103.

LUCAS Jr., R. E. (1973). Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation
Tradeoffs. In: Robert E. Lucas Jr. (ed.), Studies in Business Cycles theory. Oxford:
Basil Blackwell, 1981: 131-145.

LUCAS Jr., R. E. (1976). Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique. In: Robert E.
Lucas Jr. (ed.), Studies in Business Cycles theory. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1981:
104-130.

LUCAS Jr., R. E. (1977). Understanding Business Cycles. In: Robert E. Lucas Jr.
(ed.), Studies in Business Cycles theory. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1981: 215-39.

LUCAS Jr., R. E. (1980). Methods and Problems in Business Cycle Theory. In:
Robert E. Lucas Jr. (ed.), Studies in Business Cycles theory. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell, 1981: 271-296.

LUCAS Jr., R. E. (1981). Introduction. In: Robert E. Lucas Jr. (ed.), Studies in
Business Cycles theory. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1981: 1-18.

LUCAS Jr., R. E. (1998). Interview with Robert Lucas. In: Snowdon, B; Vane, H.
(ed.), Conversation with Leading Economists - Interpreting Modern Macroeconomics.
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 2000: 145-165.

LUCAS, R. E; PRESCOTT, E. (1971). Investment under Uncertainty. Econometrica.
(39) 5: 659-681.




                                                                                 15
LUCAS, R.; RAPPING, L. (1969a). Real Wage, Employment and Inflation. In:
Robert E. Lucas Jr. (ed.), Studies in Business Cycles theory. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell, 1981: 19-58.

LUCAS, R.; RAPPING, L. (1969b). Price Expectations and the Phillips Curve.
American Economic Review, 59 (3): 342-350.

MUTH, J. (1961). Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price Movements.
Econometrica, 29 (3): 315-335.

PHELPS, E. S. (1967). Phillips Curves, Expectations of Inflations and Optimal
Unemployment over Time. Economica, 34 (135): 254-281.

PHELPS, E. S. (1968). Money-Wage Dynamics and Labor-Market Equilibrium.
Journal of Political Economy, 76 (4): 678-711.

PHELPS, E. S. (1970). Introduction: The New Microeconomics in Employment and
Inflation Theory. In: Edmund E. Phelps, et al. (eds.), Microeconomic Foundations
of Employment and Inflation Theory. New York: W.W Norton and Company Inc,
1970: 1-23.

SAMUELSON, P.; SOLOW, R. (1960). Analytical Aspects of Anti-Inflation Policy.
American Economic Review, 50 (2): 177-194.

SARGENT, T. (1982). Beyond Demand and Supply Curves in Macroeconomics.
The American Economic Review – Paper and Proceedings of the Ninety-Fourth
Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, 72 (2): 382-389.

SNOWDON, B; VANE, H. (2005). Modern Macroeconomics – Its Origins,
Development and Current State. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.

SOROMENHO, J. E. C. (1998). Os Novos-Clássicos e a Teoria dos Ciclos de
Hayek. Revista de Economia Política, 18 (3): 38-54.

WEINTRAUB, E. R. (1977). The Microfoundation of Macroeconomics – A Critical
Survey. The Journal of Economic Literature, 15 (1): 1-23.

WEINTRAUB, E. R. (1979). Microfoundations: The Compatibility of Microeconomics
and Macroeconomics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

WEINTRAUB, E. R. (2002). How Economics Became a Mathematical Science.
Durham: Duke University Press.




                                                                             16
