         Development Conventions: theory and the Brazilian case after the mid-20th century



                                                                                           Rui Lyrio Modenesi
                                                                                      André de Melo Modenesi1


Abstract
Keynes believed conventions to be a device to overcome uncertainty. For French Conventionalists (FC)
conventions coordinate behavior in complex market situations. Brazilian economist Fabio Erber contributed to
this debate by formulating a concept of development convention (DC) based on Keynes’ and FC’s
contributions. As development refers to long term structural changes, DCs can only be identified in the long
term. Multiple development conventions can co-exist, however, at any given period, among which only one
can be dominant at a particular point in time. There has been in Brazil a struggle for hegemony between two
DCs: the pro-growth – state led and the pro-stability – free market conventions. From WW II until the 1970s,
the former was hegemonic (or dominant) but it has been since replaced by the stability convention after the
1980s. The conservative conduct of monetary policy in Brazil since the 1990s builds on the hegemony of the
stability convention. This view point has opened room to a research program based on political economy
devoted to the study of the Brazilian contemporary monetary policy, which helps to explain why the country
has consistently maintained the world’s highest interest rates for so long.

Key words: Convention; Development Convention; Political Economy; Brazil

Resumo
Keynes considerava as convenções um instrumento para superação da incerteza. Para os Convencionalistas
Franceses (CF), as convenções serviam para coordenar a ação dos agentes em “situações de mercado
complexas”, não abrangidas pela hipótese de concorrência perfeita. O economista brasileiro Fabio Erber deu
seguimento a esse debate formulando um conceito de convenção de desenvolvimento (CD) baseado nas
formulações de Keynes e dos CFs. Como o desenvolvimento econômico envolve mudanças estruturais de
longo prazo, CDs também só podem ser identificadas no longo prazo. Múltiplas convenções de
desenvolvimento podem coexistir num dado período, sendo uma deles a dominante em cada ponto no tempo.
Observa-se no Brasil uma disputa pela hegemonia entre duas CDs: a convenção pro-crescimento-liderado
pelo Estado e a convenção pro estabilidade-livre mercado. Da II Guerra Mundial até os anos 1970, a primeira
foi hegemônica (dominante) tendo sido substituída pela convenção da estabilidade após os anos 1980. A
condução conservadora da política monetária brasileira desde a década de 1990 é sustentada pela hegemonia
da convenção da estabilidade. A contribuição de Erber dá espaço para um programa de pesquisa focado na
economia política da política monetária brasileira, que ajuda explicar por que o país tem persistentemente
praticado a taxa de juros mais alta do mundo.

Palavras-chave: Convenção; Convenção de Desenvolvimento; Economia Política; Brasil
JEL: B59, O10, O20

Área 6 – Crescimento, Desenvolvimento Econômico e Instituições




1
  André de Melo Modenesi is Associate Professor at the Institute of Economics, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro
(IE/UFRJ) and researcher of the Scientific and Technological Development Council (CNPq). Rui Lyrio Modenesi was
senior research, Applied Economic Research Institute (IPEA), Ministry of Planning, Undersecretary of Economic Policy,
Ministry of Finance, and Associate Professor, Fluminense Federal University.
Introduction

   An ordinary concept in its origin, convention was first used by Keynes in the General Theory to
deal with the modes through which private agents coordinate their behavior under uncertainty. The
notion was later developed by a group of French economists, that we will call French
Conventionalists (FC), who extended its reach from the original focus on investment decisions given
by Keynes to other areas of economic collective behavior. These two strands, Keynes and FC, served
as starting points for Brazilian economist Fabio Erber to develop the concept even further, dealing
with beliefs and behaviors related to development processes in developing economies.
   For this paper’s authors, a DC can be characterized as responding to two fundamental questions.
The first one is grounded on the fundamental macroeconomic trade-off of growth versus price
stability (or employment versus inflation), expressed, for instance, by a phillips curve. The second
one is based on the efficacy and relevance attributed to state intervention versus free market
operation. In both cases, a DC is supposed to result from an examination of historical evidence
pertaining to that society (or class of societies).
   From a broad historical perspective, two DCs have been struggling for hegemony in Brazil: the
pro-growth – state led convention and the pro-stability – free market convention. Generally
speaking, the former prioritizes economic growth and state intervention, while the latter prioritizes
price stability and free market operation. From World War II until the 1970s the former was
hegemonic (dominant), but it has been replaced by the stability convention after the 1980s.
   Besides this introduction and a conclusion, this paper has three sections. In the first, are presented
Keynes and FC concepts of convention. The second addresses Erber’s concept of development
convention (DC), gives a history of DCs in Brazil from World War II to the begin of the 2000s, and
eventually analyses the DCs prevailing in president Lula da Silva’s terms. In the third one, the
problem of high domestic real interest rates is analyzed from the viewpoint of conventions.


1 – Convention: Keynes and French conventionalists
   Conventions are very useful in our daily life: it is a resource to overcome the uncertainty related
to “human decisions affecting the future, whether personal, political or economic, which cannot
depend on strict mathematical expectation, since the basis for such calculations does not exist”
(Keynes, 1936, pp. 162-163). This sort of uncertainty is the one of a nonegordic stochastic process
(Davidson, 2002). It is also worth remarking that convention is not an economic concept, being
instead the basic psycho-sociological concept of Keynes’s investment theory.
   Keynes has given two examples of generic situations, i.e., not necessarily related to the economic
field, in which we have to betake to conventions. The first: not knowing how the future is likely to
be, “we tend (…) to substitute for the knowledge that is unattainable certain conventions, the chief of
which is to assume, contrarily to all likelihood, that the future will resemble the past” (Keynes, 1973,
p. 124; our italics). It is a practical way of judgment (and behavior), used when one feels unable to
predict the future. It is fairly termed projective convention by Dequech (2011).
   The second situation: needing to adopt a hypothesis about the future we may call upon a
“conventional judgment” or “copy the others’ (Keynes 1937, p. 214; italics in the original), e.g.,
“[k]owing that our individual judgment is worthless (…) we endeavor to conform to the behavior of
the majority or the average” assuming that “the rest of the world is perhaps better informed” (ibid.,
214). This conventional (in italic) judgment is the specific way which Keynes has proposed is
performed by financial investors.
   In the first case, the assumption that “the future will resemble the past” is considered by Keynes
the chief convention: meaning that there may be other alternatives to be chosen by the individual in
such situations. Moreover, the choice is made without direct external influence: the agent’s decision



                                                                                                       1
and/or behavior do not depend on what the others do. He decides by himself to assume – in a sense
rationally, but at the same time conventionally – the projection into the future of present conditions.
   In the second case, the conventional judgment emerges from a genuinely social process, i.e.,
which transcends the individual sphere: it is a belief, a judgment, or an expectation whose formation
results from the interaction of social actors, and which, by its turn, eventually shapes the
understanding, the decision or the behavior of each member of a given society or social group. In
brief, the individual decision depends, fundamentally, on the judgment (or behavior) of the pertinent
social group.
   Despite of these contributions, Keynes has not translated the content of convention into a
formalized expression or a definition in strict sense, for good or evil (Modenesi et al., 2013b). This
seems to be due to the circumstance that his concern was not with the formulation of a theory of
action, or the like, neither with convention itself, but with the building up of a revolutionary
investment theory (a task sufficiently complex): in few words, it was a mean, not an aim. And
perhaps because Keynes believed it to be an empirical fact, more than a theory of action.
   More precisely, Keynes has used the ordinary concept, with its original denotation and
connotations,2 but has also proposed a proper concept of convention – the one implicit in the above
mentioned “conventional judgment” – comprising, nevertheless, the basic features of a general
concept of convention, according to Dequech (2011): social sharing, conformity with the conformity
of the others, and arbitrariness. This is the sense of convention which is relevant to the purpose of
this paper. It is utilized in The General Theory to explain the logic of financial speculation by means
of a well-known metaphor: the beauty contest “in which the competitors have to pick out the six
prettiest faces from a hundred photographs, the prize being awarded to the competitor whose choice
most corresponds to the average preferences of the competitors as a whole” (Keynes, 1936, p. 156).
In Keynes’s view, the best thing to do in such cases was to follow or imitate the others.
   With this denotation, the term “convention” has been understood as designating “mimetic
behavior” (Dupuy, 1989), “collective representation” (Jodelet, 1989), “rules of the game” (North,
1990), “a structure of interdependent judgments” (Davis, 1997), “collective rule of behavior”
(Oreiro, 2000), “a socially shared pattern of thought (and possibly of behavior)” (Dequech, 2009),
and so on.
   The inaugural contributions of FC were published in a special issue of the Revue Économique
(March 1989). Working then as a research team, they departed from the identification that
neoclassical theory was at that time facing critical problems in its attempt to explain economic
behavior under non-competitive conditions. They mainly refused the proposition that equilibrium is
reached by the meeting of individuals wills, with no exterior reference. In fact, FC postulated that an
agreement between individuals, even in the case of an exchange, was not possible “without a
common framework, without a constitutive convention” (Dupuy et al., 1989, p 142; our translation).
According to Thévenot, in the case of non-competitive market, the neoclassical theory faces “critical
situations” requiring resorting to “notions external to the explicative system of the general market
equilibrium model, mainly qualified as ‘organizational’ or ‘social’ (conventions, engagement, trust,
loyalty, solidarity, etc.)” (1989a, p. 149; our translation). For him, in these situations some “different
constitutive conventions” are useful to allow market equilibrium, as far as they “serve as common
prerequisites for action” (1989b, p. 401). In sum, convention provides market coordination.
   FC claimed that their insight was shaped under the influence of Durkheim (1960) who had
suggested that “‘free exchange’ (…) could not rest only on the voluntary agreement of private
individuals”. They also noted that Durkheim proposed that “the contract is not sufficient in itself”
requiring “a regulation”, a “contractual law”. For FC, this is a referential “not modifiable by private

2
  Keynes’s thinking about the role of conventions has dramatically changed along his intellectual history. In the
beginning, he considered as fundamental the concept of intuition, an intellectual capability that enables an unmediated
insight into reality. Thence, Keynes then “repudiated entirely customary morals, conventions and traditional wisdom”
(Davis, 1997, p. 149; our italics) as having no meaning whatsoever for human comprehension of the real.


                                                                                                                     2
individuals” to which Durkheim has attributed a “social origin” constitutive of a “fundamental norm”
(Dupuy et al., p. 142; our translation). They replaced the basic neoclassical proposition by a
“common constitutive framework” which should not be considered
        as the result of a primitive contract as is supposed by contractualists, but rather as a theory, a paradigm (Orléan)
        a common sense (Dupuy), a cognitive model (Favereau), a system of knowledge (Salais), of representations, a
        structure of information etc., which provide the information deemed pertinent and useful for action, and
        determine the nature of elements that can serve as resources (Eymard-Duvernay, Thévenot). (ibid., p. 142; our
        translation)

   They also observed that “as well suggests the semantic field of the term ‘convention’, that
designate the device constituent of an agreement of wills as their product, having a mandatory
normative power, convention should be understood both as the result of individual actions and as a
framework which constrains agents” (ibid., p. 143; our translation). In other words, a convention
emerges from the interaction of the wills, expectations, decisions, or behaviors of the members of a
social group or a society, thus establishing a set of guiding rules or a social agreement making up a
common framework – endowed of normative power among its adherents – which, by its turn,
influences and constraints agents’ wills, expectations, and so on. In this sense, conventions are
“collective representations that make an a priori coordination of individuel (sic) expectations”
(Orléan, p. 402).
   In line with the conventional behavior illustrated by the means of the “beauty contest”, Dupuy
formulated the following definition:
        a convention is, by definition, a regularity of behavior R (or of behaviour and of belief) that, in a population P,
        satisfies the following six conditions: 1. Each conforms to R. 2. Each believes that the others are conforming to
        R. 3. This belief that the others are conforming to R provides everyone a good and decisive reason to conform to
        R. 4. All prefer a general conformity to R rather than a slightly less than general conformity – in particular,
        rather than conformity of all except one (this condition ensures that there is equilibrium. It is local [or partial]
        and therefore it does not imply that a general non-conformity would not have been preferable). 5. R is not the
        only regularity able to satisfy the last two conditions; at least one other, R’, would equally have respected them
        (this condition ensures that there is a certain arbitrariness in conforming to R). (Dupuy, 1989, p. 369; our
        translation)

   In sum: FC have departed from Keynes’s innovative concept of convention and have also
followed him in the use of this concept to analyze economic issues. But instead of expectation
formation, their focus was the coordinative function of convention. From another perspective, they
extended its application far beyond the terrain of investment, and of financial market. Erber went
even further by formulating a new concept of convention which allows to analyzing a phenomenon
not strictly economical but also comprising a social and a political dimension – economic
development.

2 – Development Convention: an analysis of the Brazilian case

    2.1 – The Concept of Development Convention: Erber’s contribution

   Professor F. Erber was influenced by the French school of regulation and applied its concepts and
theses to the analysis of the pattern of development in Brazil – a key factor to understand the genesis
and the meaning of DC.3 He defines pattern of development as a “(…) set of relations between
economic and social agents that ensure, for a given period of time, the continuity of the processes

3
  For instance, Lautier and Moreau (2012), and Thury and Freitas (2010) apply Erber’s DC concept. According with
Carvalho (2014): “Erber chegou ao conceito menos por via de Keynes que pela via dos trabalhos de economistas
franceses, notadamente André Orlean, sobre o tema, mas jamais perdeu de vista a possibilidade de fertilização cruzada
que esse tipo de problema oferecia com a teoria keynesiana” (p. 272).


                                                                                                                          3
of capital accumulation and the preservation of political power” (Erber, 1992, p. 8; our
highlights; our translation). In the economic dimension, these relations are translated into a set of
standards regulating: accumulation; production; consumption; funding; innovation and diffusion of
technology; State intervention; and international insertion4. According to Erber:
         [t]hose relations are built within each nation state, historically speaking. However, they are subject to limitations
         imposed by the logic of the system and the prevalence, at an international level, of a given hegemonic formation
         (…). (…) those relations are themselves selective, as they determine a cast of ‘problems’ that can be addressed
         and the manners of solving them, assuming a cumulative character. That’s why, in the Kuhnian tradition, they
         are called standards or paradigms. (1992, p. 9; our highlights; our translation)

    Here we find two key elements of the concept of DC elaborated by the author later on. First, the
idea that we are dealing with a phenomenon that transcends the economic sphere. Its sociological
character is due to the relevance given to the interrelations among social actors. It is a genuine social
phenomenon: something sui generis, a whole that cannot be reduced to the sum of its parts, no matter
what roles they perform. It is an emerging phenomenon: external to the behavior of individuals and
irreducible to individual cognition (De Wolf and Holvoet, 2005).5 And second, the emergence of a
set of problems to which is given set of solutions or an agenda. The idea of convention comes into
view more clearly – although not explicitly yet – in Erber (1996), which discusses the concept of
myth in details. Later on it reappears in Erber (2002): “Part of the conventions which help social
actors to deal with uncertainty are ‘stories’ told about change – of how change is necessary and,
especially feasible, even under difficult circumstances” (p. 15). Erber (2002, pp. 19-33) also explores
the notions of myth and agenda in both positive negative perspectives.
    The concept of convention is then expounded in Erber (2004), in a section especially dedicated to
the development conventions. In later stages of his career, Erber (2007; 2008a; 2008b; 2011; 2012)
devoted himself almost exclusively to studying conventions and exhaustively deepening and shaping
the concept, under the influence of both Keynes and the FC, such as Orléan (1989; 2004) and Jodelet
(1989).6 For Erber (2004, pp. 40-41):
         [c]onventions are sets of beliefs shared by a community for, among other purposes, problem-setting and
         problem-solving. They are a heuristic device for dealing with uncertainty. Conventions may steam from
         different sources: religion, myths, scientific theories, etc. Since the Enlightenment the prestige of science as a
         source of conventions has increased, albeit at the cost of dressing up other sources (such as myths) in the guise
         of scientific theories. (…) conventions embody a set of criteria which specify a ‘positive agenda’, the set of
         problems which should be tackled and a set of solutions which should be used to solve such problems. The
         criteria also specify a ‘negative agenda’, problems which are not relevant and solutions to (relevant) problems
         which should be avoided. (our highlights)

   The author himself acknowledges the contribution of Castro (1993), who proposes a dichotomy
between the conventions of “growth” and “stability”. Erber (2004; 2012), in addition to
acknowledging that he owes Castro the notion of convention, also acknowledges the influence of
Schön (1988). Erber also borrowed the notions of “rules of the game” and “shared mental models”

4
  Erber uses the notion of Mode de Régulation [Mode of Regulation]. Boyer and Saillard (2002: p. 41) state that “a mode
of regulation establishes a set of procedures and individual and collective behaviour patterns which must simultaneously
reproduce social relations through the conjunction of institutional forms which are historically determined”. Agents are
involved by series of institutional arrangements that socialize and restrict both information and cognitive abilities,
adopting situated rationality. It ensures compatibility of a set of decentralized decisions, without requiring agents to
internalize the principles governing the overall dynamic of the system (Aglietta, 1997). Modes of regulation may differ,
depending on time and location, and evolve as a result of the interactions of its institutional forms (Benassy et al., 1979).
5
  Erber (2007) uses the concept of “sociological generation” (Abrams, 1982), which reinforces the sociological character
of the concept of convention: “[t]he identity that constitutes a given sociological generation can be understood as a
‘social convention’, a cognitive system that guides social practices and serves as a key element to reduce uncertainty and
coordinate economic and political agents” (p. 43; our translation).
6
  FC approach is usually combined to Keynes’ ideas. See, for instance, Dequech (2003; 2009; 2011).


                                                                                                                            4
from North (1990) and Denzau and North (2004), respectively. The power of theses guiding rules is
strengthened if there exist a metaphor (given by myth, story or theory) assuring that the promised
better future will be achieved since the agenda is implemented – that is to say, a teleology.
According to Erber:
        [s]uch set of rules, the positive and negative agendas they generate and the teleology underlying them are a
        convention – a collective representation which structures individual expectations and behavior (Orléan, 1989)
        (…). A convention arises out of the interaction of social agents but it is external to such agents and cannot be
        reduced to their individual cognition, i.e., it is an emergent phenomenon (De Wolf and Holvoet, 2005). In every
        society there are many conventions dealing with different aspects of economic and social behavior (e.g., the
        quality of traded goods, the working of the financial system). Following our definition, a development
        convention is concerned with structural change. This begs the question about which “structures” are to be
        changed? The answer to that question differentiates development conventions. (Erber, 2012, p. 8; highlight in
        the original)

   DCs exist as a direct result of the concept of economic development itself, which cannot be
reduced to the growth of per capita income – what in Erber’s words would simply mean “more of the
same”.7 The structural changes subjacent to and characteristic of the development process produce
uncertainty (in the Keynesian sense), as well as coordination problems (as FC emphasized). Thus,
conventions exist to mitigate the uncertainties and the consequent coordination problems that are
inherent to the development process.
      Development is a multifaceted phenomenon in which the economic dimension – both at micro
and macro levels – cannot be dissociated from its political and sociological aspects.8 Eventually,
development is promoted and hence determined by social actors. In addition to the role performed by
policy makers, Erber emphasized the influence of social actors, such as interest groups, corporations,
multilateral organizations (as the IMF and the World Bank), scholars, opinion makers, voters, and
others. His epistemological stance becomes very clear: “Ontologically, Economics is Politics”. Based
on the assumption that economic theory is not axiologically neutral, Erber explained where the DCs
prevailing in contemporary Brazil came from – or how they were formed – and where they are
leading us to.
   Probably, the main contribution resulting from the study of DCs is that the belief that a given DC
can be transformed into a “national project” aiming at the “common good” is as utopic as the belief
in Rousseau’s idea of the “general will”. Actually, a DC serves a set of interests, particular to a given
society and historical moment, which asymmetrically affect all social actors and groups of interest:
        [d]espite being sold as a “national project” aiming at the “common good”, they actually represent a given
        distribution of political and economic power in a society in a given period of time. (…) no development
        convention can accommodate everyone (Erber, 2011, p. 36, our highlights, our translation).

    2.2 – Development Conventions in Brazil: a brief retrospect from post-World
    War II to the1990s

   From WW II until the end of the 1970s, the hegemonic convention in Brazil was the
developmentalist one. The core content of its agenda was to foster development by changing the
productive structure – dominated by the primary sector – by means of industrialization assumed as a
national project to be implemented under the leadership of the State. Industrialization came to be

7
  Erber acknowledges the contribution of Schumpeter (1964) to the formation of his own view of development.
8
  In the sense given by Weber (1991): knowledge is built upon the theoretical-rational construction of ideal types, as a
product of interpretation of reality. As this one is infinite and subject to multiple ordinations, it becomes impossible to
explain a given object from all possible viewpoints: “all the analysis of infinite reality which the finite human mind can
conduct rests on the tacit assumption that only a finite portion of this reality constitutes the object of scientific
investigation” (Weber, 1991, p. 29).


                                                                                                                         5
politically and socially envisaged as indispensable to reproduce the same productive structure and,
eventually, social patterns similar to those regnant in the developed world.
   The ideological and theoretical basis, and the technical instruments to implement this convention
was mainly provided the UN Economic Commission for Latin America (ECLA).The called “center-
periphery approach” or “structuralism” was firstly formalized by Prebisch (Executive Secretary of
ECLA) in what Hirschman (1961) named the “Latin-American Manifesto”:

        [i]n Latin America reality is undermining the schema of international division of labor (…) Under that schema,
        the specific task that fell to Latin America, as part of the periphery of the world economic system, was that of
        producing food and raw materials for the great industrial centers. There was no place in it for the
        industrialization of the new countries. It is nevertheless being forced upon them by events. Two world wars in a
        single generation and a great economic crisis between them have shown the Latin American countries their
        opportunities clearly pointing the way to industrial activity. (Prebisch, 1949, p. 4; our italics)



Accordingly, a necessary condition to overcome underdevelopment was to promote structural
changes: increasing the overall productivity of the economy above all through industrialization, but
also with the modernization of agriculture and the renewal of infrastructure. Figuratively speaking, it
was prescribed as necessary removing the then called development “bottlenecks”.
   Given the underdevelopment conditions9, the technical complexity of the investment projects and
the huge investment expending required, the private sector was not able neither to fund nor to
implement those investments, which in many cases were made in natural monopoly (with a high
minimum efficient scale).10 So, direct state intervention – by means of public enterprises –, planning,
and also public incentives to private investors were other necessary conditions to foster
development.11
   In a sentence, surpassing underdevelopment was sold as mostly a political task to be furthered by
the State. This was an upheaval political-ideological perspective grounded in theoretical
fundamentals which was translated into economic policy objectives and eventually in actionable
targets. Thereat, the developmentalist convention was in its way to conquer hearts and minds.
ECLA’s theory provided the cognitive content for a teleology which explained “how the present
arose from the past and, especially how the future will be” (Erber, 2008, p. 2) once the
developmentalist agenda is performed.
   As mentioned by Erber (2012, p.14), industrialization attended not only national interests but also
those of international oligopolies producers of durable consumer goods, capital goods and
intermediary industrial products which established subsidiaries in the country benefiting from
domestic market reserve provided by import controls and high tariffs – discouraging imports of
goods to be produced domestically and favoring essential goods imports –, and also from the
resulting high profit rates. The denominated “import substitution industrialization” was fully
developed by Tavares (1964)12
   Developmentalism turned to be a “social representation”, grounded in a teleology (Structuralism),
and having all the other features of a DC: 1) shared guiding rules to reduce uncertainty and
promoting coordination; 2) an agenda ranking the problems to be faced (e.g. low degree of
industrialization, infra-structure “bottlenecks”), the respective acceptable solutions (e.g. import
9
   Meaning: the low skill of labor force, low level of saving, rudimentary financial market, limited entrepreneurial
capacity, lack of experience with the formulation of investment projects and its implementation, etc.
10
   See Kerstenetzky et al. (1973) and Baer et al. (1976).
11
   From 1956 to 1979, five economic plans were adopted. By the end of the 1970s there were around 80 public
enterprises, for instance: CSN (siderurgic), SIDERBRÁS (siderurgic), CVRD (mining), Álcalis (alkali), PETROBRAS
(oil), CHESF (electric power), FURNAS (electric power), ELETROBRÁS (energy), TELEBRÁS (telecommunications),
FNM (automobile), EMBRAER (aircraft), and EMBRAPA (agricultural research).
12
   See Bielschowsky (1988) for a thorough analysis of developmentalism.


                                                                                                                      6
substitution and investing in infra-structure) and the no acceptable ones (e.g. reducing growth to
controlling inflation); and 3) organizations in charge of the achievement of the established goals, as
the National Bank for Economic Development (BNDES); and 4) the rules and regulations to be
followed in the targets implementation. Developmentalist convention had progressively conquered a
highly solid and effective support of the majority of Brazilian population eventually becoming
hegemonic.
   Inflation was not considered a relevant problem and growth was favored over price stability.
Accordingly, President J. Kubitshek’s was elected using the slogan “fifty years [of growth] in five”.
During his administration (1956-1960), GDP grew around 8%. Despite that inflation accelerated to
more than 22%, he was then considered the most popular president. Another negligence was related
with income distribution that actually worsened (Gini coefficient increased from 0.535 to 0.589,
from 1960’s to 1970s). Changes in the institutional framework were not promoted as it was
envisaged by the developmentalist agenda. For example, the historically needed land reform was not
promoted, being labeled by rightists as “a communist banner”. And also scarce attention was given
to scientific and technological development. Thus developmentalist agenda was not fully
implemented: it was adopted in a rather distorted way, giving rise to a restrict version of it, limited to
fostering economic growth.
   The full implementation of developmentalist agenda was largely obstructed by a right wing
military coup in 1964 (Furtado, 1995). The autocratic regime put even greater emphasis on economic
growth13, waving that the social changes would necessarily follow it. For instance, as a sacred
economic law to justify the income distribution worsening, an authority has vowed that “the cake has
to grow up before being distributed”. Nevertheless, the most frequent orthodox criticisms from adept
of liberalism was mainly concentrated in blaming on the low degree of openness of the economy and
the high level of state intervention.
   Indeed, for the whole period of 1946 to 1979, economic growth was rather impressive: GDP
increased at an annual rate of 7,6%, and the share of industrial product in the GDP rose from 23% to
around 33%. On the other hand, inflation accelerated progressively from 19% in 1946 to 67% in
1979.
   After the 1970s, the pattern of development in Brazil started being radically changed. During the
“lost decade” (1980s), economic growth vanished abruptly14 and the situation was made worse by
the already chronic high inflation, (external) debt and fiscal crises. Inflation went out of control
producing high income regressive effects – bearing the poor especially – and disturbing economic
system and people’s day life. Worst of all was the frustration resulting from the negative overall
outcome: the feeling that the overcoming of underdevelopment eventually became unreachable.
   This new economic reality turned to be a fertile field to the rise of a new DC. Indeed, during the
1980s, the developmentalist convention began a cumulative process of deconstruction. Its cognitive
content was put in check; and then the adherent population started diminishing. Both factors
contributed to weakening its political and economic power – which, by its turn, ended up restricting
its capacity to subsume and determine the individual judgment and behavior.15 The widespread
delusion with the developmentalist convention provided a necessary condition for the neoliberal
convention emergence.


13
   Promoting high growth rates was an instrument of political legitimacy of the autocratic regime, which ruled until 1984.
14
   From the 1980s on, GDP annual rate of growth averaged around 2,5% p.y.
15
   According to Keynes (1937, p. 215): “The practice of calmness and immobility, of certainty and security, suddenly
breaks down. New fears and hopes will, without warning, take charge of human conduct. The forces of disillusion may
suddenly impose a new conventional basis of valuation.” Likewise, Erber (2012, p. 13) has proposed that “[d]evelopment
conventions arise out of the interplay internal economic and political forces with the international context and a crisis of
such forces (…) may prevent the incremental and cumulative process of change of a DC, leading to an attack on its hard
core (…). Under such circumstances the hegemonic DC tends to be replaced by a new convention”.


                                                                                                                          7
    In the political-ideological level, the forthcoming of the Washington consensus (Williamson,
2004) played a crucial role.16 IMF and World Bank became in charge of promoting (sometimes even
imposing) at global level a completely new agenda: fiscal discipline; privatization; deregulation
(especially in financial markets); current and capital account liberalization (focused in FDI); property
rights; etc. Accordingly, there was also a completely new teleology: liberalizing the economy will
bring development. One should note how this antagonizes with the developmentalism: its positive
agenda suddenly became negative.
    From 1985 to 1994, economic policy was virtually reduced to attempting controlling inflation:
six stabilization plans were implemented without being succeeded. Price stability was only
achieved with the Real Plan, based on an exchange rate anchor. Inflation plunged from a monthly
rate of 47% in June 1994 to less than 2% two months later, and it has since then been maintained
at reasonable levels: between 6-7% per year.
   During Sarney’s (1985-89) and, mainly in Collor’s administration (1990-92), a wide set of
reforms began to be implemented: opening up of the economy (current and capital account);
privatization; administration reform; and tax reform. During Cardoso’s terms (1995-2002), the
Washington consensus agenda was furthered and the neoliberal convention eventually became
hegemonic.17 Privatization and capital account liberalization was deepened. State intervention was
reduced substantially in favor of free market operation. Price stabilization process – begun during
Franco’s (1992-94) administration – was concluded. Economic policy was focused on price stability.
Economic growth became secondary – or at best, considered a byproduct of price stability.
   In 1999, the exchange rate anchor was abandoned in favor of the policy tripod: inflation targeting
(IT); floating exchange rate (with high capital mobility); and primary budget surplus targeting.
Monetary policy was hierarchically superior compared to others: economic policy targeted price
stability, which became the sole object of monetary policy and fiscal policy gained a supporting role,
limited to not creating inflationary pressures. The tripod was aligned to the New Consensus on
Macroeconomics.
   In few words: from the WW II to the 1970s, a pro-growth – State-led convention was hegemonic
being replaced by a pro-stability – free market convention along the 1990s.

2.3 – The Development Conventions in President Lula’s terms (2003-2010)

   Erber (2008b; 2011) applies the concept of DC to the analysis of President Lula’s terms, which
began surrounded by huge uncertainty. He discusses the clash between two conventions: the
institutionalist convention and the neo-developmentalist convention. The former became hegemonic,
but the latter also exerted some influence on President Lula’s terms, as we shall see ahead.18
   The discourse and the documents produced by the Brazilian Central Bank (BCB) and the Ministry
of Finance are permeated with the institutionalist convention, which is founded on neo-classical
theory and the new institutionalism (North, 1990). It is grounded on the myth of a competitive,
meritocratic society, where free market and adequate institutions are thought to ensure economic
efficiency, especially from the allocative perspective. In this framework, allocative efficiency is
reinforced by investments in human capital (education) and targeted social policies, such as those
preached by the World Bank.

16
   For a PK view on the Washington consensus, see Davidson (2004) and the other papers in the JPKE especial issue on
the subject (vol. 27, n. 2).
17
   More details on Sallum (2000).
18
   Erber (2011, pp. 31-32) also acknowledges the existence of two other conventions: the neoliberal convention, which
despite losing strength after the 1990s crises (Erber, 2012) stood out for its critique of the interventionism of President
Lula’s governments; and the new-developmentalist convention (Bresser-Pereira, 2012a; 2012b), inspired by post-
Keynesian thought, which opposed the policy tripod.


                                                                                                                         8
    Market forces – based on a price system that adequately signals the relative scarcities – allow for
an efficient allocation of resources, which in turn ensures economic growth. From this perspective,
institutions, translated into a set of rules and organizations, favor the adequate functioning of the
markets. Assuring ownership rights and creditors’ rights and reducing transaction costs are equally
important, hold as essential. In general, second-generation institutional reforms, that is, post-
Washington consensus, are recommended.
    It is worth to mention the belief that a reduced level of inflation (as it ensures the adequate
functioning of the price system) is an essential precondition to economic growth. Indeed, the BCB
played a crucial role, with its president elevated to the status of a minister during President Lula’s
terms. The BCB is a kind of organization, structured in accordance with the principal-agent model,
that must be independent of the political system (but not the financial market, as we shall see ahead),
in order to avoid the profane temptation of monetary authority being subject to inflationary bias.
Price stability has become sacred, a “good in itself”, according to the Federal Reserve Chairman Ben
Bernanke’s expression.
    The institutionalist convention, despite its hegemony, was adopted in a mere restrictive manner,
as it focused price stabilization mostly. Thus, at the top of President Lula’s agenda, price stability
was pursued as a key goal. Since the macroeconomic policy focused on inflation control, the policy
tripod became asymmetric: IT influenced and restricted both fiscal and exchange rate policies.
    The high interest rates attracted foreign investments – in pursuit of arbitrage gains – and thus
contributed to the overvaluation of Brazilian real. In its turn, the overvaluation of real facilitated
inflation control. Indeed, the exchange rate became a key monetary policy transmission channel. As
a matter of fact, during President Lula’s terms,19 Brazil set a world record in terms of (real) interest
rates, and the Brazilian real was one of the most overvalued currencies of that period. Roughly
speaking, fiscal targets were achieved by cutting government expenditures, especially investments. If
any conflicts arose between inflation control and other macroeconomic goals, they were solved in
order to pursue the sacred goal of price stability.
    As Erber (2011) noted, despite price stability being sold as a good in itself, featuring like a public
good – whose benefits are available to everyone –, the (asymmetric) policy tripod was not neutral
from the allocative perspective, with losers and winners being clearly distinguished.
    Among the losers are debtors and credit takers. The State – the biggest individual debtor – spent
around 6% of GDP a year on average with public debt interest payments. Private borrowers (firms
and households) also lose. The financial system becomes scarcely functional, as it prioritizes
operations with government bonds. The result is a high concentration (to total financial system
assets) of short-term assets with high liquidity and high yield. As a consequence, it jeopardizes the
funding of investment projects (in production and innovation), which are essential to the structural
changes subjacent to development.
    Among the winners are surplus units, in general, and the financial system, in particular, whose
incomes mostly come from the vigorous gains from treasury operations. Erber (2011) points out that
Brazilian banks’ net profit tripled, with their profit margins rising from 15% to 23% between 2003
and 2007. The wealthier also benefited: from 1995 to 2005, non financial companies and individuals
received 80% on average of all financial incomes, according to data presented by Bruno (2007).
    However, the institutionalist convention was not only beneficial to the financial system and the
rentiers. Aligned with the logic of financialization – which characterizes the period under study –
firms, especially those with vigorous cash flow, also benefited from the combination of high interest
rates and currency overvaluation, as they were able to make robust financial gains from investing
their cash flows. Among them, one should mention producers of intermediate goods; producers and
sellers of commodities; wholesalers; and retailers. Another example is the high leverage position in

19
  Note that, also during President F. H. Cardoso’s terms, interest rates were high and the currency was maintained
overvalued.


                                                                                                                9
foreign exchange derivatives by Aracruz (one of the biggest pulp and paper producers) and Sadia
(one of the biggest food producer), revealed at the end of 2008.
   The overvaluation of real is a byproduct of monetary policy, from which it cannot be dissociated:
“currency overvaluation and high interest rates are Siamese twins” (Erber, 2011, p. 43). Importers of
goods and services also benefit from currency overvaluation, whereas domestic producers and
exporters have their businesses negatively affected by it. The combination of high interest rates and
currency overvaluation also benefits those who have access to international credit markets, as well
senders of outbound money transfers (such as investments, profits, dividends).
   Summarizing, despite being sold as beneficial to everyone, as something aimed to promote the
common good, the stabilization policy – based on the combination of high interest rates and currency
overvaluation – was non neutral from the allocative perspective and clearly produced distinguishable
winners and losers.
   The neo-developmentalist convention coexisted with (despite being subject to) the institutionalist
convention, which was hegemonic in that period. The 2003-2007 Pluriannual Plan (in Portuguese,
Plano Plurianual de Aplicações – PPA) and the Industrial, Technology and Trade Policy (in
Portuguese, Política Industrial, Tecnológica e de Comércio Exterior – PITCE) provided the
guidelines for the neo-developmentalist convention, which was reinforced by changes in the
command of the Ministry of Finance (notably, the substitution of Minister A. Pallocci) and President
Lula’s reelection in 2006. Five pillars underpinned the neo-developmentalist agenda: 1) investment
in infrastructure (especially energy, logistics and sanitation), with emphasis on the role of public
companies and the BNDES; 2) investment in residential real estate, based on both public and private
credit, aiming at reducing the housing deficit; 3) virtuous cycle involving an increase in consumption
– due to an increase in the minimum wage, formal employment, and income transfer programs – and
investments in fixed capital and innovation; 4) investment in innovation through subsidies and fiscal
incentives; and 5) an independent foreign policy that prioritizes relations with developing countries.
   The theoretical framework behind it is Keynesian, in which the State and State policies played a
central role. A point to be mentioned is the endeavor to create a virtuous cycle involving income
increase among low-income families – by means of income transfer programs and increase in the
minimal wage – and State-led strategic investments.
   Contrarily to the more liberal character that permeates the institutionalist convention, in the neo-
developmentalist convention the State assumes a strategic role in the implementation of those five
pillars. The role of the public sector in implementing the first two pillars, as well as the last one,
makes this new convention particularly close to the (old) developmentalist convention. Nevertheless,
despite sharing features with the new-developmentalist framework, the neo-developmentalist
convention diverges from it in a fundamental issue: the second one accepts the policy tripod.
   The neo-developmentalist convention builds on the myth of a cooperative, inclusive society. It
builds on the pursuit of a social contract and on President Lula’s metaphors that compare society to
family and interpret economic problems in terms of home economics. Social inclusion policies –
which aimed to reduce poverty and materialized the third pillar underpinning the neo-
developmentalist convention – played an important role in President Lula’s agenda, which distanced
this convention from both the old developmentalist and the neo-liberal conventions.
   Also, it is worth to mention that the relation between the institutionalist and the neo-
developmentalist convention is rather dialectical. On the one hand, they antagonize in key aspects;
on the other, they reinforce each other mutually. 20 According to Erber (2011), the main “link”
between them is the belief that price stability – obtained by means of the policy tripod – has a
purging capability. As a consequence, under the influence of the hegemonic pro-stability convention
– which serves them both – the neo-developmentalist and the institutionalist conventions reinforce
each other mutually and ensure the status quo, serving to a wide range of interests. In his words:

20
     On the power of DC, see Erber (2012, p. 8).


                                                                                                    10
       However, “links” can be established between the two conventions, which reduce the conflicts between them
       and, at the same time, allow for the hegemony of the convention of stability to consolidate. Among them,
       there is the idea that the “poor” tend to be the most negatively affected in periods of high inflation, and that the
       political success of social inclusion policies, achieved by means of low fiscal costs and despite of relatively low
       growth rates, reduces the importance of high growth rates as an instrument of political legitimacy (…) and
       allows for the reconciliation between the two conventions. (…) the coexistence of both conventions is enabled
       under the hegemony of the restrict institutionalist convention, which is in turn ensured by controlling the
       macroeconomic policy tripod and by neo-developmentalist policies not jeopardizing the interests behind such a
       convention, insofar as the policies that incorporate this convention are sustained. The combination of both
       conventions serves a wide range of interests, which ends up making it stronger (…). (Erber, 2011, p. 51, our
       highlights, our translation)

   Next section discusses how the concept of convention has been particularly applied to the analysis
of Brazilian contemporary monetary policy, which brings the world’s highest (real) interest rates as a
key feature. A special attention will be given to the power of the pro-stability convention, which calls
for the conservatism that has characterized the conduct of monetary policy since mid 1990s.

3 – The Problem of Interest Rates in Brazil from the Viewpoint of Conventions

    The concept of DC can be used to explain the so-called problem of interest rates in Brazil.
Bresser-Pereira and Nakano (2002) are pioneers in using it to explain the excessive monetary rigidity
that has been practiced in Brazil since the launching of the Real Plan – period where, put in simple
terms, the country had the world’s highest real interest rates: “[a]fter a long period of persistently
high interest rates it is natural that a fear of cutting interest arises, to a point that the prevailing
interest rate level becomes a convention” (169). Erber (2011) gave a decisive contribution to
furthering the thesis on the existence of a convention supporting the conservative conduct of
monetary policy in Brazil. According to him, the excessive monetary rigidity should be explained
from the perspective of Political Economy. In other words, one should not understand the high
interest rates as a problem of macroeconomic nature only, but rather as the result of a powerful
coalition of interests on sustaining interest rates at high levels and hence keeping the real overvalued.
    As previously mentioned, Erber authoritatively discusses the non-neutrality of President Lula’s
economic policy. He acknowledges the existence of a powerful “coalition of interests” to keep high
interest rates and currency overvaluation. Such coalition is beneficial not only to rentiers, who profit
from financial operations, but also to other beneficiaries (see previous section), including the BCB
itself, which benefits from the reputation of being a conservative, inflation-averse central bank.
Therefore, this is not a typical situation where the agent, the Brazilian Central Bank (BCB), is
capture by the principal, the rentiers. In his words:
       [t]hus, a wide and powerful constellation of interests has been structured on the combination of high interest
       rates and currency overvaluation, and it has established a convention on the idea that those features are
       essential to the development of the country. (…) Such coalition of interests has at its disposal powerful
       instruments to consolidate and disseminate its convention of development, the most explicit of which is in
       the hands of the financial system (…) But there are others (…) such as the funding of political campaigns,
       relations with Congressmen, the ‘bureaucratic-corporate circle’ (…) and relations with media groups. The
       Central Bank is a necessary member of that coalition (…). To establish the coalition and the convention that
       serves as its social representation, it is necessary that the Central Bank and the private banks jointly benefit
       from the same policy – in this case, the prestige from achieving targets and the profits from high interest rates
       and currency overvaluation (Erber, 2011, p. 43, our highlights, our translation).

   It is worth noting that the more orthodox economists find it somewhat difficult to assimilate the
precise meaning of this thesis – probably, because it transcends economic theory, given its
sociological character. In addition, it cannot be formalized as an abstract theoretical model in which
historical timeframe, political relations and social relations are irrelevant – something usual among


                                                                                                                        11
mainstream economists. As a result it is common to find this thesis addressed to in a completely
distorted manner. For instance, from Schwartsman’s (2011) point of view the convention suggests
there is a “conspiracy” among the analysts at Boletim Focus to “induce the BCB to put interest rates
in a trajectory that is higher than strictly necessary”. It is true that Focus is one of the instruments
used by the beneficiaries of this convention, the BCB among them, to keep the status quo
(Guimarães, 2008, 2009). However, the thesis cannot be reduced to a mere “conspiracy”.
   Erber pioneered a research program based on Political Economy devoted to study the Brazilian
contemporary monetary policy. His contribution allowed Corrêa (2010), Oreiro (2012), Dequech and
Seabra (2003), among others, to bring the thesis on the interest rate convention close to Keynes’
ideas. Modenesi et al (2013b), as well as Erber, apply Keynes’ (and the post-Keynesians’) approach,
as well as the French conventionalists’, in an explicitly convergent manner. They suggest that the
monetary policy framework, in general, and the setting of Selic rate, in particular, are driven by
conventions.
   In empirical studies, the parameters of the reaction function estimated by Modenesi (2008; 2011)
and Modenesi et al (2013a) corroborate the idea that BCB was extremely conservative. In general,
their results indicate excessive slow movements in Selic and lower bound well above zero for the
equilibrium interest rate. Chernavsky (2007; 2008) provides empirical evidences that also seem to
corroborate the convention thesis.
   Due to changes in the economic policy (especially in the strategy to control inflation) started at
the end of President Lula’s second term (notably in the late 2010’s) and furthered in President
Dilma’s government (after 2012), the contribution of Erber has gained relevance as an explanation to
the situation of high interest rates in Brazil. It is now clear that it is rather a matter of Political
Economy, more than any other thesis could have foreseen.21
   Indeed, one can argue that there were no genuine impediments of macroeconomic nature to the
fall of interest rates. In the end, there have been no bank crises and no capital flights, nor has the
chronically high inflation returned. In addition, there has been no need for a drastic reorientation of
the fiscal policy, as proposed by the defenders of the fiscalism – one of the most popular
explanations for that problem. Hence, real interest rates (both in short and long terms) have
ultimately declined as a result of a political decision made by the President, and no macroeconomic
disturbances have threatened the success of the new monetary policy.
   On the one hand, the BCB has cut Selic in an unprecedented manner – and has kept it to a
historical minimum level – but inflation has not been significantly above the average observed
during the post-Real Plan period.22 On the other, the strong reaction against the “unexpected” cut in
Selic – especially by representatives of the financial market – reveals the role and the power of the
conservative convention behind the monetary policy in Brazil, as we shall discuss ahead.
   BCB’s new stance became concrete in the cutting of Selic by 50 bp (a movement that had not
been foreseen by financial market analysts), during a meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee
(COPOM) in August, 2011. The cutting of Selic generated massive losses to most money market
agents, who had bet on the maintenance of Selic at a high level. Contrarily to the market consensus
(or convention), the BCB set Selic rate at a level expected to prevail within three months ahead on
future contracts (SWAP-DI).
   BCB had made this decision based on a more favorable inflationary scenario, where: 1) the
Eurozone crisis was deepening and consequently international interest rates were expected to remain

21
   Modenesi and Modenesi (2012) list five theses on the “problem of interest rates in Brazil”: reduced efficacy of the
monetary policy; pro-conservative convention in the monetary policy; multiple interest rates equilibria; fiscalism; and
jurisdictional uncertainty.
22
   Selic was set at 7.25% p.y. during the COPOM meeting of August, 2012. The consumer price index (in Portuguese,
Índice de Preços ao Consumidor Amplo – IPCA) rose by 5.9% in 2012, thus inflation target was achieved. Note that the
average inflation since IT was adopted (1999-2012) stood around 6.7% p.y., whereas IPCA stood at 7.4% p.y., on
average, since the Real Plan was launched (1995-2012).


                                                                                                                    12
at minimum historical levels; 2) it featured the cooling of domestic economic activity; and 3)
inflation came closer to the target center. Ministry of Finance, in a more coordinated action with the
BCB, made a contribution in rising the primary surplus target; and, especially, in setting a new rule
for the earnings from savings account, and thus removing a sort of lower bound that obstructed the
falling of Selic.23
    Two other key factors have accounted for the fall of interest rates. First, monetary policy
instruments have become more diversified, by including macroprudential and credit control
measures. Second, measures have been taken to control cost inflation, such as payroll tax cuts and
energy price cuts.
    Despite being well grounded, the decision to cut Selic prompted a wave of criticism, particularly
from financial market participants (both at the domestic and international levels). The “wide and
powerful constellation of interests” on high interest rates (and currency overvaluation) acted in
defense of its worldview and its agenda (both positive and negative). 24 Despite the world crisis, they
asked for more of the same and radically opposed to the changes in the monetary policy. 25
    According to Nakano (2011), spokesmen for the financial system publicly bemoaned the break
with “protocol” and “liturgy”, as well as the subversion of IT “most valuable principles”, which
made financial markets “perplex”. Banks got “used to have a promiscuous relationship with the
BCB, to say the least”, in which the BCB merely sanctioned the expectations on inflation (revealed
by Focus) and interest rates (contained in SWAP-DI contracts). According to Nakano, that protocol
has been broken and “the BCB has finally become independent” from the financial market. Thus, “[it
is] understandable that those who profit from high interests shall defend the ‘valuable principles’ of
the current rule” (p. A-15).
    Former BCB President Franco (2011) attacked the change in monetary policy and, covertly, the
Minister of Finance himself. First, Franco suggested that the BCB should adopt the “let-things-be-to-
see-how-things-turn-out-to-be” kind of behavior, which had already been adopted in the subprime
crises (and proved to be a disaster) and became eventually known as the Meirelles mistake. 26 Franco
then warned that the BCB responded proactively (before the crisis) and gave “the impression of
COPOM members knowing better than the market”. Eventually, he joined not only the hordes of
non-believers in the gravity of the crisis, but also the litany of complaints by the “orphans” who used
to benefit from that old liturgy. On the brink of mysticism, he stated that “[those] mysteries – and
there is no one who dares to question the size of the risks mentioned by the BCB – have suspended
the usual considerations that are applied in inflation targeting liturgy” (p. A-14)
    One should note that the more radical opposition to the changes in the conduct of monetary policy
has particularly come from those representing and participating in the financial market. Above all,
leveraged future money market agents who had bet that interest rates would be kept at a high level
ended up having heavy losses. In this case, the conflict of interests is explicit and unequivocal: the
“unexpected” fall in interest generated losses for those who had bet interest rates would remain high.

23
   The old rule erroneously established a sort of lower bound for the Selic rate, around 9% p.y. As Selic converges to this
level, the earnings from most money market funds became smaller than the earnings from the savings accounts. Thus a
massive migration to the savings accounts was feared, since it could jeopardize the sale of public bonds.
24
   Put in simple words, in the negative agenda the alleged abandonment of IT predominates; in the positive one, the need
to rebuild the policy tripod is preached.
25
   Among the demonstrations of astonishment and dissatisfaction, two news articles leap to the eye for the mocking in
their titles: “Cuts in samba rhythm” (Olivares, 2011) and “Farewell Taylor rule, welcome Rousseff rule” (Schmidt,
2011). Jensen and Ribeiro (2012), for their turn, issued a warning: “at some point the government will have to make hard
choices. Inflation may come to diverge from the target (...). In the best scenario, the tripod will be resumed. In the worst,
institutional murders escalate (...)” (p. A-29).
26
   Despite the subprime crisis deepening (which ecloded at the end of 2008) and the clear signs of economic slowdown,
the BCB kept the monetary policy tightened and hence gave an extra contribution to deepen the economic slowdown.
Actually, a good opportunity was missed to cut Selic. That was one of the most notorious examples of the conservatism
in the conduct of the monetary policy prior to the ruling of A. Tombini as chairman of the BCB.


                                                                                                                          13
Criticizing the BCB was a way of defending or justifying the positions in SWAP-DI contracts.
Naturally, this cannot be done explicitly; the interests of a particular group must be sold as if they
aimed at the common good.
   The cry of dissatisfaction was swollen by market analysts (chief economists, strategists at
financial institutions) who, given their job descriptions, acted as genuine defenders of the financial
market interests. Acting as if they were lobbyists, they defended the worldview and interests of the
financial system.
   From another perspective, one should note that most of the criticism (and particularly the
sharpest) did not come from investors and savers, neither from most of the non-financial
entrepreneurs, especially the small and medium business owners.
   To sum up, the recent changes in anti-inflationary policy illustrate the thesis on the role of DC as
an explanation for the problem of interest rates in Brazil. The Political Economy approach has
proven to be fertile and powerful in the study of this issue.

Concluding Remarks

   Summing up, until the 1970s a pro-growth – state led convention was hegemonic in Brazil. After
that, a liberalization process took place and economic growth became secondary giving rise to a pro-
stability – free market convention, which has become hegemonic since the 1990s.
   The conservative conduct of monetary policy in Brazil builds on the hegemony of the pro-stability
convention. The excessive monetary rigidity should be explained from the perspective of Political
Economy. In other words, one should not understand the problem of interest rates as a problem of
macroeconomic nature only, but rather as the result of a powerful coalition of interests on sustaining
interest rates at high levels and hence keeping the real overvalued.
   This view opens room to a research program based on Political Economy devoted to the study of
the Brazilian contemporary monetary policy. Recent changes in the anti-inflationary policy illustrate
and, more importantly, corroborate the thesis on the role of DC as an explanation for the problem of
interest rates in Brazil. Adopting the perspective of Political Economy to studying this issue has
proven to be fertile and powerful.

References


Abrams, P. Historical Sociology. New York: Cornell University Press, 1992.
Baer, W.; Newfarmer, R.; Trebat, T. “Considerações sobre o capitalismo estatal no Brasil: algumas
questões e problemas novos”. Pesquisa e Planejamento Econômico, 1976, 6 (3).
Benassy, J. P.; Boyer, R.;G. R. M. ‘Régulation des economies capitalists et inflation’, Revue
Économique, 30(3), 397-441, 1979.
Bielschowsky, R. Pensamento Econômico Brasileiro: o Ciclo Ideológico do Desenvolvimentismo.
Rio de Janeiro: IPEA, 1988.
Boyer, R.; Saillard, Y. “A Summary of Régulation Theory” in: Robert Boyer/Yves Saillard (Hg.),
Régulation Theory. The State of the Art, Routledge: London/New York, 2002, 36-44.
Bresser-Pereira, L.C. “Structuralist Macroeconomics and the New Developmentalism”. Brazilian
Journal of Political Economy, 2012a, 32 (3), 347-66.
______. “Summing Up Structuralist Development Macroeconomics and New Developmentalism”.
Challenge, 2012b, 55 (5).


                                                                                                    14
Bresser-Pereira, L.C., Nakano, Y. “Uma Estratégia de Desenvolvimento com Estabilidade.”
Brazilian Journal of Political Economy, 2002, 22 (3), 146-180.
Bruno, M. Financiarisation et Accumulation du Capital Productif au Brésil: les Obstacles Macro-
économiques à Une Croissance Soutenue.” Revue Tiers Monde, 2007, XLVIII, 65-92.
Carvalho, FJ.C. “Expectativas, incerteza e convenções”. In D. C. Monteiro Filha, L. C. D. Prado &
H. M. M. Lastres (eds.), ESTRATÉGIAS DE DESENVOLVIMENTO, POLÍTICA INDUSTRIAL E
INOVAÇÃO: ensaios em memória de Fabio Erber, pp. 269-95, 2014.
Castro, A.B. “Renegade Development: Rise and Demise of State-Led Development in Brazil.” In W.
Smith, C. H. Acuña, and E. A. Gamarra (eds.), Democracy, Markets and Structural Reform in Latin
America. Miami: Transaction Publishers, 1993.
Chernavsky, E. Sobre a construção da Política Econômica: Uma Discussão dos Determinantes da
Taxa Real de Juros no Brasil. Dissertação de Mestrado, São Paulo, Brazil: Unversidade de São
Paulo/IPE, 2007.
__________. Taxa Natural e Convenções: Uma Discussão dos Determinantes da Taxa Real de Juros
no Brasil. Proceedings of the XIII Encontro de Economia Política, 2008.
Corrêa, L.C. Convenções Financeiras e a Taxa Básica de Juros no Brasil. Dissertação de Mestrado,
Campinas, Brazil: Universidade de Campinas 2010.
Davidson, Davidson, P. Financial Markets, Money and the Real World. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar,
2002.
_______. “A Post Keynesian view of the Washington consensus and how to improve it”. Journal of
Post Keynesian Economics, 2004, 27 (2).
Davis, J. B. Keynes’s Philosophical Development. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994
________. “Convergences in Keynes and Wittgenstein’s Later Views.” The European Journal of the
History of Economic Thought, 1996, 3 (3) (Autumn), 433-448.
________. “J. M. Keynes on History and Convention.” In G. Harcourt, P. Riach (eds.), A ‘second’
Edition of The General Theory, vol. 2. London: Routledge, 149-162., 1997
Denzau, A., North, D. “Shared Mental Models: Ideologies and Institutions.” Kyklos, 14 (1), 3-31.
Dequech, D. "Conventional and Unconventional Behavior under Uncertainty." Journal of Post
Keynesian Economics, 2003, 26 (1), 145-68.
______. “Institutions, Social Norms, and Decision-Theoretical Norms.” Journal of Economic
Behavior, 2009, 72 (1), 70-78.
______. “Financial Conventions in Keynes's Theory: the Stock Exchange.” Journal of Post
Keynesian Economics, 2011, 33 (3), 469-90.
Dequech, D., Seabra, .2003. “Convenção Financeira e a taxa de juros no Brasil: uma Primeira
Aproximação”. Brazilian Journal of Political Economy, 2013, 34 (2), 599-618.
De Wolf, T., and; Holvoet, T. “Emergence versus Self-organization: Different Concepts but
Promising When Combined.” In S. Brueckner (ed.), Engineering self-organizing systems:
methodology and applications. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2005.


                                                                                                    15
Dupuy, J. P. “Convention et Common Knowledge.” Révue Économique, 1989, 40 (2), 361-400.
__________. “Convention and Common Knowledge [Abstract].“ Révue Économique, 1989, 40 (2),
403.
Dupuy J. P., Eymard-Duvernay, F., Favereau, O., Orléan, A., Salais, R., and Thévenot, L.
“Introduction.”. Révue Économique, 1989, 141-145.
Dupuy J. P., Eymard-Duvernay, F., Favereau, O., Orléan, A., Salais, R., and Thévenot, L.
“Introduction.” Révue Économique, 1989, 40 (2), 141-145.
Durkheim, E. De la division du travail social. Paris: Press Universitaire de France, 1960
Erber, F. S. “Desenvolvimento Industrial e Tecnológico na Década de 90: Uma Nova Política para
Um Novo Padrão de Desenvolvimento.” Ensaios FEE, 1992, 13 (1), 9-42.
_______. “O Mito da Travessia e a Retórica do Governo: Franco Mendonça de Barros e
Goldenstein”. Boletim de Conjuntura do IE/UFRJ, 1996, 16 (2), 67-73.
_______. “The Brazilian Development in the Nineties – myths, circles and structures.” Nova
Economia, 2002, 12 (1), 11-37.
 _______. “Innovation and the development conventions in Brazil.” Revista Brasileira de Inovação,
2004, 3 (1), 35-54.
_______. “Celso Furtado e as Convenções do Desenvolvimento.” In J. Saboia, F. J. C. Carvalho
(eds.), Celso Furtado e o Século XXI. Barueri: Manole, 2007.
_______. “Eficiência Coletiva em Arranjos Produtivos Locais Industriais: Comentando o Conceito.”
Nova Economia, 2008a 18 (1), 11-31.
_______. “Development Projects and Growth under Finance Domination – the case of Brazil during
the Lula years (2003-2007).” Revue Tiers Monde, 2008b, 195 (3), 597-629.
_______. “As convenções de desenvolvimento no governo Lula: um ensaio de economia política.”
Revista de Economia Política, 2011, 31 (1), 31-55.
_______. “The evolution of development conventions.” Revista de Economia Contemporânea, 2012,
16 (1), 5-26.
Eatwell, J., Milgate M. and Newman, P. (eds.). The New Palgrave. New York: W. W.Norton &
Company, 1989.
Favereau, O. « Internal and External Markets.” [Abstract] Révue Économique, 1989, 40 (2), 402.
Franco, G. “A Crise e o Juro: Deslocar a Curva.” Valor Econômico, September 14, 2011, A-14.
Guimarães, L. S. “Jogo de espelhos intensifica aperto.” Valor Econômico, August 04, 2008, C-2.
Guimarães, L. S. “Crescem pressões pela alta dos juros.” Valor Econômico, October 09, 2009, C-2.
Jensen, J., Ribeiro, A. “Do tripé macroeconômico à tripla meta.” Valor Econômico, March 30, 2012,
A-29.
Jodelet, D. Les représentations sociales. Paris: Presses Universitaire de France, 1989.



                                                                                                   16
Kerstenetzky, I.; Baer, W.; Vilela, A. “ As modificações no papel do estado na economia brasileira.
Pesquisa e Planejamento Econômico, 1973, 3 (4).
Keynes, J. M. Treatise of Probability. London: Macmillan, 1921.
_________. “My Early Beliefs.” In D. Moggridge (ed.), The Collected Writings of John Maynard
Keynes, vol. X. London: Macmillan, 1971, pp. 447.
_________. The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money. London: Macmillan, 1936.
_________. “The General Theory of Employment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1937, 51 (2),
209-223.
_________. “Some Economic Consequences of a Declining Population.” In D. Moggridge (ed.), The
Collected Wrintings of John Maynard Keynes, vol. XIV. London: Macmillan, 1973, pp. 124-133.
Modenesi, A.M. Convenção e Rigidez na Política Monetária: uma estimativa da função de reação do
BCB (2000-2007).” Texto para Discussão no. 1351, Instituto de Pesquisa Econômica Aplicada
(IPEA), 2008.
Modenesi, A.M. “Conservadorismo e Rigidez na Política Monetária: uma estimativa da função de
reação do BCB (2000-2007).” Revista de Economia Política 2011, 31 (3), 415-34.
Modenesi, A.M., e Modenesi, R.L. (2012) “Quinze Anos de Rigidez Monetária no Brasil: uma
agenda de pesquisa.” Revista de Economia Política, 32 (3), 389-411.
Modenesi, A.M.; Martins, N.M.; Modenesi, R.L. (2013a). “A Modified Taylor Rule for the Brazilian
Economy: convention and conservatism in 11 years of inflation targeting (2000-2010).” Journal of
Post Keynesian Economics, 2013a, 35 (3), 311-30.
Modenesi, A.M.; Modenesi, R.L; Oreiro, J.L.; Martins, N.M.; (2013b). “Convention, Interest Rates
and Monetary Policy: a post-Keynesian-French-conventions-school approach.” European Journal of
Economics and Economic Policies: Intervention, 10 (1), 76–92.
Nakano, Y. “Finalmente a Independência do BC.” Valor Econômico, september 13, 2011, A-15.
North, D. Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1990.
Nurkse, R. Problems of Capital Formation in Developing Countries. Oxford (UK): Basil Blackwell,
953.
Olivares, G. “Cortes em Ritmo de Samba.” Valor Econômico, september 14, 2011, A-13.
Oreiro, J. L. “Incerteza, Comportamento Convencional e Surpresa Potencial.” Econômica, 2000, 2
(2), 111-138.
__________. “Keynes e os Juros.” Valor Econômico, February 28, 2012, A-12.
Orléan, A. “Pour Une Approche Cognitive des Conventions Éonomiques.” Révue Économique, 1989,
40 (2), 241-272.
__________. “Toward a Cognitive Approach to Economic Conventions.” [Abstract] Révue
Économique, 1989, 40 (2), 402.



                                                                                                  17
________.“L’économie des Conventions: Définitions et Resultants.” In A..ORLÉAN (ed.), Analyse
économique des conventions. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2004.
Prado, L.C. “Fabio Erber: o Economista e suas Circunstâncias.” Revista de Economia
Contemporânea, 2011, 15 (1), 198-215.
Prebisch, R. (1949): The economic development of Latin America and its principal problems. New
York: United Nations/Economic Commission for Latin America – ECLA.
Rangel, I. “A inflação brasileira.” Revista Econômica Brasileira, jan-jul.1962.
Sallum Jr., B. “O Brasil sob Cardoso: Neoliberalismo e Desenvolvimentismo.” Tempo Social –
Revista de Sociologia da USP, 2000, 11 (2), pp. 23-47.
Schwartsman, A. “À Caça do Mensageiro.” Valor Econômico, May 05, 2011, A-12.
Schmidt, C. A. J. “Adeus à Regra de Taylor e Bem-vinda à Regra Rousseff.” Valor Econômico,
september 29, 2011, A-13.
Schön, D. “Generative metaphor: a perspective on problem-setting in social policy.” In A. ORTONY
(ed.), Metaphor and thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988.
Schumpeter, J. História da análise econômica. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Fundo de Cultura, 1964.
Thévenot, L. “Équilibre et Rationalité dans Um Univers Complexe.” Révue Économique, 1989, 40
(2), 147-198.
_______. “Equilibrium and Rationality in Complex Univers.” [Abstrac] Révue Économique, 1989,
40 (2), 401.
_______. (2012). “Estratégia Gradualista do Banco Central Está Correta, diz Werlang.” Valor
Econômico, January, 22, A-10.
Valor Econômico.“No limite, overdose monetária pode ser a saída.” April 05, 2011, A-14.
Weber, M. (1991). “A Objetividade do conhecimento nas ciências sociais e políticas.” In Sobre a
Teoria das Ciências Sociais. São Paulo: Moraes, 1991.
Williamson, J. “The strange history of the Washington consensus”. Journal of Post Keynesian
Economics, 2004, 27 (2).




                                                                                                  18
