    Governing Economic Life: W. S. Jevons and the Birth of
           Liberal Biopolitics in Victorian England


                                       Emmanoel de Oliveira Boff
                                     Professor Adjunto de Economia
                                    Universidade Federal Fluminense
                                        emmanoelb@gmail.com



Área ANPEC: Área 1 – História do Pensamento Econômico e Metodologia

ABSTRACT: The article proposes a novel way to analyze and link pioneer marginalist W. S. Jevons logic,
theoretical and applied economics within a single framework. Using the foucauldian concepts of biopolitics
and government, it is shown that Jevons’s contributions in logic, economic theory and practical economic
issues can be regarded, broadly speaking, as possible “parts” of liberal biopolitical apparatuses. With this
new interpretation, it is possible to find coherence between Jevons’s different contributions without
necessarily privileging his pure theory. The possible inconsistencies between Jevons’s pure and applied
economics can also be tentatively justified by their being different “parts” of biopolitical apparatuses.
Keywords: W. S. Jevons; biopolitics; government; economic liberalism
JEL Classification: A12, A13, B13, B31


RESUMO: O artigo propõe um novo modo de analisar e ligar as contribuições à lógica, economia teórica e
economia aplicada do pioneiro da análise marginalista, W. S. Jevons em um único quadro. Usando os
conceitos foucaultianos de biopolítica e governo, mostra-se que as contribuições de Jevons em lógica, teoria
econômica e economia aplicada podem ser consideradas, falando de modo geral, como possíveis “partes” de
dispositivos biopolíticos. Com essa nova interpretação, é possível encontrar coerência entre as diferentes
contribuições de Jevons sem necessariamente privilegiar sua teoria pura. As possíveis inconsistências entre a
economia pura e aplicada de Jevons também pode ser tentativamente justificada pelo fato de elas serem
“partes” distintas de dispositivos biopolíticos.
Palavras-chave: W. S. Jevons; biopolítica; governo; liberalismo econômico.
Classificação JEL: A12, A13, B13, B31




                                                                                                           1
Governing Economic Life: W. S. Jevons and the Birth of Liberal Biopolitics in Victorian England

                                                                                              Emmanoel de Oliveira Boff
                                                                                          Professor Adjunto de Economia
                                                                                 Universidade Federal Fluminense – UFF
                                                                                                 emmanoelb@gmail.com

        1. Introduction

         For historians of economics, W. S. Jevons is usually known as a pioneer of the marginalist movement
and as an applied economist who dealt with issues as wide-ranging as the relation between capital and labor,
the fall in the price of gold and the limits of growth due to the scarcity of coal as a source of energy.
However, W. S. Jevons (henceforth Jevons) was also “one of the great Victorian polymaths” (Mosselmans
and White, 2006), having given important contributions on scientific methodology and logic. Recent
historians of economics (e.g., Mosselmans (2013), Peart (1996) and Schabas (1990)) have mainly focused on
Jevons’s theoretical economics and logic, leaving less space to study his applied works and the ethics which
underlie them. Jevons’s empirical work can be seen as derived from the methodology he proposed in his
Principles of Science (1874), as Peart (1996: ch. 9) demonstrates, whereas his ethics would have roots in his
Unitarian family background (Mosselmans, 2013: ch. 6).
         However, the threads that might bind Jevons’s theoretical and empirical works, his logic and his
ethics do not seem to meet anywhere in sight. Just as an example, his most important theoretical work,
1871’s The Theory of Political Economy (henceforth TPE), hardly mentions the importance of the state
institutions for the working of the economy. However, in more applied work – say, his Methods for Social
Reform (henceforth MSR, 1882) – state institutions are seen as central to implement reforms. How can one
explain this apparent contradiction? It is possible to deal with it in a Marxist vein, insisting on the
contradictions of a purely theoretical discourse which denies the presence of concrete social conflicts and
state institutions only to bring them back when one deals with practical economic matters. Another way to
deal with this contradiction is to appeal to the mathematical rigor of the theory: as the inclusion of variables
like social conflicts and the state would make the theory formally intractable, it would be better to study only
a simplified market economy populated with self-interested agents. 1
         This article will try to present a novel and tentative way of finding a common thread that binds all of
Jevons’s different lines of thought. It will be suggested that the foucauldian-inspired concepts of biopolitics
and liberal government might be useful in this regard: these concepts can work as a framework within which
it is possible to envisage the most important contributions of the English polymath within a coherent frame.
         So, the object of this article comprises the analysis of some chapters of three central books in Jevons
oeuvre: his economic theory book (TPE), his applied economics book (MSR) and his Principles of Science
(henceforth PS), his book on logic. Our objective is to link the subjects in these different books in a coherent
way, by using the methodological framework given by the notions of biopolitics and government. The
novelty of this article lies exactly in trying to use this methodological framework to understand Jevons’s
work within a coherent perspective. It is expected as a result to show that the practical and theoretical strands
of Jevons’s thought can be understood as useful tools for the possible application of liberal governmental
techniques in the British population in the nineteenth century.
         The article is divided in 5 sections (including this introduction and a conclusion). The second section
tries to explain what government and biopolitics are: the notions of power, liberal type of government and of
apparatus (dispositif, in French) are tackled. The third section focuses on Jevons’s logic and his theoretical

1
  This kind of separation between applied and theoretical work had already been suggested by classical British political economists,
like Nassau Senior and J. S. Mill. But the link and scope between the practical and theoretical domains of economics remained
under dispute during most of the nineteenth century, as the british and the german methodenstreiten made clear.

                                                                                                                                  2
economics, showing how they can fit into governmental apparatuses. The fourth section deals with Jevons’s
applied work, showing that, despite being a different discourse, it can fit a liberal government apparatus.
Finally, a fifth section concludes the paper.


         2. What is biopolitics? What is government?

         2.1 Defining biopolitics

        Let’s first start with the concept of biopolitics. The origin of this concept lies in Michel Foucault’s
lectures at the university of the state of Rio de Janeiro in 1974 and at the College de France, between 1974
and 19792. In these courses, Foucault developed the idea of a new form of political power which could be
applied to influence – and sometimes, even manipulate -- certain biological characteristics belonging to a
given ensemble of heterogeneous human individuals. Among these characteristics, one could find, for
example, birth and mortality rates, life expectancy, susceptibility to diseases and risks associated with certain
walks of life. Roughly, one could say, then, that biopolitics is related to a political practice which has as
object given biological characteristics of a population in a certain territory.
        As a basic, even didactic definition, this might be sufficient. However, it does no justice to the
complexity and range of the subject in Foucault’s lectures. A first reason for this complexity lies in the fact
that Foucault’s lectures were never prepared for publication. They were more of a “work in progress” that
never fully materialized in a book centered exclusively on biopolitics (even though the first volume of his
History of Sexuality was strongly linked to biopolitical practices regarding the conduct of human sexuality).
A second reason is that it might be argued that there is an important inflexion in Foucault’s use of the notion
of biopolitics between 1976 and 1978/1979 (see Collier, 2009). According to this interpretation, Foucault’s
initial treatment of biopolitics as a form power emphasized its “sistematicity, functional coherence and
totalizing reach” over society, as Collier (2009: 79) clarifies. However, in 1979, Foucault would change his
vocabulary so as to underline the functioning of biopolitical power as comprising a heterogeneous
assemblage of contingent techniques, institutions, scientific disciplines, moral-philosophical discourses,
people etc. These elements are linked in a specific way and aim at solving a specific problem. This is roughly
the definition Foucault himself gives of the apparatus.3
         In defining biopolitics, the approach adopted by this paper will be conservative. That is, we will not
veer away from Foucault’s basic definitions presented in the aforementioned courses. The proliferation of
new uses4 for the notion of will not concern us here. To be more precise, we will adopt the view of

2
  In fact, Lemke (2011: 165) draws attention to the fact that the word “biopolitics” has more than 100 years of use, being first
employed in organicist conceptions of the state in the 1920’s in Germany and as a research field in American political science in
the 1960’s. However, the current usage of the term is firmly linked with the development of the work of Foucault.

3
  Quoting Foucault: “What I’m trying to pick out with this term [apparatus] is, firstly, a thoroughly heterogenous ensemble
consisting of discourses, institutions, architectural forms, regulatory decisions, laws, administrative measures, scientific statements,
philosophical, moral and philanthropic propositions–in short, the said as much as the unsaid. (…). Secondly, what I am trying to
identify in this apparatus is precisely the nature of the connection that can exist between these heterogenous elements. Thus, a
particular discourse can figure at one time as the programme of an institution, and at another it can function as a means of
justifying or masking a practice which itself remains silent, or as a secondary re-interpretation of this practice, opening out for it a
new field of rationality. Thirdly, I understand by the term “apparatus” a sort of–shall we say–formation which has as its major
function at a given historical moment that of responding to an urgent need. The apparatus thus has a dominant strategic function”.
(…). (Foucault, 1980 [1977]).

4
  In the last decade, a number of Italian political philosophers developed Foucault’s ideias regarding biopolitics in different
directions. Also in the USA the concept has been widely utilized in the social sciences. For more information, see Negri (with
Micahel Hardt) (2000), Agamben (2002) and Esposito (2008). On the American side, we can cite Rose (2007) and Rajan (2006).

                                                                                                                                      3
biopolitics presented in the 1978 (“Security, Territory, Population”) and 1979 (“The Birth of Biopolitics”)
courses by Foucault. The reason for this choice is twofold: first, these two courses deal exactly with the
history of the liberal and neoliberal biopolitical government. As will be shown in sections 3 and 4, Jevons’s
contributions in logic, theoretical and applied economics can be understood as applicable to this specific
form of government.
        The second reason is that the different branches of Jevons’s researches – logic, theoretical and applied
economics – can also be better interpreted as different discursive “parts” of a heterogeneous assemblage
which can be termed “biopolitical government”. In this interpretation, one is not looking primarily for a way
to make Jevons’s applied economics compatible with the general framework of his theoretical economics. Of
course, one does not want to say that this type of internal research is useless or misleading. On the contrary,
this kind of research might be useful to show how and if, from a logical point of view, Jevons’s practical and
theoretical economics can be matched. Our investigation, however, tries to look at the problem of
compatibility from a different angle: we are interested in how these different discourses might function
within a wider assemblage of practices – in our case, the apparatus of biopolitical government practices.
        Since we have already given a rough idea of what biopolitics is, it is important to define with more
precision which areas Foucault’s investigations encompassed in the period between 1974-1979 and how they
migh apply to what Jevons produced.
        In this regard, the book by Fahri Neto (2010) can be valuable for our purposes. First, because he aims
at a conservative and descriptive reading of Foucault’s formulations of biopolitics. And second, because he
adds a chapter which deals specifically with the role of political economy in a biopolitical government.
        So, how many formulations of biopolitics are there in Foucault? Fahri Neto identifies five of them:
politics in relation to medicine, to war, to sexuality, to security and to the economy. In each one of them,
there are apparatuses which must deal with specific problems regarding the biological life of an ensemble of
individuals in a territory5: medicine, when seen from a political perspective, addresses the problem of the
care of human bodies, so that they remains healthy and free of diseases. War can also be seen as political
when it is carried out to destroy the life of enemy populations and protect our own population and territory.6
Sexuality, from a political perspective, deals with the problem of the reproduction of life: life it should be
preferably reproduced and sex practiced within certain privileged institutional settings (e..g., the nuclear
family in modernity) and not others (e.g., extended families). Following Foucault’s argument, specialists like
psychologists, psychiatrists and psychoanalysts are an integral part of the “sexuality apparatus”: they can
help people conform to certain sexual practices considered normal. As for security, it preserves the life of
the population from risk: everything that can be damaging to biological life – like accidents, terrorist attacks,
robbery, murder, uncertainty regarding employment etc., must be somehow curbed by a series of political
interventions. And lastly, there is the relation between the economy and biopolitics: the question here
concerns the maintenance of life by means of an appropriate level of production, consumption and
distribution of goods and services among a given population. Since Foucault traces the history of liberalism
and neoliberalism in his 1978 e 1979 courses, what is most interesting here for us is to understand how a
liberal economy operates -- how it deals with production, consumption and distribution of goods and services
in a population.7



5
  Here it is important to notice Agamben’s (2002) differentiation between zoé (which identifies life as the purely biological
functioning of bodies) and bios (life in its social aspect – as a specific way of living of different human groups). According to
Agamben, what is characteristic of western mode of government is the appropriation of zoé as bios, that is, of the purely
functioning of biological bodies as an object of government of human groups inside a territory.
6
  Foucault has in mind here the Nazi and Stalinist experiences: both the external enemies of a nation and the members of the
population who threaten its integrity must be fought. See Foucault (1997 [1976]).
7
  According to Foucault, “only when we know what is this governmental regime called liberalism was, will we able to grasp what
biopolitics is” (2008 [1979]: 22)

                                                                                                                               4
        There are also relations among these five apparatuses. One can see that the apparatuses of sexuality,
medicine and security have “parts” that must work together. For example, the calculus of risk in the
transmission of a given venereal disease involves knowledge and institutions present in the apparatuses of
medicine, sexuality and security. The same happens with the calculus of probabilities of insurance
companies, or with the programs to protect the poor in case of unemployment: both deploy “parts” of the
economic and security apparatuses, like knowledge about probabilities and institutions which calculate the
risk of different activities or professions. As we will show in the next sections, Jevons’s work can function as
parts of the apparatuses of security and economy, but, perhaps surprisingly, also touches on issues regarding
medicine and sexuality.

        2.2 Defining Government

         What about the definition of government? It is again in the 1978 and 1979 courses that Foucault tries
to explain what government is. However, before we enter into the definition of government, it is necessary to
see how Foucault understands power.
         For Foucault, power can be conceptualized as a dynamic relation between forces: power acts upon
actions, not primarily upon individuals.8 Power also partly constitutes the very identity of the persons and
institutions through which it is exercised – for example, it is exercising power at a place named “school” that
“teacher” and “student” gain their institutional identity. In other words, power is pervasive to the social
fabric, and is not a privilege of institutions like state apparatuses. Quite the contrary: if state apparatuses have
power it is because they have, as a foundation, the flows of force that run between different people and the
things they handle. Foucault’s work on discipline in books like “Discipline and Punish” (1975) is an example
of how power is exercised: institutions like the prison and the school need to arrange the space in a certain
way, so as to make human bodies act systematically within a given period of time. In this sense, Jeremy
Bentham’s panopticion9 exemplifies a way in which the forces present in human bodies – in their arms and
legs, but also their minds -- are coordinated by means of a central control that organizes their movements, the
space where they act and apportions an amount of time for each of their actions. Although one might be
tempted to say that power is located in the panopticon’s central tower, the real source of power lies in the
forces that flow between and inside people in a population. The central control mainly organizes and
coordinates these flows of forces.
         It is within the question of organizing and coordinating these flows of forces between people that the
subject of government is raised. Foucault defines government somewhat cryptically as the “conduct of
conduct”.10 It is possible to interpret this definition as the problem of conducting one’s own and others’
actions. That is, it is a problem of how to coordinate and organize the forces that traverse different human
bodies and make them act in a certain way to achieve certain ends.
         It is important to emphasize that this “conduct of conduct” refers both to oneself and to others: that is,
it is necessary for a person both to have a specific subjectivity and to be considered as an object on which
forces can be applied. In other words, the relation of forces that characterize power must be applied to the
individual both as subject and object. In this sense, a student is not only an individual who performs certain
coordinated and organized actions in an institutional setting named school: s/he is also a subject that must

8
  The source for this analysis of power in Foucault can be found in Foucault (1983: 219-20) and also in Kusch (1991: 127-56).
9
  The panopticon is a sort of building which has a central tower where a watchman can observe the behavior of all people who act
inside the walls of the building. This idea was first used by Jeremy Bentham in a 1787 book.
10
   Foucault (1983: 220-1) says: “Perhaps the equivocal nature of the term conduct is one of the best aids for coming to terms with
the specificity of power relations. For to “conduct” is at the same time to “lead” others (according to mechanisms of coercion
which are, to varying degrees, strict) and a way of behaving within a more or less open field of possibilities. The exercise of power
consists in guiding the possibility of conduct and putting in order the possible outcome. Basically power is less a confrontation
between two adversaries or the linking of one to the other than a question of government.” Dean (2010: 267) suggests defining
government as “the conduct of conduct”.

                                                                                                                                   5
incorporate certain values, a certain sensibility and certain worldview to properly act at school.11 Following
Foucault’s account, disciplinary institutions like the school, the army, the hospital and the prison12 all try to
control these flows of forces by dividing space and time, so that people act according to these divisions (for
example, at 7 a.m. one sings the national anthem at the entrance hall at school; at 7.30 a.m., one goes to the
classroom; at 8 a.m there is a five-minute break at the yard and so on).
         Whereas discipline may be an efficient way of conducting the conduct of people – that is, of
governing them -- in what we may call “micro” institutional settings, one cannot explain with disciplines
alone how a government can govern a whole country. In such “macro” institutional settings like a federal
government, discipline must be complemented by a series of other institutions and applied social sciences
which can deal with the problem of the population as a whole. After mid-eighteenth century, with the
explosive growth of population in western European countries, the government of ever increasing masses of
people became urgent. In the foucauldian framework we are adopting, this urgency will demand a special set
of apparatuses to deal with problems associated with a growing population.13
         One can put the problem the following way: besides disciplinary institutions – which give people
different institutional identities and coordinate people’s forces and actions in different ways – how it would
be possible to find a common ground to govern a population composed of heterogeneous people and
institutions? There does not seem to be an a priori guarantee that the coordinated and organized actions of
people in different “micro”, disciplinary institutional settings can generate organized and coordinated actions
at a “macro”, population level. Putting the problem in other words: what could priests, professors, students,
mothers, robbers and politicians have in common so as to allow their conduct being conducted at the level of
population? A foucauldian-inspired answer would say it is their biological characteristics. They all have
something like a sexuality; they all have a health that can degenerate or be maintained; they are all
susceptible to a series of risks in their work and family environment; and – central to the objective of this
paper -- they all experience pleasures and pains which can guide their actions regarding production,
consumption and distribution of goods and services.
         One can say, then, that a biopolitical government purports to organize the forces that flow through
and inside the members of a population by using apparatuses which act on the biologically-based
characteristics of humans – like their sexuality, their health, their fear of damage and their economic
interests. To govern people in a biopolitical key would involve making use of a series of discursive and non-
discursive apparatuses – of medicine, security, sexuality and the economy -- that try to drive people’s actions
in the direction of the maintenance and flourishing of their biological lives.
         Because the biological characteristics of people are different – we are dealing with a multitude of
different people – the use of statistics and the notion of normalization must be parts of biopolitical
apparatuses. The function of statistics is to organize the different characteristics of individuals in a population
(e.g. weight, blood pressure etc.), in order to find what is normal (that is, more frequent in the population),
and also to identify deviations from this norm. Whereas disciplinary institutions try to normalize the
characteristics of individuals (e.g., doctors in hospitals trying to make people lose weight or control blood
pressure), federal government statistics will show which groups of individuals are more distant from the

11
  Notice that this interpretation of Foucault’s view regarding the relation between individuals and institutions finds some similarity
with the transformational model of social action proposed by Tony Lawson (2003: 40 and ff.). In this sense, it is possible to
interpret Foucault as proposing a type of realist analysis that may be useful to studying economic phenomena.
12
   According to Foucault (2009 [1978]: lesson 5), the background for many disciplinary institutions is in the “pastoral power” of
the church in the middle ages. By trying to discipline the “souls” of believers by means of confession, the church made possible the
future appearance of modern techniques of discipline applied in modern institutions, like the school, the prison, the hospital and the
factory.
13
   For example, problems like rising criminality, the spreading of new diseases among the population, sanitation, housing,
transportation etc.


                                                                                                                                    6
norm (over- or underweight people or people with hypertension). With the production of this statistical
knowledge, it is possible for governmental institutions to act upon the actions of people who are at a certain
distance from the norm. In other words, with this statistical knowledge it is possible for the government to
properly govern people. Jevons’s statistical works on social issues might function as a discursive part of a
state institution which aims to act on people’s actions as we will show in section 4.2.
        This biopolitical form of conducting people’s lives can be carried out by different institutions with
different levels of interference in people’s conduct. That is, the legal-juridical-institutional apparatuses of
government can either directly interfere with people’s behavior (e.g., by means of prohibitions or
imprisonment) or to stimulate them to act a certain way (e.g., by imposing taxes on certain “undesirable”
products, like cigarettes). The former case is related to direct intervention in people’s lives and characterizes
non-liberal forms of government. What is interesting for us, however, are liberal types of governmental
intervention – that is, interventions that do not directly meddle with people’s actions. This kind of indirect
intervention tries to modify variables of people’s natural or social environment so as to stimulate people to
act according to the goals of government. The possibility of not complying with the stimulus of government
opens the way to what we may term freedom. This point is important to see the extent to which Jevons
proposals of political intervention can match the idea of a liberal government.14
        Having finished our very brief sketch of how Foucault understands government and biopolitics, it is
now time to turn to Jevons and how his work on logic and theoretical economics depicts humans. Jevons will
describe humans as economic agents which have a principle of motion of biological origin. At the same time,
human reasoning is seen in a mechanical way, so that it does not depend on any historical or cultural
specificity. As a consequence, different economic agents could, in principle, be aggregated in a population
whose behavior could be analyzed statistically.

        3. Making reason universal and mechanical

        3.1 The mechanization of thought in Jevons’s “Principles of Science” (PS)

         Contrary to the opinion of former 19th century logicians (like J. S. Mill and William Hamilton),
Jevons defined formal logic as an objective science, like mechanics or mathematics (see Schabas 1990: 57-
8). This will have important consequences for the way he understands human thinking: if former logicians
understood logic and as branch of human psychology, now Jevons puts forth the proposition that the laws of
logic would be as general and universal as mathematical principles.
         Jevons’s ideas about human thinking and logic are mainly found in his 1874 book “Principles of
Science” (PS). With this book, Jevons tried to propose a new conception of what it means to correctly reason
in order to find rigorous, scientific knowledge. Jevons started this work with his six “laws of thought”. Their
definition and their basic operations are represented below (see Schabas, 1990: 60; Jevons, 1958 [1874]: 35,
73-8):

        1. Law of Identity: A = A
        2. Law of Contradiction: Aa = 0 (zero)
        3. Law of Duality: A = AB · | · Ab
        4. Law of Commutativeness: AB = BA; if A = B, B = A; A· | · B = B · | · A
        5. Distribution: A (B · | · C) = AB · | · AC
14
   It must be noted that the concepts of liberal and non-liberal forms of government are akin to ideal types, in a weberian sense:
what exists in the real world are different mixes between liberal and non-liberal practices. There are no concrete governments that
allow complete freedom for individuals, as there are no concrete governments that completely control each action of people in a
population: in practice, some governments deploy more liberal practices while others make more frequent use of non-liberal
practices.


                                                                                                                                 7
        6. Transitivity: A = B and B = C; therefore A = C.

        A, B and C are what Jevons calls terms. According to Mosselmans (1998: 86), a term “is a name for a
collection of objects and it may be interpreted in two ways. Interpreted as regards intension, a term is a group
of qualities. Interpreted as regards extension, a term is a group of objects possessing those qualities” (see also
PS: 24-30). A proposition, according to Jevons, “expresses the relation between two or more terms” (PS:
24). Lowercase letters (a, b, c) represent the negation of the term. The symbol · | · represents the logical
connective “or”, which, for Jevons, is taken to be the inclusive “or”. Controversially, Jevons takes the symbol
“=” to denote identity, as Boole had done before him. He does so, because he thinks there is an analogy
between mathematical equations and logical propositions. This is an important difference between Jevons
and previous logicians like J. S. Mill and Herschel. We will come back to this difference at the end of this
section.
        When Jevons puts terms side by side, like in AB, or AC, or BC, he means that the first letter is a
subset of the second letter. Following Schabas (1990: 60), let A = copper, and B = metal. We can say that A
= AB, that is, “copper is a metal”. The symbol “0” (zero) means “nothing” or something that is logically
impossible. 15
        With these explanations, we can use the symbols above to make inferences about sentences. For
example, using the classical syllogism, we can use the symbols A, B and C to make a direct deduction:

        A = Socrates
        B = man
        C = mortal creature

        By saying that A = AB (Socrates is a man) and B = BC (man is a mortal creature), we can write A =
ABC (Socrates is a mortal creature).
        The job here seems uncomplicated because we are dealing with propositions of only three terms. But
Jevons soon came up with the idea that one could make series of combinations of many more distinct terms.
For example, a series with two terms (say, A and B) could have four possible combinations (AB, Ab, aB and
ab). A series with three terms (say, A, B and C) would give us eight possible combinations (ABC, ABc,
AbC, Abc, aBC, aBc, abC and abc). Accordingly, a proposition with n terms would give us 2n possible
combinations. Jevons named the set of all possible combinations of a sequence of n terms the Logical
Alphabet.
        Once we have in front of us the logical alphabet, it would be interesting to know, beginning with
certain premises, which of the possible logical combinations are consistent with the given premises. In order
to carry out this task, Jevons conceives of two instruments: the Logical Abacus and the famous Logical
Machine. What is the objective of those instruments? To make inferences like the ones exemplified above
mechanically, saving our mental job. Their great advantage is that one could insert in them certain premises
and, after pressing some keys, the machines would give us the combinations of letters which were logically
consistent with the premises in question.
        One can see in the operation of the Logical Abacus and the Logical Machine the germs of the
conception of a machine which, by separating consistent from inconsistent logical combinations, could
actually think – or, at least, to replace human process of reasoning. However, one might argue that there is a
difference between carrying out a set of mechanical operations and the process of human thought. The whole
point is to understand how human thought and mechanical calculation are becoming interrelated in Jevons’s
time. As we will see, this will also have implications for Jevons’s conception of economic action.


15
  Jevons also uses the symbol ~ to represent non-identity between terms (PS: 45), but he does not give much attention to it because
non-identity can also be represented by an equation sign. For example A ~ B can be written as A = Ab. See Schabas (1990: 61).

                                                                                                                                 8
        So, now that we have sketchily explained how Jevons’s logic works, we must investigate how
Jevons’s discourse is embedded in a mechanistic conception of thought. In order to carry out this job, I will
resort to papers and book by Maas (1999; 2005a, b) and also Cook (2005).
        Maas (1999: 589) objective is “to show how Jevons’s work on the Logical Abacus is embedded in an
emerging discourse on mechanical rationality”. Following the idea of mechanical rationality is the possibility
to unify methodologically the natural sciences and economics, and also “to conceive of ‘economic man’ as
similar to a machine, and to analyze his behavior with the same formalism”.
        The development of machines that could calculate must be seen as part of the effort to calculate tables
necessary for the new occupations coming up with the English industrial revolution (like insurance and
navigation companies). The development of these machines initiated a discussion about the “possibilities of
representing the human mind by means of mechanics” (1999: 589-90). Going after the project of
mechanizing physical work (that had been going for several decades in the first wave of the Industrial
Revolution) there came also a project of mechanizing the mental work of people who had to calculate
numerical tables. It is in this context that we must understand Charles Babbage’s project of building a
Difference Engine, in the 1820’s. When properly programmed, this Difference Engine could count series of
numbers. Nowadays this might seem trivial to us. But at the time, Maas reports on how people “fell in
amazement” with the machine.
        The discussion that appeared with the Difference Engine regarded the ability to explain all facts of
nature – physical or psychic – as obeying mechanical laws. As Maas (1999: 593) explains: “What reason was
there to suppose that the human mind functioned in a different way from the calculating machine? (…)
consciousness could be the by-product of the invariable mechanical laws of nature.” (Maas’s italics).
        The next step in the discussion came with George Boole’s work on logic. Boole “suggested that logic
was not merely an abstract, formal discipline, but described laws inherent in our mental constitution” (Maas,
1999: 596). Because association psychology still held sway of many important scholars in England, Boole’s
claim about the similarities between logic and the laws was not readily accepted – or else were accepted in a
different version.16 Another possible reason for this is that this reticence can be found in the implication for
the breaking down of the frontiers between “traditional mental categories” (like “laws of mind” and
“associations of ideas”): following Boole and Babbage, all mental categories could be reduced to algebraic
operations. This claim was controversial to the point of being criticized in other english universities, like
Cambridge (see Cook 2005: 347).
        The big difference, though – the “true revolution” in logic, according to de Morgan, came with the
attempt to “quantify the predicate” (Maas, 1999: 598). What does this sentence mean? Well, in aristotelian
logic, syllogisms were made out of a relation between genus and species. Thus, in the syllogism presented a
few pages before, in which we deduce that the man Socrates is mortal, mortal beings is a class, and men are a
subclass of mortal beings.
        As Maas (1999: 598) elucidates, a proposition like “all humans are mortals” could be made identical
to “some mortals are humans”. Propositions like “all humans are some mortals” are also seen as valid. That
is, propositions of syllogisms could be reversed, as Jevons suggested in his uses of symbols by the Law of
Commutativeness: AB = BA, or ABC = BCA = ACB etc. Here it is possible to understand the use of the
symbol “=” to indicate identity: a logical proposition now could be expressed as an algebraic equation. Now,
if logic deals with “thoughts and things, and immediately of the signs which stand for them” (PS: 9), and if
these signs can be operated as an algebra, one can say that, according to this idea, there is no specific quality
in the workings of a mind that cannot be compared to the workings of a set of signs operated by a machine.
Jevons assures us that “signs, thoughts and exterior objects” are all “parallel and analogous”. That is, “to treat
any of the three series [signs, thoughts and exterior objects] is equivalent to treating either of the three series”



16
     More on the attack of psychophysiology against association psychology can be found in Maas (2005: 629-32).

                                                                                                                  9
(PS: 9). There we have it: minds and machines can operate according to the same pattern, and this pattern
involves the use of algebra, at least to some extent.17
         Two consequences stem from this new approach to understanding the mental activities of humans: the
first is that scientific language, according to Jevons, will assume a mathematical expression. Propositions of
everyday language should be transmuted into symbols, so that their logical, mechanical operations could be
analogous to human thought. Jevons himself does not think that the attempts to use quotidian language are
proper in science (see his TPE: 29).
         The second consequence of Jevons’s approach to the human mind is that the behavior of economic
man is not directly related anymore to the social milieu in which he acts. For a contemporary of Jevons (like
J. S. Mill, for example), economic men had a dual nature: concrete, historical circumstances could interfere
in the association of his ideas regarding the pursuit of wealth, strengthening or weakening the drive to
accumulate riches.18 As we will see in the next subsection, the situation is different with Jevons. The key
difference is that J. S. Mill’s social considerations regarding economic behavior were replaced by
biophysiological laws. If we follow Jevons, there are mainly two possibilities to study economic behavior
scientifically: 1. to search into the biophysiological functioning of the human brain and body so as to find in
there the basis for economic laws; and 2. To develop mathematical models of the economic behavior of
humans.
         What does the above analysis add to our objective in the paper – that is, to show that Jevons’s logic
can be linked to his theoretical and applied economics within a biopolitical framework? Jevons’s operation in
logic allows us to disregard differences in people’s thinking concerning their social, cultural and
psychological backgrounds. This means that a heterogeneous group of people can be homogenized in a
population as regards their calculative capacities. As we pointed out at the end of subsection 2.2, not only can
these calculative agents be objects of study for statistics, but they must also see themselves subjectively as
calculative. If they do not see themselves in a calculative way, they may not act so and be considered outliers
in statistical analysis: as a consequence, their non-calculative conduct may be the object of government. In
this case, the government must adopt measures so as to make them act closer to the norm.
         But what, exactly, do these calculative agents calculate? The next subsection will try to show.

        3.2 Jevons’s use of psychophysiology to explain economic action in his TPE

        Jevons’s main economic book consists of eight chapters. The most important chapters for our
purposes are the second (the “theory of pleasure and pain”), the third (the “theory of utility”) and the fifth
(the “theory of labor”). They are important because they deal specifically with the economic behavior of
humans.
        In the first chapter of the book, Jevons says that there is a “hierarchy” of pleasures and pains, but that
he is mainly interested in feelings of “lowest rank”. This happens because the calculus of utility when applied
in economics supplies men with his “ordinary wants at the least cost of labor” (TPE: 39).
        As a consequence, Jevons is interested only in lower pleasures, proposing that the science of
economics should deal only with the “ordinary wants” of men. The important point for us is that these lower
pleasures are exactly those of biological nature – pleasures associated with the satisfaction of hunger, thirst,
the need for air so on. These are pleasures that men shares with other living animals whose biology is similar
to ours. 19

17
   Note, however, that Schabas (1990: 61) observes that Jevons “upheld certain paralles with algebra (…) But in general, he was
less prone to import elements of algebra into his logic”.
18
   Mattos (2005, section 2) shows how J. S. Mill’s conception of the human agent is dual. See also Boff (2012: 117-21) to see how
J. S. Mill regards the drive to accumulate riches as only a part of a process of material evolution.
19
   For example, Jevons quotes approvingly of H. T. Banfield (the writer who, according to the English marginalist, best understood
the basis of economic theory) as saying that: “The lower wants man experiences in common with brutes” (TPE: 48). He also calls
lower-order needs (for example, for food, water and air) as “simple animal requirements” (TPE: 55). Schabas (1990: 94, 161) also

                                                                                                                              10
        Jevons now needs to make his utility theory quantitative – but how can we measure pleasures and
pains? In order to carry out this job, Jevons uses and reinvents Bentham’s quantitative theory of pains and
pleasures, omitting the parts of the theory that could muddle economic theory up with the “science of
morals”.20For Jevons, a theory of pleasures and pains would only consider four characteristics of those
pleasures and pains: their “intensity, duration, certainty (or uncertainty), and propinquity (or remoteness)”. In
the end, however, only duration and intensity of pleasures were considered (TPE: 42-3). Characteristics
present in Bentham, like fecundity (the chance a feeling has to be followed by a feeling of the same kind);
purity (the chance a feeling has not to be followed by a feeling of an opposite kind) and extent (the number of
people affected by the feeling in question) belonged to the realm of morals and should not enter the discourse
of scientific economics.
        Jevons famously defined economics as “the mechanics of utility and self-interest”, and this forms the
basis on which he could explain human action. According to White (1994b), the explanation was based on
two pillars: the first was that human behavior had some laws that were “universally true”. If these laws are
universal, then it would be possible to measure and aggregate the economic behavior of a population of
heterogeneous individuals.21 Jevons’s hope was that, in the aggregate, the “vagaries of individual behavior”
could be neutralized, and that the “accidental and disturbing causes” caused by an outlier would not be
relevant. The behavior of a “trading body” – defined as possessing a myriad of different individuals with an
“average behavior” – could, therefore, be studied by his theory.
        So far, so good: the second and third chapters of TPE made clear that the explanation of human
behavior should be found in pleasures and pains which could satiate their “ordinary wants”. What we need to
show now is the biological basis behind these pleasures and pains and the possibility of finding a proxy to
measure them. In this case, the history begins not exactly with the discourse of economic science, but of
human physiology.

3.3 The psychophysiological basis of economic behavior

         Roughly from the second half of the nineteenth century, advances in psychophysiology showed that
it was possible to understand states of mind produced by the interactions of the body – its organs of
perception, the nerves and the brain -- with its surrounding environment. Once again according to White
(1994a: 197-230), the ground zero for understanding Jevons’s ideas regarding the human mind and human
behavior must be found in Richard Jennings’s 1855 book, “Natural Elements of Political Economy”
(henceforth NEPE).
        Before we investigate the impact of these ideas on Jevons’s political economy, I think it is necessary
to sketch a brief account of what psychophysiology is. As the name itself suggests, psychophysiology tried to
explain psychological events like knowledge and experience of pleasures and pains appealing to the
physiology of human bodies. This history goes like this.
        In the first decades of the nineteenth century, a scientific breakthrough was achieved in the realm of
biology: the nerves responsible for the movement of our muscles and for the sensations we feel were properly
identified and separated. Up until that time, associationist psychologists believed that knowledge and
experience were generated by external stimuli that impressed our senses and the associations of ideas that

observes that Jevons thought it was possible to trace the “action of the postulates of political economy among some of the more
intelligent animals”.
20
   See Sigot (2002: 265-70), Peart (1996: 125-6) and Jevons (TPE: 40).
21
   As for measurement, Jevons equates – not without reservations -- the relation between the marginal utilities of two goods with
the price relation between them. He also believes that “the private-account books, the great ledgers of merchants and bankers and
public offices, the share lists, price lists, bank returns, monetary intelligence, Custom-house and other Government returns, are all
full of the kind of numerical data required to render Economics an exact mathematical science.” (TPE: 32). That is, even though
we could not measure marginal utilities directly, relative prices could be used, roughly, as a proxy of them. See also Backhouse
(1985: 72) and Schabas (1990: 45).

                                                                                                                                 11
come thereof. These associations of ideas allowed us both to understand human action and the reasoning of
people – which included the behavior and motivations of economic man. This happened in the work of J. S.
Mill.22 Psychophysiology changes all that, because we do not need external stimuli to impress our senses to
explain human action. As White puts it (1994a: 210),

                            “By stressing the importance of relation between movement, the nervous system, and ‘in-born’
                    patterns of coordination, it was also possible to provide an explanation for the body’s spontaneous
                    movements that were prior to and independent of previous external stimuli and consequently mental
                    ‘associations’”.

        In other words, it should be possible to explain human behavior by the configuration of the nervous
system and in-born patterns of coordination. Human behavior could be viewed as automatic, without the
participation of our conscious mind. It would also be possible that our mental states – pleasures and pains
included -- were generated by our biological nervous system, so that, in the end, our conscience could be
grounded in the physiology of our brains.
         Psychophysiology enters our history by means of two universal laws of human nature that were
important for Jevons’s economic science. According to Jennings, the first law stated that “the degrees of
satisfaction do not proceed pari passu with the quantities consumed” (cited by White, 1994a: 201). As
Jevons recognized, this definition was halfway to the law of the diminishing marginal utility.
        The second law of human nature had to do with labor. According to Jennings, the effort people
expended working could be “indifferent” or even “pleasurable”, but, eventually, that effort would lead to
painful sensations. If labor continued to be performed in spite of these painful sensations, there would be a
point in which the increase in work effort would make the pain unbearable. This explanation was also very
similar to that presented in Jevons’s TPE (ch. 5, p. 125). Jevons, in fact, quotes a lengthy passage of Jennings
in the TPE (p. 124-5), endorsing Jennings’s principle of human nature regarding labor.
        With these two principles, a scientifically valid explanation for human economic actions had been
given, according to Jennings. If we wanted to understand how the wage rate was determined, we would have
to take into consideration both the “toilsome feelings” involved in the exertion of labor and the pleasurable
feelings associated with the consumption of goods allowed by a wage. That is basically the origin of Jevons’s
“Theory of Labor”, in chapter 5 of his TPE.
        So, the road taken by Jennings (and also by Jevons and Edgeworth thereafter) was that of basing the
knowledge about human behavior regarding consumption and labor on the physiological functioning of the
human body. In the end, we can identify three interrelated modifications that Jevons operated on the
scientific method and their impact on Jevons’s conception of the economic agent. The first modification
concerns the gradual abandonment of the association psychology in favor of psychophysiology in the
explanation of the economic behavior of humans. This leads us to a second modification, which deals with
the separation between sciences of matter and sciences of mind – the latter could now be reduced to the
former. Finally, the third modification has to do with the mechanization of thought proposed by Jevons when
he conceived of the human mind as a machine.
        It is hoped that the consequences of the above analysis for the purposes of the article are now clear:
Jevons tried to reduce the scope of economic theory to the satisfaction of the “ordinary wants” of people –
wants of biological basis that all people in a population necessarily have. At the same time, a mechanical
reasoning could, at least in principle, calculate the costs (pains) and benefits (pleasures) associated with the
satisfaction of these wants. As a consequence, Jevons provides a framework in which peoples’ thinking and
behavior can be objects of statistics: their calculative thinking and economic behavior can be studied as
uniform, as having a biological basis and as applicable to a heterogeneous population. These are exactly the
necessary characteristics of a discourse that may be used by a biopolitical government – that is, a government

22
     See, for example, J. S. Mill’s System of Logic, book VI, ch. 4.

                                                                                                                     12
that aims to conduct people’s actions according to biological principles of pleasure and pain present in
human nature. At the same time, a normative prescription seems to be implicit in this view: people should see
themselves subjectively as calculative agents moved by pleasures and pains, at least in economic transactions.
It is also part of the government’s job to try to bring people closer to this ideal in economic matters, by direct
or indirect interventions in people’s physical or social environment.

        4. Applied economics in Jevons: his “Methods of Social Reform” (MSR) in light of biopolitical
           government

        4.1 The relation between theoretical economics, logic and applied economics

        In a 1991 article, Silveira coined the term “Senior indetermination” to suggest that pure, mathematical
economic theories should not be directly applied to solve applied economic problems. Concrete economic
reality is so complex that the direct application of pure theories to solve practical economic problems would
be misleading. Nevertheless, this does not mean that the insights of pure theories are useless: in order to be
properly applied, these insights need to be mediated by a series of historical, ethical and social considerations
that are specific to the problem at hand.
        The same can be said of Jevons’s theoretical economics, practical economics and his logic. Despite
being different kinds of discourse, the theoretical branch of Jevons’s economics can illuminate certain
aspects of economic behavior and reality which can afterwards be used applied economists. An example can
make this clear: one can abstractly consider a population of individuals whose economic actions can be
explained by pleasures and pains and whose reasoning can be characterized as mechanical. Inside a concrete
population, however, there might be groups that drink alcohol abusively (out of the pleasure they get from it).
A statistician can then calculate the average consumption of alcohol in the whole population and determine
(based on medical knowledge) the acceptable consumption of alcohol for members of the population. As we
saw in subsection 2.2, a biopolitical government can then try to check excessive alcohol consumption by dint
of prohibitions or by discouraging its consumption (e.g.,using advertisements or raising taxes). These
measures will increase the costs (equivalent to pains) of consuming alcohol.
        Could Jevons’s proposals regarding the government of economic agents be understood in a liberal
sense? In order to check this hypothesis, let us now turn to the MSR, which is a collection of essays by
Jevons published in The Contemporary Review during a period of 15 years (1867-1882), until his death by
drowning in August, 1882. Most of the issues deal with more than economics: they grapple with subjects as
diverse as the use (and abuse) of museums by the English, the nationalization of the railways, the post office
and the cruelty to animals.
        We chose to analyze some articles present in this book for two reasons: 1. due to the diversity of its
subjects and how they intermingle with concrete economic phenomena; and 2. other applied works by Jevons
are not likely to treat of specific social problems like the MSR do.23
        We could also have chosen for analysis the book “The State in Relation to Labor”, where Jevons
analyzes the concrete relationship between the State and Labor. There are, however, similar studies on MSR
(for example, the chapter on “Industrial Partnerships” and “Trade Societies: Their Objective and Policy”).
So, we believe that the MSR is the best possible choice for one to try to find how Jevons’s applied work on
economics is related to the government of people in a biopolitical way.
        Because all articles were written with the intention to contribute to policy issues, none of them
involves pure mathematical economics. However, when it comes to settle a controversy, Jevons usually

23
   For example, the “Coal Question”, “A Serious Fall in the Value of Gold ascertained, and its Social effects set forth” or “The
Solar Period and the Price of Corn” all touch on social problems, but are mainly technical articles whose focus are not the
government of people.


                                                                                                                             13
appeals to the use of statistics – sometimes even in a slovenly way. In the articles about “Experimental
Legislation and the Drink Traffic” and in the opening address as president of section F (statistics and political
economy) of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (BAAS), Jevons begins by noticing that
political economists are seen as “heartless mysanthropes” (e.g., Malthus) once they find a true law of human
nature. In this way, he presents the human conduct as determined by the application of some laws. However,
he also recognizes that these laws are often difficult to determine:

                       “The existence of this Section is a standing recognition of the truth that the condition of the
               people is governed by definite laws, however complicated and difficult of discovery they may be. It is
               no valid reproach against us that we cannot measure, and explain, and predict with the accuracy of a
               chemist or an astronomer. Difficult as may be the problems presented to the experimentalist in his
               investigation of Material Nature, they are easy compared with the problems of Human Nature, of
               which we must attempt the solution. I allow that our knowledge of the causes in action is seldom sure
               and accurate, so as to present the appearance of true science.” (MSR: 123).

       It is because of this difficulty in finding the “definite laws” that govern people’s actions in a
population that applied economists need statistics. Applied economists do not deal with abstract, maximizing
and supposedly calculative individuals. It is true that, as Silveira (1991) suggests, pure theory can illuminate
the concrete phenomena we have at hand. But in concrete reality, there are a multitude of individuals with a
myriad of different motivations (both economic and non-economic) and whose thinking is far from being
exclusively calculative. If we cannot precisely pin down the behavior of each individual of a population, we
should know at least how they behave in average and the dispersion of these behaviors around this average.
Because of practical considerations when dealing with a heterogeneous population, Jevons uses the concept
of “average man”. As we will see, in a biopolitical government, this concept will be of central importance: as
we commented on section 2.2, this “average” represents exactly the most frequent characteristic of a
population – it is what is considered normal and around which deviations will occur.

       4.2 The importance of statistics for applied economics

        Jevons is aware of the fact that the economic behavior of each individual in a certain group is
idiosyncratic, but he argues that the aggregate behavior of the community is not so, and will vary according
to the laws of economics. The idea is that the idiosyncrasies of individuals would be cancelled out in the
aggregate. So, in order to represent the aggregate behavior of the community, Jevons creates an average of
the economic behavior of the individuals in the group. He then considers the average and aggregate economic
variables to be equal, so that one can quantify them and find correlations and regularities between different
economic aggregates. Because of the equality between the aggregate and the average, a “trading body” could
be seen to act as an individual member of the group does – so long as that individual has also an “average
behavior” – as we have already pointed out in subsection 3.2.
        The idea of an “average behavior” of an individual naturally leads to the idea that there must also be
an “average man” that embodies this behavior. Fortunately for Jevons, the blueprint for the statistical study
of characteristics of men in society had already appeared in 1835 with the publication of “Sur l’homme”, of
Belgian statistician Adolphe Quetelet. And, in fact, as Mosselmans (2005: 573) shows, Jevons makes several
references in the PS to Quetelet’s work. Quetelet wanted to build a “Science of Man” based on the
quantification of moral and physical facts of humankind. This quantification would lead, in turn, to an
“average man”, “which should precede every other investigation of society” (Mosselmans, 2005: 568). As
Jevons notes, when the capacities, tastes and habits of people are very diverse, this “average man” might not
exist in fact – it only represented the behavior of an average individual in that specific society and time (in
Jevons’s jargon, the numbers that represented his behavior should be a “fictious mean”). The explicit


                                                                                                                   14
comparison made by Quetelet and Jevons was between the “average man” and the center of gravity of a
material body.
        As Schabas (1990: 18) and Mosselmans (2005: 570) note, Jevons also had a project to construct a
“science of man”, and this project has similarities with that of Quetelet’s, in that they both intended to
present men as quantifiable entities. However, it is important to notice that, in order to be applicable, the
characteristics presented by this average man would be subject to historical and cultural influences,
something that Jevons acknowledges. As the next section will show, Jevons’s efforts in the MSR will show
that the use statistics in issues like the industrial partnerships, the problem of married women in factories, the
drunkenness of the Irish and the question of charity may be useful to help see how biopolitical measures can
be implemented with the aid of Jevons’s researches.

           4.2.1 Charity in the MSR

       Despite the difficulty in finding causes for human action, Jevons believes that indiscriminate charity
for poor people should be “swept away”, because they can develop bad habits. The idea that people would
develop bad habits if given charity is attached to his view of man as acting on the basis of pleasures and
pains:

                          “Nothing so surely as indiscriminate charity tends to create and perpetuate a class living in
                   hopeless poverty. It is well known that those towns where charitable institutions and charitable people
                   most abound, are precisely those where the helpless poor are most numerous”. (MSR: 125)


        It is important to say that Jevons wants to keep only charity that might not develop bad habits in
people, that is, habits which would prevent them from being assertive and energetic, trying to find an
occupation. When he says that it is “well known” that towns where there are many charitable people are the
same where there are many poor, he means that there is factual evidence for that (although he does not
present it in the article). That is, he says he could collect data that will confirm his hypothesis that a place
with many charitable institutions is a place where there are many poor people. One can imagine that, if the
basic principle of human nature is the search for pleasure and the avoidance of pain, a person who would get
money from charity could escape scarcity without making any painful effort. Therefore, they would not
work, and would remain poor and dependent forever on charity. Statistical data would then confirm or not
confirm our hypothesis. Economic science would give us the causal relationship, and then a policy regarding
charity might be designed.
        Here is a good example of the possible application of liberal biopolitical measures regarding charity.
Based on the principle that effort is a bad, Jevons’s applied economics could be used to change the social
environment of towns where charity might lead to idleness. Stricter rules on charities should have the impact
of making people more industrious and capable of fending for themselves. If this actually happens, this
objective change could be identified by new statistics showing that the number of poor people has diminished
alongside the indiscriminate giving away of charities. At the same time, people should subjectively change:
they should see themselves as industrious workers and not as poor and needy.

           4.2.2 Drunkenness among the Irish

        Jevons does give us data when he wants to show that the high rate of mortality in some English towns
is related to the bad habits (drunkenness) of Irish immigrants (MSR: 131-3; 138-9).24 Because, according to
Jevons, plain facts cannot be suppressed, supposedly there might be some characteristic in Irish people’s

24
     The issue of the supposed racism in Jevons has been discussed by White (1993) and Hutcheson (1994).

                                                                                                                       15
nature that would make them choose alcoholic beverages as entertainment (= search of pleasure), and that
would lead to bigger mortality rates among the Irish population (= a cost). This would imply that the Irish
would have little foresight regarding their future. As Jevons observed in a passage in the TPE dealing with
anticipating future utility:

                       “That class or race of men who have the most foresight will work most for the future. The
              untutored savage, like the child, is wholly occupied with the pleasures and the troubles of the moment;
              the morrow is dimly felt; the limit of his horizon is but a few days off. The wants of a future year, or of
              a lifetime, are wholly unforeseen. But, in a state of civilisation, a vague though powerful feeling of the
              future is the main incentive to industry and saving.” (TPE: 44).


        Therefore, we have a non-economic notion – race (Irish Celts versus Anglo-Saxons) or class (poor or
unemployed versus the rich) – influencing the economic choices of people, and this could be ascertained by
means of statistical inference. This shows that -- contrary to what happens in Jevons’s pure economics -- in
practical economic matters, cultural factors must be factored into the analysis.
        If in the charity case Jevons did not provide data to confirm his hypothesis, here the data seem to
confirm the relationship between the percentage of Irish immigrant in English cities and the city’s morality
rate. Based on his pure economics, Jevons might suggest ways to change Irish people’s environment so that it
would change their views regarding “the wants of a future year” and then diminish their alcohol
consumption. Although Jevons does not adopt a position for or against the prohibition of alcohol, he does say
that

                       “What we want, as it seems to me, is a carefully regulated and limited [drink] traffic,
              controlled by a well-enforced law, administered by a body of magistrates or other men who will ignore
              altogether the interests of the publicans, and look steadily to the infinitely greater object of the public
              good” (MSR: 119).

        The change in the environment could be accomplished with a “carefully regulated and limited traffic”
of alcohol, “controlled by a well-enforced law”. These governmental measures might alter the conduct of
Irish immigrants in England regarding their health.
        As the previous paragraph made clear, here again is another example of a discourse that could be used
in medical, security and economic biopolitical apparatuses: it deals with the level of poverty due to
alcoholism in the population and the risks to people’s health associated with the overconsumption of alcohol.
As we observed at the end of subsection 2.1, we can see that Jevons’s applied discourse traverses economics
and medicine in a form of governement that can be considered liberal.

       4.2.3 Married women with children in factories

        The other occasion in the MSR where Jevons approaches biopolitical government is the analysis of
married women in factories – but this time in a non-liberal way: according to Jevons, there should be a
prohibition against married women with children working in factories. There are two reasons for this
prohibition: the first is that children would be home alone and this could increase children mortality, due to
lack of care. On the other hand, their husbands, with more money in the house, might be tempted to spend the
extra-income on liquor (or “idling away their time”, as Jevons put it (MSR: 110)). Behind these explanations,
the calculative and maximizing behavior of individuals is considered: women aim at making an effort
(equivalent to pain) to increase the family’s income (equivalent to pleasures). Men, on the other hand, tend to
“idle away” since they can use the extra income to increase their pleasure by drinking.



                                                                                                                      16
       Jevons upholds the idea that, if there is a significant correlation between the mortality of infants and
the work of women in factories, then this prohibition should be enforced, no matter what abstract
philosphical rights or axioms of economic theories advise:

                                   “Philosophers will urge that we are invading abstract rights, and breaking through the
                          teachings of theory. Political economists might, no doubt, be found to protest likewise that the
                          principles of political economy are dead against such interference with the freedom of contract.
                          But I venture to maintain that all these supposed natural entities, principles, rules, theories,
                          axioms, and the like, are at the best but presumptions or probabilities of good (…). If we find
                          that freedom to work in factories means the destruction of a comfortable home, and the death
                          of ten out of twelve of the offspring, here is palpable evil which no theory can mitigate”.
                          (MSR: 113).

       This is an example that moral principles are more important in applied economics than the laws of
pure economics. In fact, Jevons’s pure and applied economics works against a background of Victorian
morality that is taken as given. As Mosselmans (1998: 142-3; 2007) comments,

                                   “[Jevons’s] ‘representative individual’ is based on Jevons’s image of the Victorian
                          middle class: the laborer in Jevons’s theory would, in the absence of other motives, devote all
                          energy to the accumulation of wealth. Since this definition does not fit in the case of lower
                          class people, Jevons’s description of character and class behavior relaxes his ‘ceteris paribus’
                          definition of the labourer”.


        This did not mean that Jevons’s did not care about “lower class people” or that they should be
counted out of Jevons’s theory.25 The urgent problem we have at hand is: how should the behavior of lower
class people be brought closer to the behavior of a middle class Victorian? This is not only a problem, but a
governmental problem, as defined in section 2.2: how can authorities conduct the conduct of lower class
people so that they end up behaving closer to middle class Victorians? In the case of women in factories, the
testimony of Jevons’s widow in the MSR, Harriet Jevons, shows the obvious biopolitical character of
Jevons’s work and how it again traverses the apparatuses of sexuality, economy and medicine:

                                  “I can only say here that he [Jevons] had most carefully examined into the statistics of
                          infant mortality in every town of every county throughout England and Wales, and that he told
                          me that he thought from this exhaustive inquiry he should be able to give most convincing
                          proof of the influence which the absence of the mother at work has upon the death-rate of the
                          children, and of the urgent need which exists for legislation upon the subject”. (MRS: 114).

       The emphasis on statistics, population and the “urgent need for legistlation” shows that we are openly
dealing with biopolitical apparatuses. The apparatuses of medicine are touched when mortality rates of
children are mentioned. The apparatus of economy is also included because the problem is the employment
of mothers in factories and the consequences thereof. Finally, the problem also touches the issue of
sexuality, since it might interfere with the capacity of reproduction of human life, as section 2.1 clarified.


25
  In fact, as Hutchison (1988: 385) notes, the young Jevons had “profound social sympathies and a warm concern about the
problem of poverty”, and also “earnest social concern and commitment” (1988: 389). He was raised in an Unitarian family in
Liverpool. Jevons also believed in God, and also that the principles of religion did not contradict the principles of science: both
aimed for the truth. However, scientific reflection on “higher notions of creation” would fatally end up in confusion (Mosselmans,
2007).


                                                                                                                               17
       4.2.4 Industrial Partnerships and Union Trade Societies

        Let us finally analyze how a liberal biopolitical government can appear in Jevons analyses of
“Industrial Partnerships” and “Trade Societies”. In the first article, he studies the possible associations
between workers and capitalists, trying to understand how they should work together in order to increase the
product. In the second article, he defends the free association of workers in trade unions, as long as they do
not try to artificially determine the level of wages. As we can see, Jevons’s proposal is also compatible with a
liberal biopolitical government.
        First of all, it is necessary to notice that in union trade societies, we are far from finding an atomistic
view of humans – a view that is usually associated with Jevons’s pure economics. He also recognizes a
possible class conflict between workers and employers:

                               “(…) I must contend that the workman has a right to guard his own health,
                       convenience, comfort, and safety, and this he cannot efficiently do while he remains an isolated
                       individual. The reason is evident; the employers form a small class, between whom
                       communication and concert are much more easy than between their men, and who have usually
                       a strong disinclination to alter, for the benefit of their men, any custom or regulation which
                       seems to be for their own advantage.” (MRS: 69, our italics)

        At the same time, Jevons supports the unions in that they improve their health conditions at work: “A
second and more distinctive function or duty of Unions consists in their efforts to shorten the hours of labour,
to render factories more wholesome and safe, and generally to improve the condition of the workman.”
(MRS: 68).
        These are obviously characteristics that can be seen in a liberal biopolitical government: the freedom
to associate with each other mainly to improve their health and safety at work. However, when it comes
down to the determination of wages, Jevons prefers to leave it to the market (MRS: 77), although opening the
way for what he calls Boards of Concilliation, in case of open conflicts between labor and capital. In section
VII of the article on “Trade Societies”, he adds some statistical data in a rather careless way, trying to show
that Unions did not help to increase wages of all workers. What happens, according to Jevons, is that some
trades get raises at a cost for other trades. When there is a real increase in the wage rate, it can be explained
mainly by the liberation of free initiative of capitalists:

                             “The liberation of industry and trade from many mistaken restrictions, the removal of
                       Government protective duties, and the progress of free trade, in many countries, have thrown
                       manufactures into a state of progress more rapid than was ever known before”. (MSR: 74).

         Here is another sign that we are dealing with a liberal type of government.
         In the end, Jevons urges workers not to despise capital, but to associate with it, becoming themselves
capitalists with the passage of time. It is a different sort of capitalism, though, because in Jevons’s proposal
workers become owners of capital in a cooperative way (MSR: 76). From a biopolitical point of view, this
means that the economy should be managed so that it allows people to freely associate – as workers and
capitalists – so as to profit from this association. This would entail an objectively different assessment of
workers (they would not receive wages anymore; they would not have bosses; and they would not be
classified as employees in statistical analysis). But it is important to notice that this kind of economic society
can only properly function as long as workers also change subjectively: they should see themselves perhaps
as more calculative of the costs and benefits in their economic transactions. Perhaps they should also acquire
subjective characteristics of Victorian middle-class men. As Jevons quotes a former professor – Mr. Cobden -
- at the end of his article on Union Trade Societies:



                                                                                                                    18
                               “I wish to see the great mass of the working-classes of this country elevate themselves
                       by increased temperance, frugality, and economy. I tell you, candidly, that no people were ever
                       yet elevated except through their own advancing wealth, morality, and intelligence; and anyone
                       who tells the working-men of this country that they may be raised in the social scale by any
                       other process than that of reformation in themselves, is interested either in flattering or
                       deceiving them.” (MSR: 78; our italics).

       5.Concluding Remarks

        This article proposed a novel reading of the relation between Jevons’s logic, theoretical economics
and applied economics. Instead of focusing mainly on Jevons’s pure economics and logic, we tried to find a
respectable place for Jevons’s applied works. The focus on his applied works has the advantage of showing
that Jevon’s economic thought is not confined to self-interested, asocial and maximizing economic actions of
individuals, but also deals with ethics, politics and social problems. The focus on the logical structure of
Jevons’s pure theory by Jevons’s scholars seems to downplay the richess of his applied contributions: they
are seen as minor, imperfect or contradictory in relation to the precepts of his pure theory. While he tries to
make his pure economics devoid of any politics or ethics, these subjects are overtly considered when he
deals with practical economic matters.
        What the traditional reading of Jevons seems to leave out is the question of how practical or
theoretical economics are effectively used in concrete societies. The adoption of the foucauldian concepts of
biopolitics and government allowed us to identify the specificity of each kind of discourse – theoretical,
logical and applied – and the function they might have in different biopolitical apparatuses. In biopolitical
apparatuses, pure economics would only illuminate economic phenomena in a certain perspective and would
not be directly applicable. According to Silveira, this illumination is important in that it sheds light on certain
categories of economic phenomena – in our case, pleasures and pains that have origin in the physiology of
our brains and whose proxies (in the forms of relatives prices) can be mechanically calculated. Once humans
are seen within this perspective, a different discourse can then be used: applied economics, which can mix
with other disciplines and can be applied in the solution of an urgent problem, like extreme poverty, for
example.
        In our article, we found that Jevons’s practical proposals are, broadly speaking, of a biopolitical
liberal character (with the exception of the case of mothers working in factories). They are biopolitical
because they have the maintenance and protection of life as their target. They are liberal because they do not
interfere directly in the conduct of people, but try to govern people’s actions largely indirectly, by means of
changes in social or environmental variables.
        One can say that Jevons is one pioneer of this kind of liberal biopolitical practices in Victorian
England – so, we can say that the birth of liberal economic biopolitics in Victorian England begins at around
the end of the 19th century. Before this time, one of the most important English political economists, J. S.
Mill, would treat people’s actions and thinking differently: for him, concrete social influences, by changing
the pattern of mental associations of economic agents, could also change people’s character and economic
behavior. Governmental actions would not have as focus hard-wired biological properties of human
individuals. What J. S. Mill’s sixth book of his System of Logic tried to illuminate was the importance of the
proper association of ideas.
         This is different for Jevons, because his “laws of thought” are mechanical and economic behavior is
biology-based. Once we know the laws that govern people’s thoughts and economic behavior, the most that
social or environmental influences can do is either to repress or make room for these in-born, natural human
propensities. They may, perhaps, hinder the expression of these propensities, but cannot change them.




                                                                                                                   19
Government, in this case, consists in identifying these biological propensities so as to influence them. If
effective, these influences will likely make people act according to the desired political ends.26

        6. References

AGAMBEN, G. Homo Sacer: O Poder Soberano e a Vida Nua. Belo Horizonte: Ed. Da
     UFMG, 2002.
BOFF, E. O. Economia e Análise de Discurso: Para Além da Retórica. In:
    KERSTENETZKY, C. L., e NEVES, V. Economia e Interdisciplinaridade(s).
    Coimbra: Almedina, 2012.
COOK, S. Minds, Machines and Economic Agents: Cambridge Receptions of Boole
     And Babbage. Studies in the History and Philosophy of Science, 36, 2005:
     331-350.
 DEAN, M. Governmentality: Power and Rule in Modern Society. 2nd Edition. London: SAGE, 2010.
ESPOSITO, R. Bios: Biopolitics and Philosophy: Minnesota: University of Minnesota Press,
       2008.
FAHRI NETO, L. Biopolíticas: As Fomulações de Foucault. Florianópolis: Cidade Futura, 2010.
FOUCAULT, M. Society Must Be Defended. Lectures at the College De France 1975-1976.
      New York: Picador, 1997.
____________. Security, Territory, Population: Lectures at the College De France 1977-1978.
       New York: Picador, 2009.
____________. The Birth of Biopolitics: Lectures at the College De France 1978-1979.
       New York: Palgrave-McMillan, 2008.
____________. The Subject and Power. In: DREYFUS, R. and RABINOW, P. Michel
       Foucault: Between Structuralism and Hermeneutics. Chicago: University of Chicago
       Press, 1983.
____________The Confession of the Flesh - 1977 interview. In: FOUCAULT, M.
        Power/Knowledge Selected Interviews and Other Writings. New York: Pantheon Books:
       pp. 194-228.
HARDT, M. and NEGRI. A. Império. Rio de Janeiro: Record, 2000.
 JEVONS, W. S. The Theory of Political Economy. 3rd Edition. London: McMillan,
    1888.
____________. The Principles of Science: A Treatise on Logic and Scientific Method.
    New York: Dover Edition, 1958 [1874].
____________. Methods of Social Reform. London: McMillan, 1883.
KUSCH, M. Foucault’s Strata and Fields: An Investigation into Archaeological and Genealogical
    Science Studies. London: Kluwer Publishing, 1991.
LEMKE, T et al. Governmentality: Current Issues and Future Challenges. Oxon: Routlege, 2011.
MAAS, H. Mechanical Rationality: Jevons and the Making of Economic Man.
     Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 30(4), 1999: 587-619.
________. William Stanley Jevons and the Making of Modern Economics. Cambridge:
     Cambridge University Press, 2005.
________. Jevons, Mill and the Private Laboratory of the Mind. Manchester School,
     Vol. 73, n. 5, sept. 2005: 620-649.
MATTOS, L. V. Mill’s Transformational View of Human Nature. History of Economic

26
   One can see the long life that this form of governing people’s lives have nowadays: words like “incentivize” are common
currency among economists. Popular books by “Nudge” (2006), by Sunstein and Thaler, use the idea of “libertarian paternalism”
to design policies that nudge people into acting in a given way.

                                                                                                                          20
     Ideas, v. XIII, n. 3, 2005: 32-55.
MILL, J. S. Principles of Political Economy. In: ROBSON, J. M.; STILLINGER, J. (Eds.)
    The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill in 33 Vols. Indiana: The Liberty Fund, 1985
MOSSELMANS, B. William Stanley Jevons and the Extent of Meaning in Logic
     and Economics, History and Philosophy of Logic, Vol. 19, pp. 83-99, 1998.
_______________. William Stanley Jevons and the Cutting Edge of Modern Economics.
     New York: Routledge, 2013.
PEART, S.. The Economics of W. S. Jevons. London and New York: Routledge, 1996.
.
RAJAN, K. Biocapital: The Constitution of Post-Genomic Life. Durham: Duke University Press,
    2006.
ROSE, N. The Politics of Life Itself: Biomedicine, Power and Subjectivity in the 21st Century:
    Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2006.
SCHABAS, M. A World Ruled by Number: William Stanley Jevons and the Rise of
   Mathematical Economics. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1990.
____________. The Natural Origins of Economics. Chicago: The University
    Of Chicago Press, 2005.
SIGOT, N. Jevons’s Debt to Bentham: Mathematical Economy, Morals, and
     Psychology. The Manchester School, Vol. 70, n. 2, March, 2002: 262-78.
SILVEIRA, A. M. A Indeterminação de Senior. Revista de Economia Política, Vol. 11, n. 4 (44)
     Outubro-Dezembro, 1991.
SUNSTEIN, C. and THALER, R. Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth and
      Happiness. New York: Penguin Books, 2006.
WHITE, M. The Moment of Richard Jennings: The Production of Jevons’s Marginalist
    Agent. In: MIROWSKI, P. (Ed.) Natural Images in Economic Thought: Markets
     Red in Tooth and Claw, 1994a: 197-229.
_________. Bridging the Natural and the Social: Science and Character in Jevons’s
     Political Economy. Economic Inquiry, 32 (3), July, 1994b: 429-444.




                                                                                                 21
