        Preference, Utility, and Koopmans’s
      Contributions to Modern Macroeconomics
                                             Hugo Chu∗



                                              Abstract

Centered around a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) framework, modern macroe-
conomics was built on (independent) contributions of Frank Ramsey, Tjalling Koopmans and
David Cass over a time span that lasted from the end of the 1920s until mid-1960s. Known
also as the Ramsey-Cass-Koopmans model, a baseline theoretical structure of DSGE Macroe-
conomics, its central methodological device is an infinitely lived individual called the represen-
tative agent (consumer). The article examines the rise of that device in the 1950s-1970s period
in the contributions to intertemporal economics by Tjalling Koopmans. In the first decade, the
1950s, Koopmans was an important figure in the Cowles Commission’s (Foundation’s) incursion
into decision theory and, as an econometrician, an active participant in the debate on aggrega-
tion problems in economics. In the 1960s, Koopmans wrote the bulk of his contributions in the
field of infinite horizon economies (including his famous optimal growth model) and it is in this
decade that he fully articulated his views on the representative consumer. Finally, in the 1970s,
Koopmans changed his research aim and began to contribute to the preference-based approach
to individual decision-making, a move that led to a certain specification of the additively sep-
arable utility functions. Over these three decades, Koopmans went from an ambiguous stance
toward the representative consumer to a more supportive one. I argue that part of this change
is due to the ever increasing use of that device in macroeconomics, a movement that Koopmans
did not initiate but helped intensify.

Keywords: Representative Agent, Aggregation Problems, Tjalling Koopmans


                                               Resumo
Centrado em um arcabouço dinâmico estocástico de equilı́brio geral (DSGE), a macroeconomia
moderna foi construı́da com contribuições (independentes) de Frank Ramsey, Tjalling Koop-
mans e David Cass em um perı́odo que durou do fim dos anos 1920s a meados dos anos
1960s. Conhecido também como modelo Ramsey-Cass-Koopmans, uma estrutura teórica base
da macroeconomia DSGE, seu instrumento metodológico central é o agente (consumidor) rep-
resentativo. Esse artigo examina o surgimento do agente representativo nos trabalhos sobre
economia intertemporal de Tjaling Koopmans. Na primeira década, de 1950, Koopmans foi um
nome importante na incursão da Comissão Cowles na teoria da decisão e, como econometrista,
também participou ativamente do debate sobre problemas de agregação na economia. Na
década de 1960, Koopmans escreveu a maior parte de suas contribuições para o subcampo da
  ∗
    Adjunct Professor of Economics, UNIOESTE-FB. I am indebted to Pedro Garcia Duarte for invaluable
support and advice. I also thank Kevin Hoover, Fernando Rugitsky, Matthieu Renault and Danilo Ramalho for
comments and suggestions. All errors or inaccuracies are my own. Contact h.hugochu@gmail.com.
economia do horizonte infinito (incluindo seu modelo de crescimento ótimo) e é nessa década
que ele articulou de forma completa suas visões sobre o agente representativo. Finalmente,
na década de 1970, Koopmans mudou o foco de sua pesquisa e começou a contribuir para a
teoria das decisões individuais baseada nas preferências, levando-o à elaboração das funções de
utilidade intertemporalmente separáveis. Ao longo dessas três décadas, Koopmans passou de
um posicionamento ambı́guo em relação ao consumidor representativo para outro mais inclu-
sivo. Eu argumento que parte dessa mudança se deve ao uso cada vez maior do dispositivo na
macroeconomia, um movimento que ele não iniciou mas ajudou a intensificar.
Palavras-chave: Agente Representativo, Problema de agregação, Tjalling Koopmans

JEL Codes: B2, B21, B23

Área 1 - História do Pensamento Econômico e Metodologia




                                                  2
1       Introduction
A pivotal step in the development of modern macroeconomics consisted in the axiomatization of
time preference and the ensuing specification of a utility function in discounted form.1 In a series
of papers, notably Koopmans (1950, 1953, 1960, 1964, 1972a, 1972b) and Koopmans, Diamond,
and Williamson (1964), Tjalling Charles Koopmans made foundational contributions to the
subfield of intertemporal choice theory. With varying degrees of technical as well as historical
importance, in common, those articles extended the ordinary formulation of preferences and
the utility functions over time. The following passage, from one of the aforementioned articles,
exemplifies an important advancement in this research effort:

        In a previous article one of the authors [8] studied some implications of a set of
        postulates concerning a preference ordering of consumption programs for an infinite
        future. The preference ordering was assumed to be representable by a numerical
        utility function defined on the space of consumption programs, and the postulates
        were formulated as properties of that function. While these postulates themselves
        appeared to be concerned only with properties more immediate and elementary
        than any questions of timing preference, it was found that the postulates implied,
        at least in certain parts of the program space, a preference for advancing the timing
        of future satisfaction. This conclusion was expressed by the concept of impatience
        (Koopmans et al. 1964, p. 82, italics added).2

The article “[8]” mentioned above referred to Koopmans’s 1960 “Stationary Ordinal Utility
and Impatience.” Notwithstanding impatience used to be regarded as an irrational behaviour,
an economic disharmony according to Arthur Cecil Pigou, from that article onward it became
a logical outcome out of a set of rational postulates underlying a utility function.3
    As claimed by Christ and Hurwicz (2008), however, an important facet in Koopmans’s con-
tributions to intertemporal economics was the seemingly trivial change in his research agenda
in the 1970s: from the postulates underlying utility functions, Koopmans (1972a, b) turned
the focus to the postulates underlying preference relations instead. Such a re-orientation in his
research affected the way the author approached the representative consumer, going from a less
enthusiastic view to a more favourable one as his career progressed.
    Founded on, but not limited to, the assumptions of continuity, stationarity, and total in-
dependence over time in preference relations, he then proved that a utility function over an
infinite program had now a certain desirable additive property. In other words, not only did
the existence problem of the continuous utility function appear to be solved, Koopmans now
wished to expand its scope to focus on the intertemporal additive properties of preferences.4
    As I will try to substantiate in this article, such an episode seems to have led to one impor-
tant historical feature: the ever increasing explicitness of the representative agent in macroeco-
nomics in the 1970s and 1980s.5 As Kevin Hoover (2012) gauged using the jstor database and
    1
      See Duarte (2016) on how mathematicians and economists strove to narrow their understanding of time
discounting in the 1920s-1960s period, going from a nagging ethical subject to a pure technical requirement.
    2
      The coinage of the term “impatience” owes first to the Austrian economist Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk, who
introduced it into the theory of rate of interest (Christ and Hurwicz 2008) and, later, to Fisher (1930), for whom
“(...) individuals facing the alternatives of having a given reward today or in the future opt for current reward”
(Duarte 2016, p. 292).
    3
      For an examination of Arthur Pigou’s and other Cambridge economists’ thoughts on welfare analysis,
particularly on their stances against discounting future utilities, see Collard (1996).
    4
      Debreu (1959), section 4.6, was among the first to prove the existence of a continuous utility function.
    5
      It might not be a coincidence that the Sonneschein-Mantel-Debreu theorem, an important result contradict-
ing the possibility of consumers aggregation, was also established in the 1970s. See, e.g., Rizvi (2006), Hands
(2012), and their suggested references for a historical overview of that theorem.



                                                        3
reproduced in table 1, the number of mentions of the terms “representative agent,” “represen-
tative consumer,” and “representative household,” for the periods “through 1969” and “1970
and after,” went from 0, 1, and 0 to 157, 107, and 69, respectively.

                          Table 1: Examples of consumers aggregation

                                         Through 1969                              1970 and after
                Representative Agent          0                                         157
                Representative Consumer       1                                         107
                Representative Household      0                                          69
              Note: Although “representative agent” differs slightly in meaning compared to “representative
              consumer” and “representative household,” they are commonly used to mean aggregate demand
              of the economy.


    A possible reason is that the additive properties of the utility function that Koopmans
helped build might have now become an important complement to the first established—but
sometimes neglected—proof of aggregation across individuals provided in Gorman (1953) and
Samuelson (1956) and, as such, strengthened the overall technical justification of that method-
ological device.6 Coupled with Samuelson’s contributions regarding homothetic preferences
(Hands 2016), it could have freed the representative agent to be used in many other subfields
of macroeconomics as well, such as the stochastic optimal growth literature found in Brock and
Mirman (1972).
    While broad and epistemically distinct, since I consider relatively a long period and con-
template both micro and macroeconomics, this analysis is intended to contribute to the un-
derstanding of the ever higher explicitness of the representative consumer in the writings of
Tjalling Koopmans in the postwar period, aided, also, by the parallel contributions to the
problem of aggregation led by Paul Samuelson during the same period. Furthermore, I also
attempt to show the widespread use of separable utility functions in macroeconomics to be a
possible corollary of such a theoretical development.
    This diversity of theoretical interpretation of preferences and utility functions across time
and people showcases the challenge involved in tracing certain concepts in the history of ideas,
particularly when they straddle different fields. In the present case, they began as a new ap-
proach to tackle decisions sciences in microeconomics, the offshoot of a specific Normative Turn
at the Cowles Foundation for Research in Economics (Herfeld 2018), and turned out to make
a splash in the subfield of growth theories in macroeconomics. To write this article I peruse
(many of) the main articles published about the subject by Tjalling Koopmans, Paul Samuel-
son and other authors and also profit from interpretations made by important historians of
thought. Finally, to supply additional evidence to my story I use archival material.
    The article is organized as follows. In the next section, I present Koopmans’s initial works
in the subfield of intertemporal economics in the 1950s, a contribution marked by aggregation
concerns and paralleled by his incursions into activity analysis. Section 1.3, focusing on Koop-
mans’s writings in the 1960s, discusses consumer choices with an infinite horizon in a context
of optimal growth problems. Section 1.4 describes Koopmans’s research reorientation in the
1970s, when he shifted his attention to investigate postulates of preference relations. The pos-
sible outcome of this new research to modern macroeconomics is also delineated. Section 2.5
offers some concluding remarks.7
   6
     Of the authors who consider Gorman (1953) and Samuelson (1956) to be the first proofs of the representative
consumer are Muellbauer (1976), Deaton and Muellbauer (1980), Lewbel (1994), Blackborby et al. (2008), and
Acemoglu (2009).
   7
     With a view to giving greater clarity to Koopmans’s writings, I chose to divide his articles into those
published in the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s. A different way to discern a segmentation in his writings is through his


                                                           4
2     Koopmans’s intertemporal economics in the 1950s
As explained by a long-time colleague, Koopmans’s incursion into the field of infinite horizon
economies took place as early as the 1950s with two important short publications, “Utility
Analysis of Decisions Affecting Future Well Being” and “La Notion d’Utilité dans Le Cas de
Décisions Concernant le Bien-Être Futur” (Chipman 2006, p. 531).8 In Christ and Hurwicz’s
(2008) view, this research is probably Koopmans’s most important contribution in theoretical
economics, a subject intimately linked to his understanding of the “optimal allocation of re-
source” (observed, e.g., in his 1965 growth model) and for which he would be awarded the 1975
Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences.9
    Initially presented at the 1949 Boulder (Colorado) meeting of the Econometric Society, and
published in 1950 as a report of the organization’s journal Econometrica, “Utility Analysis of
Decisions Affecting Future Well Being” laid down the initial reasoning that would later serve
the author’s long-term engagement with utility analysis. With the utility function based origi-
nally upon a complete and static ordering of objects, Koopmans contended that its sought-after
dynamic generalization oftentimes ignored the desire for postponement of decisions in cases of
unpredictable events. To deal with it, he understood that:
          Assets can then be entered in the utility function as representative of the sets
      of consumption sequences they give access to, through direct enjoyment, resale and
      purchase of other assets or consumption flows, alternatively or in succession, subject
      to later decision (Koopmans 1950, p. 175, italics added).
Koopmans continued by drawing special attention to the role played by borrowing, or consum-
ing financing, to the well-being of consumers, since “(...) it gives access to the flow of services
associated with the possession of durable consumer’s goods at an earlier time than would oth-
erwise be possible at the same rate of saving” (ibid.).
    In the 1953 edition of Cahiers du Séminaire d’Économétrie, a special volume dedicated to
choice theory, Koopmans contributed a small article entitled “La Notion d’Utilité dans Le Cas
de Décisions Concernant le Bien-Être Futur,” in which he extended the central idea pursued in
his previous article.10 By contrasting the ordinary concept of “preferences” to that of “possi-
bilities” he enabled the introduction of a set Q, or ordered sequences, into the utility function;
and via the replacement of points by sets he then permitted uncertainty to play an explicit role
in choice theory.11 In the discrete case it is possible to represent the sets in tree form whose
optimal growth paper (Koopmans 1963). Even though the final versions of the articles published in the 1970s
came out as early as the mid-1960s they were, nonetheless, written after his growth article was finalized. In
other words, the aforesaid change in the emphasis of his papers took shape only after his foray into the realm of
normative growth theory (Christ and Hurwicz 2008). I expect to demonstrate why in the subsequent sections.
    8
      John Chipman completed his PhD at Johns Hopkins University in 1951 and during the 1950-51 academic
year was a post-doctoral fellow at the University of Chicago’s economics department and a guest fellow at the
Cowles Commission; his close contact with Koopmans took place while the latter served as a professor at the
University of Chicago and had an appointment as research director at Cowles around the same period. Chipman
has important publications in international trade theory, econometric theory and microeconomics, especially
in demand theory. He has also written history of economics papers. Chipman taught at the University of
Minnesota (Economics) from 1955 until his retirement in 2007.
    9
      In addition to Tjalling Koopmans, the Royal Swedish Academy of Science also awarded the Russian math-
ematician Leonid V. Kantorovich (1912-1986) for their (independent) contributions to the theory of optimum
allocation of resources.
   10
      Although the 1950 and 1953 articles had very similar titles, they focused on different aspects of choice
theory. I thank Pedro Duarte for pointing this out. The French journal Cahiers du Séminaire d’Économétrie
is published nowadays under the title Annals of Economics and Statistics.
   11
      Decision-making under uncertainty became part of a broader research “package” in decision theory after
Koopmans joined the Cowles Commission in 1943 and “reengineered” it under the influence of von Neumman.
According to Mirowski (2002, chapter five), other packages included in this new wave were linear programming,
activity analysis, and Arrow-Debreu general equilibrium.


                                                       5
ramifications portray every possible choice which varies according to different contingencies.12
    In light of Koopmans’s early treatment of preferences over time in the 1950s, it is possi-
ble to suggest that those articles led him to rewrite the utility function as a time aggregator
whose parts consisted of an one-period utility and a prospective utility, as seen in the articles
“Stationary Ordinal Utility and Impatience” and “Stationary Utility and Time Perspective”
published in the 1960s. In the next section, I will discuss some of the technical aspects that
enabled Koopmans to attain this outcome.
    While Koopmans’s writings on the topic of preferences over time in the 1960s and later
featured more abstract mathematical models, which he would often use to analyze concerns
related to the representative consumer, his 1950s endeavors in the field had just recently been
marked by what Catherine Herfeld (2018) identified as a Normative Turn, i.e., the transition
from an empirical to an axiom-based approach to human behaviour. It does not follow from
this that the problem of aggregation was no longer for Koopmans a nagging concern. In a
series of letters exchanged between him and Marc Nerlove in January of 1957, the issue of ag-
gregation emerged not only as a difficulty limited to a field, but a more general concern within
economics.13
    On January 10, 1957, Koopmans asked Nerlove about his recent research activities at the
Agricultural Marketing Service of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA).14
Nerlove replied with a rather detailed description of his inquiries into, inter alia, the statistical
properties of distributed lags models, their applications to the estimation of supply functions
for agricultural commodities, their intertwined relationship with demand functions (in which
Milton Friedman’s permanent income hypothesis drew most of his interest) and, essentially,
some problematic instances in the case such as the inapplicability of Friedman’s consumption
function “to cover individual items of consumption.”15,16
    Then, referring specifically to those as well as other concerns raised by Nerlove within
econometrics, Koopmans responded with the following overall intuition:17
           I have not given much thought to the problem of distributed lags in the last few
       years. However, I have developed a general feeling that the clue to a number of dif-
       ferent problems in econometrics lies in further exploration of aggregation problems,
  12
     As I will show in section 1.4, the notion of choices representable in tree forms, also called separable utility
functions, would be formalized (axiomatized) by Koopmans only in the articles published in the 1970s. Inter-
estingly, even though it took Koopmans almost twenty years to re-engage with the formal properties of such
utility functions, they continued to be studied by Robert Strotz (1957, 1959) and William Gorman (1959a, b).
How Koopmans’s contributions can be understood considering Strotz’s and Gorman’s will then be discussed in
the same section.
  13
     In the summer of 1953, as a graduate student, Marc Nerlove worked as a research assistant for Tjalling
Koopmans and Jacob Marschak at the Cowles Commission. In 1956, under the supervision of Carl Christ, he
earned a PhD in Economics from Johns Hopkins University with a dissertation measuring the dynamics and
elasticity of the U.S. agricultural supply. In 1956-1957, the period of the correspondence, Nerlove worked as an
analytical statistician at the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA).
  14
     Letter from Koopmans to Nerlove, January 10, 1957, TKP, box 16, file folder 304.
  15
     Letter from Nerlove to Koopmans, January 27, 1957, TKP, box 16, file folder 304.
  16
     Milton Friedman’s intuitive notion of the permanent income hypothesis is derived from chapter three of
his famous book A Theory of the Consumption Function, published in 1957. The gist of his argument is that
agents’ consumption behaviours are better predicted with a non-directly observable “mean of the expected
level of income in the very near-term” (Carroll 2001, p. 24), labeled “permanent income,” instead of the usual
“recorded income” as postulated by Keynes (De Vroey 2016). What should be clear to better comprehend
Nerlove’s interpretation of the Friedman’s consumption function and, by extension, the story presented in this
article, is that both Friedman’s model and the neoclassical theory of consumer’ choice were initially theorized
at the individual levels. For an empirical economist like Nerlove, whose works came down to estimating aggre-
gate relationships, the incongruence between both approaches overshadowed his analyses. It is precisely this
frustration that prompted Henri Theil (see footnote 18 for a brief sketch of his biography) to write the opening
paragraph of his 1957 book, which I chose to quote at full length below.
  17
     Letter from Koopmans to Nerlove, January 31, 1957, TKP, box 16, file folder 304.


                                                         6
       that ties our notions of individual decision making with somewhat more aggregated
       relationships. I doubt that this reflection is of much value to you in regard to dis-
       tributed lags, but it does seem to me that this is one of the problems that may stand
       to gain if progress should be made on aggregation. Theil’s book is excellent as far as
       it goes. My main reservation about it is that it studies primarily the implications of
       current econometric procedures, rather than trying to answer the deeper question
       what procedures we should be using in view of aggregation problems.18
Even though the exchange of views on the aggregation problems between the authors arose in
the field of applied econometrics, there was also a clear comprehension of its theoretical nature
as captured in Koopmans’s indication of the need to handle such a more difficult “deeper
question” and in Theil’s (1954, p. 1) own explanation of the problem:
           A serious gap exists between the greater part of rigorous economic theory and
       the pragmatic way in which economic systems are empirically analysed. Axiomat-
       ically founded theories refer mostly to individuals, for instance the consumer or
       the entrepreneur. Empirical descriptions of economic actions in large communities,
       on the other hand, are nearly always extremely global: they are confined to the
       behaviour of groups of individuals. The necessity of such a procedure can scarcely
       be questioned: How could one handle the tremendous mass of relations governing
       the actions of millions of individuals? But the introduction of relations pretending
       to describe the reactions of groups of individuals instead of single individuals raises
       questions of fundamental importance, which are not very well understood: What
       are the connections between the functional relationships postulated by the economic
       theories of individual households and the relationship for groups of individuals pos-
       tulated by the empirical research worker? If the analysis shows that these relations
       are not of a “desirable” type, is it possible to indicate rules for the construction of
       group relationships that must be obeyed in order that certain optimum criteria are
       fulfilled? And how must these criteria been chosen?
           These are questions that must be answered by the theory of aggregation.19
In what follows, I shall make a few remarks concerning Koopmans’s publications in the 1950s
reviewed in this article vis-à-vis his overall contributions to the subfield. As far as I am aware,
among all appreciations written so far about Koopmans’s contributions to economics or about
his professional life, such as Koopmans’s own Nobel Memorial Lecture written in 1975, Werin
and Jungenfelt (1976), Niehans (1990), Scarf (1995), Chipman (2006), and Christ and Hurwicz
(2008), only Chipman (2006) cited the two articles I mentioned above in the body of his text
  18
     The book mentioned by Koopmans in the correspondence was Theil’s Linear Aggregation of Economic
Relations, published in 1954. Henri Theil was born in 1924 in Amsterdam and passed away in the United States
in 2000. After earning his doctorate in Economics (with distinction) from the University of Amsterdam in 1951,
Theil began his career as a macroeconomic analyst and forecaster for the Central Planning Bureau (CPB) of
the government of the Netherlands under the directorship of Jan Tibergen. Between 1953 and 1966 he taught
econometrics at Erasmus University Rotterdam (formerly the Netherlands School of Economics in Rotterdam),
where he also founded and directed The Econometric Institute. From 1966 to 1981 he was a member of the
University of Chicago’s economics department. From 1981 until his passing, Theil remained affiliated with the
University of Florida. Over a period of five decades he published more than 250 articles and 17 books, of which
the one mentioned by Koopmans was his very first (Bewley 2000).
  19
     Along the line put forward by Tjalling Koopmans and Henri Theil, it is interesting to observe that many
theoretical problems seem to surface more commonly in applied works than in theoretical ones proper. For
example, aggregation issues were more of a problem in the “Modeling Resource Group” (MRG) than in any
other academic communities Koopmans belonged to. The MRG was an association of economists and other
experts created to provide the Committee on Nuclear and Alternative Energy System (CONAES) with economic
information obtained through mathematical models. In addition to Tjalling Koopmans, William Nordhaus,
Hendrik Houthakker and Kenneth Arrow took part in the discussions of the group.


                                                      7
as indication of their importance to economics (although Werin and Jungenfelt (1976) did at
least list the 1953 piece in their references). In the two-volume Scientific Papers of Tjalling C.
Koopmans, published in 1970 and 1985, none of those 1950s papers were included even though
in the preface to the first volume, the editors, Martin Beckmann, Carl Christ, and Marc Nerlove
(1970, p. v) wrote: “In making our selection of his papers to be included in this volume, we
have attempted to include significant contributions in each of the major areas of Koopmans’
work (...),” intertemporal economics being one of them.20
    As to why the profession overlooked Koopmans’s contributions in intertemporal economics
at the time, a possible answer is that the subject could have been upstaged by the parallel
development of activity analysis whose 1949 conference, “Activity Analysis of Production and
Allocation,” set a new era in economics research and, hence, drawing most of the author’s
attention for the remaining years of the 1950s.21 This can be observed, e.g., in the ensuing
publications of the conference volume (Koopmans 1951) and, especially, of his celebrated Three
Essays on the State of Economic Science (1957), both of which featured novel developments
in the subfield. To complement and, thus, get a more reliable answer to the question though,
bibliometric research would be worth conducting, helping us to shed light on such related ques-
tions as how have the citations of Koopmans’s writings evolved since he published those papers
in the 1950s.
    By bringing further details into the works of the Dutch economist in the 1950s and, more
important, by later tightening them up with his writings in subsequent decades, I intend to con-
tribute with a narrative of Koopmans’s works in the subfield of intertemporal economics. Such
a narrative shall therefore aid in the understanding of his thoughts regarding the representative
consumer.


3      Koopmans’s Intertemporal Economics in the 1960s:
       articulation of the representative agent
The bulk of Koopmans’s contributions to infinite horizon economies appeared in a series of
papers concentrated in the first half of the 1960s. The intertemporal utility function with time
discounting that appeared in Koopmans’s 1960 “Stationary Ordinal Utility and Impatience”
had the form22                                ∞
                                             X
                                       U=       αt−1 u(xt ),                                  (1)
                                                    t=1

where α ∈ (0, 1) denoted a (constant) exponential discount factor, xt a vector of goods, and u(·)
an instantaneous utility function.23 Interpreted as a preference ordering of infinite program,
equation (1) had the following comment by the author (Koopmans 1960, p. 288):

           Flexibility of interpretation remains as to whether this ordering may serve as a
       first approximation to the preferences of an individual consumer, or may perhaps be
       an “impersonal” result of the aggregation of somewhat similar individual preferences
  20
     The other two areas considered by the editors were econometrics and activity analysis.
  21
     The importance of the 1949 conference to the development of economic science in the second half of the
twentieth century was only recently made more clear by Düppe and Weintraub (2014).
  22
     The first version of this work was the Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No. 81, dated November, 1959.
  23
     The instantaneous utility function is an essential concept in both macroeconomics and growth theory, and
a description of the function is thus worth quoting at length from a major textbook on growth theory: “The
instantaneous utility function captures the utility that an individual derives from consumption at time t. It is
therefore not the same as a utility function specifying a complete preference ordering over all commodities -
here consumption levels in all dates. For this reason, the instantaneous utility function is sometimes referred to
as the ‘felicity function’” (Acemoglu 2009, p. 180, italics added).


                                                          8
       (interpreting “consumption” as “consumption per head” in the case of a growing
       population), or finally may guide choices in a centrally planned economy. In each
       of these interpretations further modifications and refinements may be called for.

Jointly written with Peter Diamond and Richard Williamson, and published in Econometrica in
1964, “Stationary Utility and Time Perspective” consisted primarily of direct generalizations of
the notion of impatience found in Koopmans (1960) by way of a discovery of a deeper property
of preference ordering, called time perspective (hence the titles of both articles), applicable to
a larger part of the commodity space.24,25 Among other goals, the article demonstrated that
in comparing two consumption programs of the same period, for example, programs A and B,
where the first is strictly preferred to the second, the more the consumer postponed his or her
consumption, the smaller would be the difference assigned by the utility function; put another
way, time mattered in the authors’ account of preference and utility.
    An example shall illustrate this point. Suppose an individual prefers apples to oranges today.
A utility function then would assign a higher value for the first fruit. In Koopmans, Diamond,
and Williamson’s interpretation, since consumers are impatient, the preference for apples over
oranges would be diluted when he/she tried to compare both fruits in, say, twenty months from
today, leading to an ever-lower difference assigned by the utility function as time passes. Yet,
to achieve this outcome, a real-valued utility function had to be capable of representing an
ordering of sequences over time of commodity bundles in the first place.
    If 1 x = (x1 , x2 , ..., xt ) represents an infinite-dimensional sequence (over time) of a particular
commodity bundle, it can alternatively be written 1 x = (x1 ,2 x), where 2 x = (x2 , x3 , ..., xt ) is a
sequence of commodity bundles starting at t = 2. Thus, the initial notation can be rewritten
as 1 x ≡ (x1 ,2 x) or, considering only two periods, 1 x ≡ (x1 , x2 ). In this definition x1 and x2
constitute the same commodity vector (consumption bundle) in the consumption set X but for
periods 1 and 2, respectively.26 The authors’ intention was to justify the formulation of U (1 x) as
a function of the instantaneous utility function un (xn ) and, therefore, attain an intertemporal
utility function such as U (1 x) = (u1 (x1 ), u2 (x2 ), ..., un (xn )). By accepting the postulates P1
(existence and continuity), P2 (sensitivity), P3 (limited complementarity), P4 (stationarity),
and P5 (extreme programs), and undertaking various proofs, U (1 x) could then be written in
the form
                                            U (1 x) = V (u(x1 ), U (2 x)),                            (2)
where V (u, U ) is continuous and increasing in its two arguments u and U . As u(x1 ) and U (2 x)
can be defined, respectively, as an one-period (or an immediate) utility and a prospective utility,
U (1 x) can be redefined as an aggregate utility, where the function V (·) is the time aggregator
(over all future time periods). Related to this function, Koopmans (1960, p. 292) stated that it
“(...) indicates how any given pair of utility levels, immediate (u1 ) and prospective (U2 ) stacks
up against any other pair in making choices for the entire future.”27 By iteration, (1.2) can be
  24
     Following Mas-Colell et al. (1995, p. 19), the consumption set is the set of all nonnegative bundles of
commodities X = RL                 L                                   L
                        + = {x ∈ R : xl ≥ 0 for l = 1, ..., L}, where R is the commodity space.
  25
     The first version of this paper was a Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No. 142, dated August, 1962.
In his 2010 Nobel memoir Peter Diamond recounted, with inescapable gratitude, how his mathematical ability
helped reorient Koopmans’s research while working as his research assistant in the summer of 1960 (when
Diamond had not even started graduate studies at MIT), a fact that stirred Koopmans to promote him as a
co-author of the 1964 paper.
  26
     Throughout this article, I follow the notations adopted by Koopmans in his examination of the subject.
To clarify, a consumption vector xt can also be understood as xt = (xt1 , xt2 , ..., xtl ), that is, assuming a
l−dimensional commodity space.
  27
     The passage refers indeed to an expression obtained prior to equation (1.2), namely, U (1 x) =
V (u1 (x1 ), U2 (2 x)), where the difference consists in the appearance of time subscripts in both arguments of
the function V . Nevertheless, since my concern is to focus on the aggregative feature of U (1 x), both expressions
play the same role. See Phlips (1983, chapter XI) for further clarifications on this point.


                                                        9
generalized to
                            U (1 x) = V (u(x1 ), u(x2 ), u(x3 ), ..., u(xτ ), U (τ +1 x))                         (3)
for all τ . Bearing on a result attributed to Debreu ([1959] 1960), in which postulate 30 (inde-
pendence) is added to the set of postulates, a monotonic transformation can be performed on
(1.3) such that (using t = 3)

                                     U (1 x) = u1 (x1 ) + u2 (x2 ) + U3 (3 x).                                    (4)

Finally, as Koopmans (1960) and Phlips (1983) argued, equation (1.4) is usually written in the
literature as                    ∞
                                X                     1
                      U (1 x) =     κt−1 u(xt ), κ =     , 0<κ<1                           (5)
                                t=1
                                                     1+γ
or                                                     Z    ∞
                                           U (1 x) =             e−ρt u(xt )dt                                    (6)
                                                        0

for discrete and continuous time, respectively.28 The significance of the additively separable
preference assumption (postulates 3 and 30 ) cannot be underestimated. It is indispensable in
an intertemporal problem solved by either a household or a central planner: in a workhorse
Ramsey-Cass-Koopmans model, each reaches an Euler equation where the marginal rate of
substitution in consumption between periods t and t + 1 is independent of future periods.29
    Koopmans’s ingenious way of working out an intertemporal utility function depended un-
avoidably on how he aggregated the time-varying instantaneous utility function. Although he
never explicitly identified such a function with the (aggregate) expression “representative con-
sumer,” one could argue that the author always had the latter construct in mind: as is the case
with intertemporal preference and intertemporal utility, the representative agent also enabled
a correspondence between consumer and central planner.
    In a 1964 sole-authored paper entitled “On Flexibility of Future Preferences,” an examina-
tion of the effects of uncertainties on agents’ preferences in coming, yet distant periods, Koop-
mans adopted an open stance regarding whom should such a (future) preference belong to by
stating from the outset: “The economist’s traditional model of choice - whether consumer’s
choice or planner’s choice - is based on an analytical separation of preferences and opportu-
nity” (Koopmans 1964, p. 469, italics added).30 In another passage, Koopmans alluded to
the usefulness (and therefore ability) of a central planner acting as some sort of aggregator of
preferences. According to him:
           (...) taste evolves with experience. A model that freezes preferences by the
       adoption at an initial point in time of an ordering of programs for a future period
       of indefinite duration is likely to become an unacceptable straight jacket as time
       proceeds. At what age would the individual consumer be supposed to embrace the
       ordering that is to guide all his consumption choices for the remainder of his life?
       And the economic planner, who presumably attempts to aggregate the preferences of
       the population - perhaps with some admixture of his own values - wouldn’t he wish to
       retain flexibility so that he could respond in the future to newly perceived currents of
       taste and desire? In fact, would it be morally defensible for one generation to pre-
  28
     Koopmans stated that equation (1.5), where “aggregate utility is a discounted sum of all future one-period
utilities, with a constant discount factor κ” (1960, p. 308), had been used “extensively” before, such as in
Ramsey (1928), Samuelson and Solow (1956), and Strotz (1957), but with κ = 1 imposed in the first two cases.
  29
     In such problems, an intertemporal utility function of the form (1.5) or (1.6) is optimized subject to a
feasibility or technology constraint (in the centralized case) or subject to a wealth constraint (in the decentralized
one).
  30
     This short paper appeared first as a Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper dated No. 150, December, 1962.


                                                            10
       sume, and act on, a very definite specification of the next generation’s preferences?
       (ibid., p. 472, italics added).
As pointed out by Duarte (2016), some controversies involved in the analysis of an individual’s
intertemporal allocation problem compared to the planner’s were already raised by Amartya
Sen and Stephen Marglin in the 1950s and 1960s; Koopmans’s words quoted above could be
a reaction to this discussion and, in this sense, his treatment of individual vis-à-vis centralizer
figures, such as “the subsistence farmer” or the “the economic planner” (Koopmans 1964, p.
470) might be taken as an example of the care Koopmans granted to the issue as well.
    In a particular study centered on the axiomatization of time preference and the subsequent
incorporation of time discounting in optimal growth models in the 1960s, Duarte (2016, p. 294)
claimed: “While Cass advocates an infinite horizon, discounted optimization problem, he does
not make an argument for basing social welfare on the representative agent’s utility function.”
In contrast, “(...) Koopmans blurred the lines between individual and social intertemporal
choices” and, as such, made “(...) more room for discounting to become a rather technical
requirement” (ibid.).
    In his famous optimal growth article written in 1963, “On the Concept of Optimal Economic
Growth,” Koopmans introduced a slightly modified version of (1.1), but now applied to examine
normative features of economic growth:31
                                                ∞
                                                X
                                           U=          κt−1 u(xt ),                                     (7)
                                                 t=1

where κ ∈ (0, 1) is the constant discount factor. Looking for mathematical simplicity, his
analysis into the existence andR characteristics of optimal growth paths resorted to the finite-
                                    T
horizon utility function U = 0 u(xt )dt, where the simple integration of the instantaneous
utility flow u(xt ) “(...) implies noncomplementarity between consumption in any two or more
parts of the future” (Koopmans 1963, p. 20). Applying the discount factor eρt and pushing
time horizon to infinity, the latter expression could then be rewritten as
                                              Z ∞
                                      V (ρ) =     e−ρt u(xt )dt,                             (8)
                                                  0

where ρ is a positive instantaneous discount rate strictly greater than 0, whilst other variables
remain with the same definitions as in (1.1). Equation (1.8) is therefore almost identical to (1.6).
Initially presented with a finite horizon, where “(...) the choice of the terminal capital stock is
as much a part of the problem to be solved as the choice of the path” (ibid., p. 5), the optimal
growth problem was re-framed with an infinite horizon perspective since in Koopmans’s view
it was “(...) perhaps a more natural specification in many formulations of the growth problem”
(ibid., p. 6).
    Similar to all papers that dealt with the topic of infinite horizon economies seen above, the
1963 growth article also left open the interpretation by which equations (1.5) and (1.6) could
be the utility function of some generic preference, that is, “(...) no discussion of whether these
preferences were of individuals, a representative agent, or a social planner” (Duarte 2016, p.
292-3).
    Koopmans’s famous optimal growth paper was then published in definitive form in a 1965
volume that wrapped up the proceedings of a conference held in Vatican City.32 But, as can
be implied from the 1965 article, Koopmans’s concern regarding the technical appropriateness
  31
    Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No. 163, dated December, 1963.
  32
    Under the theme “Study Week on the Econometric Approach to Development Planning,” the conference
was organized by the Pontifical Academy of Sciences in 1963. In addition to Koopmans, who discussed his 1963
version of the paper, other important economists at the time also presented articles and participated in the


                                                       11
of (1.7) as an optimality criterion did not encompass an explanation of whether it purported
the preferences of an individual, a social planner, or a representative agent either; he carried
on his investigation solely on the grounds that the most basic (and suitable) mathematical
formulation of an optimality criterion is simply “(...) that of a preference ordering of growth
paths” (Koopmans 1963, p. 2).
    Not specifying whose preference is (1.7) could be a practice inherited from his previous
work “Stationary Ordinal Utility and Impatience” (Koopmans 1960). In this article—following
the derivation of equation (1.1), an expression almost identical to equation (1.7)—although
Koopmans asserted that such an equation had already been used extensively in the literature, a
perusal of the papers mentioned therein suggests that they did not include time discounting.33
    We can derive two implications from this fact. First, as examined in Duarte (2016), it
substantiates the claim by which Koopmans pioneered the axiomatization of time preference,
for a clear difference can be observed between his 1960 work and other contemporaneous works
analyzed in Duarte’s article. Second, due to Koopmans’s early treatment of the discounted
intertemporal utility function, it would be reasonable to expect a timid stance toward the
wording of the term “representative consumer” as well. This posture, nevertheless, did not go
unscathed as seen in the quotation below:

          The effort economists such as Koopmans made to construct a behavioral basis
      of an ordinal intertemporal discounted utility function that characterized either the
      behavior of an individual or of a social planner did not prevent serious criticisms
      either to employing a social discount factor or to treating individual and social
      decisions in the same way (Duarte 2016, p. 296).

Irrespective of the technical reason behind Koopmans’s treatment of individual and social deci-
sions, there was still a noticeable vagueness in the way he viewed the aggregation of preferences
and of utility functions in the 1950s and 1960s. Although I have tried to show such ambiguity
through a close reading of Koopmans’s writings and the perusal of the letters he exchanged
with Marc Nerlove, a further investigation may answer why that was the case.


4     Koopmans’s intertemporal economics in the 1970s: ex-
      pansion of the representative agent appeal in macroe-
      conomics
Initially part of a single 1966 Cowles Foundation discussion paper entitled “Structure of Prefer-
ence Over Time,” the articles “Representation of Preference Orderings with Independent Com-
ponents of Consumption” (1972a) and “Representation of Preference Orderings Over Time”
(1972b) appeared as separate pieces in a single volume in honor of Koopmans’s long-time
friend and mentor Jacob Marschak.34 In common, and in opposition to his writings from the
1950s and 1960s, the 1970s articles signified a (re)orientation of his research interest toward
the postulates of preference relations (which he called ordering) under which he sought the
overall discussion during the occasion such as Richard Stone, Walter Isard, Ragnar Frisch, Wassily Leontief,
Luigi Pasinetti, and Michio Morishima, among others. The changes that occurred between the 1963 and 1965
versions and the role played by the French economist Edmond Malinvaud are discussed in detail in Spear and
Young (2014).
  33
     The articles mentioned were Ramsey (1928), Samuelson and Solow (1956), and Strotz (1956).
  34
     On Koopmans’s meandering career before joining the Cowles Commission in July 1944, Mirowski (2012,
p. 152) said: “Were it not for Marschak, one can easily imagine that the dissatisfied chap bouncing from one
brief job to another, never really fitting in anywhere, might have left no mark whatsoever on the history of
economics.”


                                                    12
possibility of a more complete representation in terms of utility functions.35
    If in the 1960 article Koopmans proved the existence of a (continuous) utility function at the
very outset, with the reformulated postulates set out in the 1970s, the author endeavored “(...)
to construct a representation of % on the entire program space 1 X , or on as large a subspace
of it as we can” (Koopmans 1972b, p. 108). Stated even more clearly, and in connection to the
point I want to emphasize, the author made this complementary point in another passage:

       The postulates are modeled after those used in two earlier studies by koopmans
       (1960) and by koopmans, diamond and williamson (1964). The main differ-
       ence is that the former studies presupposed the existence of a continuous represen-
       tation. In the present study, the postulates refer to a continuous ordering, and the
       proximate aim of the study is to derive the existence of a continuous representation.
       Further differences will be noted in connection with the third and fifth postulates
       (Koopmans 1972b, p. 105, italics added).

Aligned with the main results predicated on the assumption of separable preferences obtained
in the 1972a article, the re-examination of the independence (third), monotonicity (fifth) and,
especially, stationarity (fourth) postulates in the 1972b paper led to the continuous represen-
tation of the utility function with certain desirable additive properties.36 The ultimate goal of
such re-appraisals was therefore to find a theoretical device that would enable a better com-
parison of growth paths for an indefinite future or, in other words, a technical device that once
applied to growth theories could broaden the understanding of infinite-time growth processes.
Such was the direct importance of such an elaboration that it can be found, for example, in a
prominent recent textbook Introduction to Modern Economic Growth, where the author states:

       The Solow growth model is predicated on a constant savings rate. Instead, it would
       be much more satisfactory to specify the preference orderings of individuals, as in
       standard general equilibrium theory, and derive their decisions from these prefer-
       ences. This will enable us both to have a better understanding of the factors that
       affect savings decisions and also to discuss the “optimality of equilibria” - in other
       words, to pose and answer questions related to whether the (competitive) equilibria
       of growth models can be “improved upon.” The notion of improvement here will
       be based on the standard concept of Pareto optimality, which asks whether some
       household can be made better off without others being worse off. Naturally, we can
       only talk of individuals or households being “better off” if we have some information
       about well-defined preference orderings (Acemoglu 2009, p. 215, italics added).

The conceptual and mathematical refinements Koopmans sought within intertemporal choice
theory, especially with regard to its implications for the additivity properties of utility functions,
turned out to have important sway in the profession’s effort to integrate optimal growth theory
into general equilibrium theory. In the next two subsections, in addition to providing a relatively
thick outline of Koopmans’s writings, I show how he dealt with aggregation problems and, by
extension, with the representative agent.
  35
     A subtle, yet difference worth noting between the two articles was that rather than studying the postulates
underlying preference orderings on a prospect space, in the second paper he focused on the postulates underlying
preference orderings over time, that is, a space 1 X of programs, of infinite-time sequences.
  36
     Koopmans used the term independence of different components of consumption instead of separable prefer-
ence.




                                                      13
4.1     Representation of preference ordering with independent com-
        ponents of consumption
Koopmans strove to fulfill two aims set out for his 1972a paper: first, summarized under propo-
sition 1, provide proofs of the existence of continuous utility functions and, second, under
proposition 2, provide proofs of an (additively) separable utility function from the assumption
of (additively) separable preferences. As a starting point, in section 2, Koopmans defined and
described the mathematical properties of a complete preference ordering on a prospect space.
In section 3, drawing on the results found in Debreu (1959), Koopmans announced proposition
1 for continuous as well as non-continuous preference relations.37
    In section 4, building on the previous works by Leontief (1947a, b), Samuelson (1947, chapter
seven) and, especially, Debreu ([1959] 1960), Koopmans proved preliminarily the existence of a
separable utility function under the assumption of two independent components of consump-
tion.38,39 After the definitions of some particular mathematical properties related to preference
relations, the author attained what he called Result A:40

                                          U (x) = F (u(xP ), v(xQ )).                                       (4.4)

According to Koopmans (1972a, p. 88), “A function of this form has been called a utility tree
by strotz (1956, 1959), and a separable utility function by gorman (1959a, b).”41 The idea
of separability in the utility function, therefore, implies that “(...) instead of one function U of
nP + nQ variables (...),” there is “(...) a triple of functions, one (F ) of two variables, one (u) of
nP , and one (v) of nQ ” (Koopmans 1972a, p. 88).
    In section 5, mathematically the most challenging one, he began tackling the subject of
an additively separable utility function under a Euclidean (n-dimensional) commodity space,
partitioned into three independent subsets (n = 3). Unlike proposition 1, where Koopmans
resorted to a definition found in Debreu (1959), the arguments used to attain proposition 2
were drawn from Debreu ([1959] 1960) instead, related now to the definition of a cardinal
utility function applied to “independent factors of the action set.”42 Koopmans then reached
the following additive separable utility function (proposition 2):

                                   U ∗ (x) = u∗ (xP ) + v ∗ (xQ ) + w∗ (xR ),                               (5.4)

which is said to be unique up to a linear transformation.
    In section 6, Koopmans extended the existence proof of an additively separable utility func-
tions for the case of additively separable preferences defined in a commodity space with more
than three variables (that is, the case of more than three independent components of consump-
tion, n ≥ 3). His important conclusion, called result C, presents the following continuous utility
function,
                              U (x) = u1 (x1 ) + u2 (x2 ) + ... + uk (xk ),                 (6.3)
unique up to an increasing linear transformation.
   In section 7, the author basically discussed why proving additively separable preferences in
the case with two commodities (n = 2) is harder than in the case where there exists three or
  37
     The actual announcement of proposition 1 was based on the assumption of continuity of %.
  38
     It is interesting to observe that Debreu himself referred to Samuelson’s (1947) Foundations of Economic
Analysis on the subject.
  39
     “Preliminarily” because Koopmans will return to this case in section 7 of his article.
  40
     Henceforth, I keep Koopmans’s (1972a) equation numbering.
  41
     There is a typo in Koopmans’s text: Robert Strotz’s papers that dealt with the concept of utility tree were
his 1957 and 1959 articles, not his 1956 paper.
  42
     Besides this case, Debreu ([1959] 1960) also studied the concept of cardinal utility in two other situations:
“stochastic objects of choice” and “stochastic acts of choice.”


                                                       14
more commodities (n ≥ 3). In Koopmans’s (1972a, p. 101) words, the latter case “(...) leads
to a more special class of representation than the case k = 2.” The whole point is tightened up
to the question of why not every function of separable form, such as that obtained in result A,
U (x) = F (u(xP ), v(xQ )), can be expressed as an additively function of separable form

                                        U ∗ (x) = u∗ (xP ) + v ∗ (xQ ),                        (7.1)

This discussion matters because this development would turn out to be important in macroe-
conomics.

4.2       Representation of preference ordering over time
While the appraisals of preference orderings moved from an emphasis on prospect space (Koop-
mans 1972a) to an emphasis over time (Koopmans 1972b), the propositions obtained in the
first article were used to attain the goal set out in the second one. I briefly discussed both
propositions above, which concerned, first, the existence of a continuous utility function and,
second, the existence of an additively separable utility function (first, for the n = 3 case, and
later extended to n ≥ 3).
     If the first article fulfilled an essential role in introducing all necessary ingredients for a
rigorous discussion of preferences on a prospect space, namely the propositions and their corre-
sponding proofs, the greatest merit of the second article consisted in its de facto re-assessment
of the postulates or axioms (of preference relations) in light of such novel developments (the
propositions). It is worth noting that Koopmans had already discussed painstakingly the very
same postulates in a series of papers in the 1960s, including, of course, his paper on optimal
growth (Koopmans 1963). By rescuing such discussions in a time setting in the 1970s, he in-
tended to provide proof of existence of an additively separable utility function. Furthermore,
in the author’s own words, “(...) both propositions are applied in discussing the choice of a cri-
terion for the evaluation of growth paths, starting from postulates about a preference ordering
of such paths” (Koopmans 1972a, p. 81-2).
     In section 2, titled “Postulates Concerning a Preference Ordering over Time,” Koopmans
sought to re-analyze all five postulates previously studied in Koopmans (1960) and Koopmans
et al. (1964), this time enumerating them in the following arrangement: continuity (P1),
sensitivity (P2), complete independence (P3) (consists in a stronger case, in which both the
“limited” independence, P30 , and the “extended” independence, P300 , postulates hold), sta-
tionarity (P4), and monotonicity (P5) (which includes a stronger case denominated “extreme
programs”); Koopmans aimed at re-framing them as axioms of choices in a time setting and no
longer taking their algebraic representations as given.43 In the article an important emphasis
is then placed on the postulate of independence by encompassing P30 and P300 , for they “(...)
facilitate explorations of the implications of the fourth postulate, the real objective of this study
(...)” (Koopmans 1972b, p. 107).
     Specifically, instead of focusing on P30 , as he did in the aforementioned articles, the focus
now rested on the implications of P3. The modification in the weight given to a crucial axiom
was meant to “(...) preclude all complementarity between the consumption of different peri-
ods” (ibid.), that is, to ensure a separable utility function. Put in another way, if stationarity
disregards whatever past values a consumption vector 1 xt−1 assumed before a certain time (in
any consumption program), and disregards the exact time those changes began, then it can
be attained through the validity of postulate P3 (P30 and P300 hold). With all the postulates
propounded, Koopmans sought to build a representation of preference relations on the entire
program space 1 X “(...) or on as large a subspace of it as we can” (ibid.).
 43
      According to Koopmans, the postulate P3 is attributable to Gorman (1968).


                                                      15
    In section 3, the two propositions discussed in Koopmans (1972a) will then finally aid in
the construction of such representations. The first outcome, called result D, churned out the
following utility function for all time T :

                    UT (1 xT ) = u(x1 ) + αu(x2 ) + ... + αT −1 u(xT ),          0 < α < 1,                  (3.2)

where u(x) is a continuous utility function defined on X and independent of T , while α is also
independent of T .
    In section 5, Koopmans reached probably one of his most (and last) important results in the
field of infinite horizon economies, the attainment of a representation of preference ordering (a
utility function) on the space of programs bounded in utility.44,45 Formally, any consumption
program 1 x = (x1 , x2 , ..., xt , ...) is bounded in utility if there exist vectors x and x in X such
that x % xt % x, for all t.
    Hence, on the large subspace of the program space bounded in preference (made possible
with the application of propositions 1 and 2), for example, 1 X ∗ , the ordering % can therefore
be represented by the continuous utility function
                                              ∞
                                              X
                                  U (1 x) ≡         αt−1 u(xt ),   0 < α < 1,                                (5.1)
                                              t=1

which is a result that consists in his proposition 3.
    As acknowledged by Koopmans in section 6, the utility function (5.1) surprisingly exhibited
strong implications of the axioms used to derive it. Moreover, he emphasized the roles played
by two mathematical concepts in the studies of program changes in future periods and, there-
fore, of direct concern to the evaluation of growth paths: while the function u(x) allowed the
comparison of utility differences in the same period, the discount factor α enabled the compar-
ison of utility differences in different periods. Koopmans then went on to discuss cases with
and without the discount factor (see Duarte (2016) for an overall analysis).
    In section 7, Koopmans (1972b, p. 117) synthesized the results he had found thus far: “If
instead of complete independence (P3) we postulate only limited independence (P30 ), Proposi-
tion 2 is not available, and we must fall back on Result A.” That is, without the assumption of
separable preferences, guaranteed by the axiom of complete independence (P3), an additively
separable utility function (proposition 2) would have been impossible and, accordingly, the best
offshoot would be a separable utility function as obtained under Result A (equation 4.4). He
nevertheless pointed to an interesting result obtained by Diamond (1965) (Existence Theorem)
in which an aggregate utility function identical to expression (1.2) above was obtained through
a different set of postulates, all applied to a preference ordering as well.46
    Finally, as I anticipated, in the concluding part of the article the author highlighted the
special role played by the stationary assumption (P4) in producing:
           (...) interesting special forms for the utility function U (1 x) in terms of simpler
       functions u(x) and possibly V (u, U ), that facilitate the use of U (1 x) in models
       of optimal economic growth, and may perhaps suggest further parametrization or
       other specialization for econometric studies of individual consumption plans over
       time (Koopmans 1972b, p. 121-2, italics added).
In other words, the passage referred to the equation obtained in proposition 3, that is, the
  44
     I will skip directly to the principal arguments of section 5 since is more general and, furthermore, comprises
the main result found in section 4.
  45
     As pointed out by Christ and Hurwicz (2008), the term “bounded in preference” is preferable to the term
“bounded in utility,” used by Koopmans, because no numerical utility is involved in his definition.
  46
     The postulates were P10 , P2, P30 , P4, and P50 .


                                                          16
expression (5.1), or the expression (1.2), which were previously obtained in Koopmans (1960)
and Koopmans et al. (1964). Such expressions are also known to be in recursive stationary
form, where the preference ordering would remain the same even if the timing of all periods
were moved one period into the future.
    I have discussed in this section two important changes in Koopmans’s works in the 1970s.
The first one was how he changed the emphasis from the axioms/postulates concerning utility
functions to those concerning preference orderings/relations. The second change was the ex-
tension of such an analysis over time. An important similarity between the 1970s articles and
his earlier writings consisted, again, in the author’s preoccupation with aggregation issues and,
as a result, the representative consumer.
    In essence, by asking “(...) [if] one may wish to examine whether, or under what conditions,
an aggregate preference ordering over time can be imputed, on an ‘as if’ basis, to a society of
individual decision-makers each guided by his own preference ordering over time” (Koopmans
1972b, p. 104), and by considering it “(...) the ultimate goal of a theory of preference over
time for an economy with private wealth (...)” (ibid.), Koopmans indeed tried to tackle the
same Post-World War II theoretical challenges raised by Kenneth Arrow, James Buchanan and
Gordon Tullock in such different fields as Social Choice Theory and Public Choice Theory.47
    Interestingly, due to the key role of economic planning in the postwar context, and given
the debates over whether the difference between social choice and public choice theories could
be framed as positive or normative interpretations, Koopmans might have felt compelled to
address the same issue.48 In his words, “In regard to preference over time, the simplest inter-
pretation of the orderings that have been studied most thus far is a normative one” (ibid.).
In contrast, he also stated that: “Another possible interpretation is that one wishes to study
descriptively the preference ordering of an individual with regard to his life-time consumption
program, assuming that such an ordering is implicit in his decisions” (ibid.).


5     Concluding Remarks
The Dutch physicist and economist Tjalling Koopmans wrote seminal articles in three areas
of research in economics: activity analysis, econometric theory and intertemporal economics
(infinite horizon economies). For his several contributions to the theme of optimal allocation
of resources, he was awarded the 1975 Nobel Prize in Economics.
    This article investigated Koopmans’s contributions to the intertemporal economics litera-
ture, also considered to be within the realm of optimal allocation of resources, in an attempt to
uncover the factors that might have influenced his stance toward a methodological device used
in optimal growth models: the representative consumer. To do so, I focused specifically on his
contributions to the subfield in the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s.
    By separating his contributions into those subperiods, I was able to observe in more detail
the evolution of his thinking. From a greater concern with aggregation problems in the 1950s,
he shifted to a more practical emphasis in the 1960s. In the 1970s, Koopmans’s works became
more interrelated with the instrumental needs of macroeconomists, understood as the use of
additive separable utility functions. In the works of all those periods, a certain vagueness is
noticeable in the use of the term “representative consumer.”
    The analysis in this article can be enhanced in at least one direction. Koopmans’s con-
   47
      During the Cold War new approaches to decision sciences emerged, based mostly on the role played by
a rational economic agent. The literature on Social Choice Theory (Arrow ([1951] 1963) and Public Choice
Theory (Buchanan and Tullock 1962) were parts of this movement (see Amadae 2003).
   48
      As explained by Judy Klein (2007), both World War II and the Cold War forced the US government into
planning (or “programming”), even though such conflicts represented, on the one side, capitalism and the
free-market and, on the other side, state corporatism and central planning.


                                                   17
struction of additive separable utility functions in the 1970s seems to have followed the overall
change in economics that took place after the adoption of homothetic preferences in the 1950s
(in an effort that took Paul Samuelson almost thirty years). These joint facts seem to have
favoured a higher use of the representative agent in macroeconomics in the 1980s with the
advent of the Real Business Cycle School and, later, in the 1990s, with the emergence of the
so-called New Neoclassical Synthesis.


References

Acemoglu, Daron. 2009. Introduction to Modern Economic Growth. Princeton: Princeton
   University Press.
Amadae, Sonja. 2003. Rationalizing Capitalist Democracy - The Cold War Origing of Rational
   Choice liberalism. Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press.
Arrow, Kenneth. [1951] 1963. Social Choice and Individual Values. New York: John Wiley
   and Sons.
Blackborby, Charles, Daniel Primont, and Robert Russel. 2008. Gorman, W.M. (Terence). In:
   S. N. Durlauf and L. E. Blume (eds.), The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. Second
   edition. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Brock, William, and Leonard Mirman. 1972. Optimal Economic Growth and Uncertainty -
   The Discounted Case. The Journal of Economic Theory, 4: 479-513.
Buchanan, James, and Gordon Tullock. 1962. The Calculus of Consent - Logical Foundations
   of Constitutional Democracy. Indianapolis: Liberty Fund.
Carrol, Christopher D. 2001. A Theory of the Consumption Function, With and Without
   Liquidity Constraints. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15(3): 23-45.
Chipman, John. 2006. Koopmans, Tjalling Charles (1910-1985). In: Ross Emmett (ed.), The
   Biographical Dictionary of American Economists, vol. 2, pp. 525-535. London: Thoemmes
   Continuum.
Christ, Carl F., and Leonid Hurwicz. 2008. Tjalling Charles Koopmans (1910-1985). In: S.
   N. Durlauf and L. E. Blume (eds.), The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. Second
   edition. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Collard, David. 1996. Pigou and future generations: a Cambridge tradition. Cambridge
   Journal of Economics, 20: 585-597.
Deaton, Angus, and John Muellbauer. 1980. Economics and Consumer Behaviour. Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press.
Debreu, Gerard. 1959. Theory of Value: An Axiomatic Analysis of Economic Equilibrium.
   New Haven and London: Yale University Press.
——. [1959] 1960. Topological Methods in Cardinal Utility Theory. In: K. Arrow, S. Karlin,
   and P. Suppes (eds.), Mathematical Methods in the Social Sciences, pp. 16-26. Stanford,
   CA: Stanford University Press.
De Vroey, Michel. 2016. A History of Macroeconomics from Keynes to Lucas and Beyond.
   Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Diamond, Peter A. 1965. The Evaluation of Infinite Utility Streams. Econometrica, 33: 170-
   177.
Duarte, Pedro Garcia. 2016. A Path Through the Wilderness: Time Discounting in Growth
   Models. History of Political Economy, 48(2): 265-306.
Düppe, Till, and E. Roy Weintraub. 2014. Siting the New Economic Science: The Cowles
   Commission’s Activity Analysis Conference of June 1949. Science in Context, 27(3): 453-
   483.
Fisher, Irving. 1930. The Theory of Interest. New York: Macmillan.

                                               18
Friedman, Milton. 1957. A Theory of the Consumption Function. Princeton: Princeton Uni-
    versity Press.
Gorman, William (Terence). 1953. Community Preference Fields. Econometrica, 21(1): 63-80.
——. 1959a. Separable Utility and Aggregation. Econometrica, 27(3): 469-481.
——. 1959b. The Empirical Implications of a Utility Tree: A Further Comment. Econometrica,
    27(3): 489.
——. 1968. The Structure of Utility Functions. ReviewPof Economic Studies, 37: 367-390.
Hands, D. Wade. 2012. What a Difference a Sum ( ) Makes: Success and Failure in the
    Rationalization of Demand. Journal of the History of Economic Thought, 34(3): 379-396.
——. 2016. The Individual and the Market: Paul Samuelson on (Homothetic) Santa Claus
    Economics. The European Journal of the History of Economic Thought, 23(3): 425-452.
Herfeld, Catherine. 2018. From Theories of Human Behaviour to Rules of Rational Choice:
    Tracing a Normative Turn at the Cowles Commission. History of Political Economy, 50(1):
    1-48.
Hoover, Kevin. 2012. Microfoundational Programs. In: P. G. Duarte and G. T. Lima (eds.),
    Microfoundations Reconsidered - The Relationship of Micro and Macroeconomics in Histor-
    ical Perspective, pp. 19-61. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Klein, Judy. 2007. Cold War, Dynamic Programming, and the Science of Economizing: Bell-
    man Strikes Gold in Policy Space. First Annual Conference on the History of Recent Eco-
    nomics.
Koopmans, Tjalling Charles Papers (TKP). Manuscript and Archives, Yale University Library.
Koopmans, Tjalling C. 1950. Utility Analysis of Decisions Affecting Future Well-Being. Econo-
    metrica, 18(2): 173-192.
——, ed. 1951. Activity Analysis of Production and Distribution: Proceeding of a Conference.
    New York: John Wiley and Sons.
——. 1953. La Notion d’Utilité dans le Cas de Décisions Concernant Le Bien-Être Futur.
    Cahiers du Séminaire d’Économétrie, 2: 7-10.
——. 1957. Three Essays on the State of Economic Science. New York: McGraw-Hill Book
    Company.
——. 1959. Stationary Ordinal Utility and Impatience. Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper
    No. 81.
——. 1960. Stationary Ordinal Utility and Impatience. Econometrica, 28(2): 287-309.
——. 1962. On Flexibility of Future Preferences. Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No.
    150.
——. 1963. On the Concept of Optimal Economic Growth. Cowles Foundation Discussion
    Paper No. 163.
——. 1964. On Flexibility of Future Preferences. In: Beckmann, M.; C. Christ., and M.
    Nerlove (eds.), The Scientific Papers of Tjalling C. Koopmans, vol. 1, pp. 469-480. Berlin:
    Springer-Verlag, 1970.
——. 1965. On the Concept of Optimal Economic Growth. In: Study Week on the Econometric
    Approach to Development Planning, first part, pp. 225-300. Rome: Pontifical Academy of
    Science.
——. 1966. Structure of Preference Over Time. Cowles Foundation discussion paper 206.
——. 1972a. Representation of Preference Orderings with Independent Components of Con-
    sumption. In: T. C. Koopmans (ed.), The Scientific Papers of Tjalling C. Koopmans, vol.
    2, pp. 81-102. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press.
——. 1972b. Representation of Preference Orderings Over Time. In: T. C. Koopmans (ed.),
    The Scientific Papers of Tjalling C. Koopmans, vol. 2, pp. 103-124. Cambridge, Mass.:
    The MIT Press.



                                              19
——. [1975] 1992. Concepts of Optimality and Their Uses. In: A. Lindbeck (ed.), Nobel
   Lectures, Economics 1969-1980. Singapore: World Scientific Publishing Co.
——, ed. 1985. The Scientific Papers of Tjalling C. Koopmans. Vol. 2. Cambridge, Mass:
   The MIT Press.
Koopmans, Tjalling, Peter Diamond, and Richard Williamson. 1962. Stationary Utility and
   Time Perspective. Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No. 142.
Koopmans, Tjalling, Peter Diamond, and Richard Williamson. 1964. Stationary Utility and
   Time Perspective. Econometrica, 32(1/2): 82-100.
Leontief, Wassily. 1947a. Introduction to a Theory of the Internal Structure of Functional
   Relationships. Econometrica, 15: 361-373.
——. 1947b. A Note on the Interrelation of Subsets of Independent Variables of a Continuous
   Function with Continuous First Derivatives. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society,
   53: 343-350.
Lewbel, Arthur. 1994. An Examination of Werner Hildenbrand’s Market Demand. Journal of
   Economic Literature, 32(4): 1832-1841.
Mas-Colell, Andreu, Michael Whinston, and Jerry Green. 1995. Microeconomic Theory. New
   York and Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mirowski, Philip. 2002. Machine Dreams - Economics Becomes a Cyborg Science. Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press.
——. 2012. The Cowles Commission as an Anti-Keynesian stronghold 1943-1954. In: P. G.
   Duarte and G. T. Lima (eds.), Microfoundations Reconsidered - The Relationship of Micro
   and Macroeconomics in Historical Perspective, pp. 131-167. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Muellbauer, John. 1976. Community Preferences and the Representative Consumer. Econo-
   metrica, 44(5): 979-999.
Niehans, Jürg. 1990. A History of Economic Theory - Classic Contributions, 1720-1980.
   Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Phlips, Louis. 1983. Applied Consumption Analysis - Revised and Enlarged Edition. Amster-
   dam: North Holland.
Ramsey, Frank. 1928. A Mathematical Theory of Saving. The Economic Journal, 38(152):
   543-559.
Rizvi, S. Abu Turab. 2006. The Sonnenschein-Mantel-Debreu Results after Thirty Years.
   In: P. Mirowski and D. Wade Hands (eds.), Agreement on Demand: Consumer Theory in
   Twentieth-Century. Annual Supplement to volume 38 of History of Political Economy, pp.
   228-245. Durham: Duke University Press.
Samuelson, Paul A. 1947. Foundations of Economic Analysis. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
   versity Press.
——. 1956. Social Indifference Curves. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 70(1): 1-22.
Samuelson, Paul A., and Robert M. Solow. 1956. A Complete Capital Model Involving Het-
   erogeneous Capital Goods. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 70(4): 537-562.
Scarf, Herbert. 1995. Tjalling Charles Koopmans 1910-1985 - A Biographical Memoir. Wash-
   ington DC: National Academies Press.
Strotz, Robert H. 1956. Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization. Review
   of Economic Studies, 23: 165-180.
——. 1957. The Empirical Implications of a Utility Tree. Econometrica, 25: 269-280.
——. 1959. The Utility Tree - A Correction and Further Appraisal. Econometrica, 27: 482-488.
Theil, Henri. 1954. Linear Aggregation of Economic Relations. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Werin, Lars, and Karl Jungenfelt. 1976. Tjalling Koopmans’ Contributions to Economics. The
   Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 78(1): 81-102.




                                             20
