Título do trabalho: The History of Metal Leve S.A. and its leadership in the Brazilian auto parts
industry: 1950-1996
Autor: Jaques Kerstenetzky, Instituto de Economia da UFRJ

Abstract: Narrative of the life history of Metal Leve from its creation in the beginning of the 1950’s to
growth, success and leadership in the Brazilian auto parts industry, and up until the 1990’s problems
related to competition from multinationals and changes in the international trade policy that brought its
denationalization.
The Business History case follows Alfred Marshall’s evolutionary conception of firms and their life cycle
and is analyzed against the background of the Brazilian economy and its automobile industry, as well as
the world automobile industry.

Key words: Business History; auto parts; Metal Leve S.A.

Resumo: Narrativa do ciclo de vida da Metal Leve desde a sua criação no início da década de 1950,
passando pelo crescimento, sucesso e liderança na indústria brasileira de autopeças, e culminando nos
problemas relacionados com a concorrência de multinacionais e mudanças na política de comércio
exterior dos anos 1990 que trouxeram sua desnacionalização.
O estudo de caso da empresa brasileira emprega uma abordagem marshalliana da firma e seu ciclo de vida
e tem como pano de fundo a economia brasileira e sua indústria automobilística, bem como a indústria
automobilística mundial.

Palavras-chave: História de empresas; autopeças; Metal Leve S.A.

Área da Anpec: área 3, História Econômica

Classificação JEL: N86




                                                                                                            1
The History of Metal Leve S.A and its leadership in the Brazilian auto parts
industry: 1950-1996
                                                                                         Jaques Kerstenetzky (IE-UFRJ)

Introduction
        Metal Leve (ML) figures as an unsuccessful business case in the fall out from liberalization, which
was particularly disruptive for Brazilian business activity in the auto parts sector, such that even iconic
national businesses ended up being denationalized.1 The account that follows aims to explain Metal
Leve’s prolific growth and abrupt decline, culminating in the sale of the shares of the tight-knit group - or
of their descendents - that had controlled it since its foundation to a foreign company in 1996.2
        In this way, Metal Leve’s case is emblematic of business in a peripheral country in the era of
globalization. During the decades of import substitution industrialization, ML was recognized for its
national business excellence, achieving international recognition in the 80s as a supplier to foreign
companies through its exports, only a few years later to be denationalized, faced with an adverse situation
in the 90s. Ownership and control were given over to a large German auto parts firm that had already
taken part in the early phases of its history.3 The case contains nuances that give it marked characteristics
and interest in its own right, while also marking it out as representative of the development and
transformation of the auto parts manufacturing sector and automobile industry in Brazil and the world.
        The narrative’s construction follows an evolutionary conception of business history inspired by
Alfred Marshall’s writing. His idea of life cycle of firms gives due attention to the accumulation of
capabilities and solutions to problems in the different areas of business activity, such as production and
technology, workforce qualification and training, the firm’s internal organization, its relationship to the
market, as well as financing its operations. The evolutionary conception stresses that the quality of
solutions is related to the configuration of elements inside and outside the company that change over time
as a result of the action of the firm and other agents, moving away from ideas of equilibrium in favor of
an organic growth trajectory in which growth itself brings with it new problems. The incapacity to keep
introducing effective solutions may indicate ossification and decay, that is, entering decline in the
business life cycle (Marshall, 1961, chapter XI §5 and chapter XII §6; Kerstenetzky, 2010: pp 573-5).
        Five phases were identified in the company’s life and in its relationship with its environment: the
first phase is the birth of the company in the immediate post-war years; the second is marked by the
establishment of the car industry in Brazil followed by the crisis and the slowdown in the Brazilian
economy; the third phase is characterized by the return of growth with the cycle of expansion and
reversal, starting in 1968 through to the end of the 70s; the fourth corresponds to the issues and
contradictions of the troubled 80s; the fifth and final phase is marked by the opening of the economy and
globalization, which led to the the company’s sale. It is worth noting here that if the firm still exists as a
result of acquisition by another company, from the viewpoint of a business history focusing on business
capabilities, it is reasonable to think of the end of the life cycle.
        Exemplary as the company was, the case raises age-old questions about protectionism and
efficiency. Did the company become complacent under the auspices of protectionism? Were the workings
of global competition different from those at home?

Birth and the first phase (1950-1956): a particular historical context
       In the first decades of the 20th century, fluctuations in international trade linked to the world wars
1
  Cofap and Varga are further comparable cases.
2
  This chapter drew on material from my master’s thesis on the History of Metal Leve (Kerstenetzky 1985) for the company’s
history up to 1978. I still feel indebted to Jacob Frenkel, who advised the master thesis work, and grateful for the company’s
support which enabled many interviews with company’s members, and free access to data and archives. For the more recent
phases of the business history case I thank Sergio Mindlin, who gave me access to José Mindlin’s personal archive and kindly
accepted to be interviewed twice. I am also grateful for the comments and suggestions by Werner Baer, Eduardo Pontual, and
also by Celia Lessa Kerstenetzky.
3
  The acquisition initially involved other buyers, such as Cofap, but the latter ended up being sold to Mahle. These details do
not feature in this account.


                                                                                                                                  2
and the Great Depression brought about alternating periods of ease and difficulty of importation, resulting
in the emergence of a set of industrial companies that operated precariously and was eventually able to
translate into effective units of industrial production. In the specific case of auto parts manufacturers, the
fleet of vehicles in circulation, produced abroad but eventually assembled in Brazil, as of 1919, required
maintenance and replacement of parts worn by use and precarious road conditions. National piston
production could take place in periods of difficulty in importation by using sand-casting moulds and
overhauling machines to make pistons. The resulting product was high in cost, poor quality and small in
scale.
         The development of production capacity from this fragile base depended on the evolution of
foreign trade. The 1929 crisis and later, World War II, were favorable to the appearance of auto parts
manufacturers in Brazil. In 1941 there were five manufacturers, which rose to 30 in 1946 and 250 in
1952. Import liberalization after World War II threatened this precarious production, which managed to
proliferate due to fast depletion of exchange reserves accumulated during the war. The context of
alternation manifested itself yet further with the new interruption of normality in foreign trade due to the
Korean War in the early 50s. Alternation of ease and difficulties for imports allowed the fleet to grow and
also for production capacity to take root through the importing of equipment – not without moments of
real threat to businesses, owing to its unpredictable nature and changes in economic policy guidelines, as
can be noted in the early days of ML’s history.
         Metal Leve had its origin in a previous company called Motorit, a piston ring manufacturer, set up
in 1941, with Samuel Klabin, A. Buck and Ludwig Gleich as its partners. With import liberalization after
the war, the plant was transformed into an overhauling business, unable as it was to compete with
imported rings. Machinery in good condition from the war effort was imported from the US and
Switzerland. The firm’s difficulties in obtaining pistons led to the idea of producing them inside the
company. Gleich, who had emigrated from Germany before the war, had been an overhauler in Berlin,
and came to the attention of Ernst Mahle, a German piston manufacturer, through old clientele ties. The
future of auto parts production in Germany was still uncertain in that post-war phase, whereas Brazil had
distinct advantages in its fleet, bauxite reserves and water power (Penna, 2014). José Mindlin, who was a
lawyer for Motorit, prepared the certificate of incorporation and looked to his friend Luiz Camillo de
Oliveira Netto, Managing Director of the Banco de Crédito Real in Minas Gerais, who could not make the
loan, but who recommended Walther Moreira Salles, then Loan Portfolio Manager at Banco do Brasil.
The latter granted a loan of Cr$400.000,00, which it is worth mentioning reflected a 70% debt ratio4 in
the new company’s first annual balance sheet. Luiz Camillo networked further to ease the necessary
bureaucracy and Mahle’s way. So, Mahle immigrated to Brazil and became a partner in the new
company, bringing on board his production capabilities, German machinery and operators, thus
establishing from the outset a high level of technical qualification. As partners, there remained Buck, an
Austrian Jew-turned-Brazilian citizen and Gleich’s partner in Motorit, who was in charge of company
finances and the running of the company, Samuel Klabin, José Mindlin and Luiz Camillo, as well as
Gleich, and finally Mahle, who received a 10% share in the company for his technological contribution.
Two years later, Abrahão Jacob Lafer, who was related to the Klabin family, and Aldo Franco joined the
board. The company of 50 white and blue collar workers was set up in Rua Independência in the Cambucí
neighborhood of São Paulo City, on a plot of 2,800m2, where the office, foundry and machining operated,
in a first production line made up of German machines with a production capacity of 220,000 pistons per
year.
         The history of the founding of the company brings out the exceptional nature of a high-technology
industrial company in a peripheral country. There were clear opportunities, skills were present and, to
some extent, they followed in the footsteps of service providers-turned-industrial companies, with greater
or lesser technical difficulty. Thus it is that, in Metal Leve’s case, circumstances and personal ties were
decisive. The difficulties and uncertainties of a German firm in the post-war years along with former
clientele ties between Gleich and Mahle helped solve the technical problem. At a time of strong
fluctuations in the trade balance, not only was financing solved with arguments for the benefits of

4
    Measured by the debt divided by the total liability of the company’s balance sheet.


                                                                                                                 3
industrialization, but also with personal ties. Moreover, personal and community ties brought together a
group of partners and their families for the whole of the company’s history in a consensus-based
management style in which robustness, caution, competence, but also mutual trust were present. It is also
worth noting that, in the last years of national company control, the survival of these relations was
evaluated negatively, as it took its toll on the restructuring of the business.5 We will come on to this later.
        Getting back to the story, Ernst Mahle ended up returning to Germany still in the 50s and selling
his share in the company. The relationship with the German manufacturer - and after with his firm -
proceeded in a sequence of three assistance contracts, which were renewed until 1975. It is worth saying
in advance here that the relationship ended due to the condition imposed by Mahle GmbH for the signing
of the fourth contract, of a stake in Metal Leve’s capital.6 ML chose to put an end to the relationship and
to allocate the sums that formerly went on royalties to a technology centre, replacing assistance by an
increased push for their own development. The centre was financed with a loan from FINEP, and Mahle
GmbH, demonstrating its intentions in relation to the Brazilian market, bought the Brazilian piston
manufacturer, CIMA, in 1978. We will also return to this later.
        A detail of the market prospects of the then-new company relates to the fact that pistons are parts
requiring high manufacturing standards and precision to the scale of thousandths of a millimeter. Metal
Leve, with German technological backing and through its own development, had for much of its existence
only one minor competitor supplying to automobile manufacturers (OEM),7 CIMA, and few other rivals
in the market for replacement of the fleet’s worn parts (the so called aftermarket), so that it covered
significant parts of the market. In the mid-50s, for instance, it made up something around 75% of installed
capacity in piston manufacture. The situation only began to change with the arrival of foreign companies
at the end of the 60s and, even then, slowly. It is worth pointing out that ML never lost its position as the
largest-ever manufacturer and supplier of its products to automobile assembly plants in Brazil.
        A distinctly conservative management style spans the company’s history, figuring in the
company’s memory from an episode from its early years (Campos and Pinto, 2007; Kerstenetzky, 1985).
In March, 1951, having produced 100,000 pistons, a study carried out by suggestion of the Banco do
Brasil revealed that a second production line would allow ML to meet the demand of the piston market,
doing away with imports, which could be banned through CEXIM8 controls based on the principle of the
existence of a similar national product. The second line was ordered, but, soon after, fear that conflict
from the Korean War might once again interrupt overseas supplies led the government to suspend import
controls in April, 1951, which made Ford suspend a Metal Leve order of 150,000 pistons. CEXIM
accepted import license applications until it was convinced there was sufficient national piston
production, again refusing piston import licenses in January, 1952. This left Metal Leve in dire straits
until all the imported pistons were sold, and the company had to turn to different banks for help. The
episode remained in the company’s history as a lesson in caution, an example of which, with
consequences for the future, is the financial management of the company, which operated throughout its
history with growth financed by internally-generated resources and a very low level of debt, as we shall
see later in the story.
        Aside from this extraordinary episode, the market offered remunerative prices and profitability,
which were reflected in a reduction in the high initial debt levels, in continual decline after the import
liberation episode was digested, until reaching a level of around 15% of the company’s liabilities in the
mid-50s.
        To conclude with an assessment of this initial phase of Metal Leve’s life cycle, the replacement
market and the protection mechanisms, together with technical quality, the almost total lack of
competition and the prices charged allowed the company to reduce its debt level (from 70% initially to
15% in the mid-50s) and at the same time to grow at very high rates, in such a way that
production capacity increased fivefold. These were the years of greatest profitability in the company’s

5
  Vassalo (1996).
6
  According to an interview given to Indústria Brasileira (Campos e Pinto, 2007), José Mindlin replied that the stake was not
impossible, but that it could not be imposed.
7
  Original equipment manufacturer.
8
  A Banco do Brasil division that administered import controls.


                                                                                                                                4
history. During the following phases, profits declined with the development of the market represented by
purchases of automobile manufacturers, who started to manufacture vehicles in Brazil, and as foreign
competitors entered the market. Even so, we will see that the company could face the threat of
competition from foreign companies until the abrupt turnabout in the 90s completely changed the
situation.

Industrialization and Brazilian automobiles
        The industrializing stance the country had been adopting during the 50s became official with the
Target Plan of Juscelino Kubitschek’s government, in such a way that we can identify the beginning of
the company’s second phase after the establishment of the automobile industry in Brazil in 1956. The
auto parts market started to expand, supplying to the Brazilian automobile industry, in addition to the auto
parts replacement market.
        In the conception of the Brazilian automobile industry’s policy, the choice was made for a non-
vertical structure, with the recommendation to manufacturers to subcontract for parts supply. Economic
policy guidelines established progressive nationalization targets and conditions favorable to importing
equipment and parts that complemented national production.9 As a result, parts manufacturers, having
emerged in a turbulent, precarious environment, not only had their place guaranteed, but were also
transformed by the presence of demanding buyers, who brought with them an expanding and more
predictable market (the OEM). It is significant that the resultant industrial structure represented a
peculiar experience of small, flexible parts manufacturers.Given the smaller dimensions of the market and
of auto manufacturing, it was impossible to fully enjoy typical economies of scale of the sector at that
time. Varied and flexible production remained a national trait throughout the sector’s history.
International experience, by contrast, showed a greater degree of vertical integration. In the extreme case
of the United States, for example, automobile manufacturers produced their own pistons at that time.
        The predictability was linked to the fact that demand for vehicles had become more in tune with
the Brazilian macroeconomic evolution, even more so because there followed a period with relatively few
big external shocks from foreign trade. Furthermore, the new phase of industrialization promoted an
internal dynamics of investment, income generation and consumption. Transformations included the
creation of financing mechanisms for durable goods. A complete cycle of growth and slowdown can thus
be seen in the Brazilian economy and in its automobile industry, with expansion in 1956-1962 and
recession in 1963-67, and likewise for Metal Leve, in what I am calling the second phase of its life cycle.
        In 1957, Metal Leve was able to produce 1,200,000 pistons per year, which represented three
quarters of national capacity. Of its competitors, only CIMA also sold to manufacturers, but its capacity
was only 140,000 pistons per year. Other manufacturers had an individual capacity of no more than
40,000 units and only supplied distributors or retailers, when they didn’t produce for their own use, as in
the case of overhaul services.10
        Concerning the implantation of the automobile industry, Metal Leve presented a number of
expansion projects to the GEIA.11 The first, which was approved in August 1956, involved the installation
of a fourth production line with a capacity for 500,000 pistons. It not only increased capacity by 42%, but
also allowed interruption in the use of the old production lines for repairs. The equipment was imported
from Mahle for the sum of DM 999,337.84, financed over five years at 6% interest per year. The second
project involved specific lines for the production of large pistons that had been produced on existing lines,
causing a great deal of wear and loss of quality due to the high content of silicon in its alloys. The
increase in capacity took in 120,000 pistons annually for tractors and trucks, 1,200 pistons for ship and
rail engines and 25,000 pistons for General Motors, in addition to 500,000 pistons corresponding to one

9
   There is no space here to detail the measures, but the literature on Brazilian industrialization is abundant and well-known.
See, for example, Baer (2014).
10
   According to CIMA’s investment project approved by GEIA (resolution no. 40), which would enlarge its capacity by 150%.
Incidentally, by contrast, CIMA did not manage to get the financing and in 1960 applied with another project seven times
smaller in value.
11
   The Executive Group for the Automotive Industry, a government agency set up by the government to advance the sector’s
implantation.


                                                                                                                                  5
more line of light pistons. The equipment was also imported from Mahle, for the sum of DM
2,514,894.00, and with the same financing conditions as before. The third project, which was approved in
September 1958, referred to the installation of induction furnaces to complement those already in use,
with the aim of preparing alloys in the factory, in order to avoid difficulties obtaining them at home &
overseas. The project also included enlargement of production capacity of pins and forging presses. The
equipment, once again, was imported from Mahle, under the same conditions, for the sum of DM
1,186,790.00. The three expansion projects approximately tripled the existing stock of machines and
installations at the end of 1955 (Kerstenetzky, 1985).
        The investments above included the capacity to produce aviation pistons for Pratt and Whitney
engines, which Metal Leve developed from unofficial drawings. In 1965 a technical assistance contract
with United Aircraft Co. was signed for access to technology and its improvements and, after, ML was
granted approval for aviation pistons by the Federal Aviation Agency, the first such non-American
company to get it. With this, ML, which already sold pistons to the Brazilian Air Force, began exporting
to the US, to the replacement market and to the Lycoming and Continental Motors factories (later
Teledyne Continental Motors), executive airplane manufacturers. Demands made by the FAA in the
approval process raised manufacturing standards not only for aviation pistons but for all production lines.
        In the same period Metal Leve also diversified into bearings manufacture, another part for vehicle
engines. As early as 1953 Ford had suggested that ML start to make them, recommending Clevite,12 its
American supplier, to get the necessary technology, but difficulties resulting from the period of recessive
economic policies between 1954 and 1956 interfered with the plan until the following year. The
equipment was imported from Clevite, with whom a technology transfer agreement was also signed.
Approval to import the equipment was given by SUMOC13 in 1956, and in 1957 the bearings project was
approved by GEIA. The financing was done with Eximbank, to the sum of US$1,250,000, with 5.5%
interest per year, to be paid off over 7 years.
        In one aspect of the diversification a mistake was found: the bearings chosen were of the Babbitt
kind, made of lead antimony (or white alloy). 2,657,000 bearings were produced in the first year, more
than the one-shift production capacity of 2,400,000. Of these however, 1,857,000 were for the aftermarket
and, in the two following years, there were no sales to the automobile manufacturers, which were
ordering copper lead bearings (red alloy). In fact, only 17% of the bearings used in the assembly lines in
1958 were Babbitt.14
        Metal Leve thus began to make red bearings through a non-continuous process called PAP, the
patent for which was acquired together with Clevite from a German company. But the casting process
was very limited in terms of the production scale. On the other hand, installation of a continuous
production line of copper lead bearings would mean an investment of US$1.5 million, which at that point
was too much for the company, as was the production scale. The solution was to adopt another recent
production process, sintering.15 Advantages included greater flexibility in terms of scale, lower initial
investment; only in theory the process produced less resistant copper-lead bearings, compared to die-cast
red bearings. The solution took the form of another project approved by GEIA, with financing of
US$469,000 from Eximbank. The capacity of the sintered line was 1,440,000 bearings and 2,400,000
bushings per year.
        Unlike in the US, the sintered product became the basic material for Metal Leve bearings and
bushings, with the improvement of the production process in the company, giving rise to patenting and
resulting in a high quality product. Only in the 80s would Metal Leve install a continuous production line
of red bearings, after increasing capacity with two more sintering lines.
        Two other manufacturers presented projects to GEIA for bearings production. The first was the
São Paulo Retífica, owned by the driver, Chico Landi, which serviced customized engines, thereby not
representing a threat. The company Sinterosa, by contrast, could, with the proposed expansion, reach the
12
   A subsidiary of the American manufacturer Cleveland Graphite Bronze co.
13
   Superintendência da Moeda e do Crédito, the body in charge of exchange rate management.
14
   According to Sinterosa’s (a competitor) project, submitted to GEIA and approved in 1959.
15
   A process in which copper-lead deposited in a fine powder forms a solid mass with steel strips by using electric ovens filled
with exothermic gas.


                                                                                                                                   6
capacity of 2,400,000 parts per year between bushings and bearings. The project involved association
with the American firm Johnson Bronze, one of three large American manufacturers,16 which came on
board as co-owner of half of the increased capital, such that Sinterosa would be able to gain access to
foreign technology and to become a significant competitor.
        Another aspect of Metal Leve’s capacitation was the in-house machinery production. In 1960
machines were already produced for replacement and improvement of the production process. In 1966 a
machine factory was set up, initially with imported projects, to produce chamfering, automatic broaching
machines, and copying lathes. Although clearly signaling technological progress, this development is not
unknown in this line of business, because machine tools are produced by assembly of parts.17 With time
the company worked out its own projects for manufacturing lathes, saws and semi-automatic milling
cutters. Proof of production quality can be found in the fact that Metal Leve exported six beveling
machines to Clevite at US market prices. At the end of the 60s, manufacturing had reached 200 new
machines, in addition to the overhaul or modernization of approximately 80 units.
        The OEM piston market expanded until 1962. After this year, the Brazilian economy entered into
a recession, with the car industry taking part in the slowdown. As ML provided almost all piston and
bearing supplies to car manufacturers, except for the sporadic or localized, though notably reduced, sales
by competitors,18 the company’s sales accompanied the general movement of the automobile industry.
ML piston sales followed the heating up and the slowdown of the cycle, rising to 180,000 pistons
monthly at its peak, falling to 60,000 units in the crisis. In reality, the fluctuations could be more severe
than they were in automobile production, as was the case when a small industry upturn in 1965 due to a
reduction in excise tax hiked orders to 230,000 pistons, because automobile manufacturers also decided to
stock up again. Sales fell again in 1967. 19 The bearings market, on the other hand, as part of a less
explored market, could expand until 1964, only then starting to fluctuate.
         In the aftermarket, on the other hand, piston sales remained stagnant during the phase, which can
be explained by the improvement in highways, the renewal of the fleet and product quality, as they
increased the interval of engine overhauls. In the case of the bearings replacement market, there was
continuous growth until 1963, by import substitution, which Metal Leve had already done so for pistons
at an earlier stage.
        Export efforts began in 1962, to Latin American countries. These markets had potential due to the
fact that these countries imported rejects from developed countries. However, problems of foreign
currency availability in the region meant that exports only became significant in the next decade. In this
phase, the successful shift towards the international market took place in the American aircraft pistons
market in the way mentioned above. This shift broadened later to include parts from other means of
transport, such that the American market became the company’s main export market.
        As for the financial area, this phase brings lower profit margins for the company than the previous
one, because the company sold to automobile manufacturers, which hold significant bargaining power.
The debt level, which had gone down to extremely low levels (around 15% at the end of the previous
phase), grew with the high investments related to GEIA projects to 49% in 1962, later declining to levels
fluctuating around 35% at this phase. These are not high levels, especially if we take into account the
major efforts of expansion, quality improvement and diversification. From 1962 investments and the debt
level went down, with fluctuations, even with lower profit margins than before.
        As regards technology, Metal Leve’s relationships with foreign firms effectively provided it with
access to technology with independence (even if technological achievements can also be attributed to
ML’s efforts to develop its technological capabilities). The contrast with Sinterosa makes this clear: Metal

16
   The other two were Clevite itself and Federal-Mogul.
17
   i.e., a machining line can produce parts for machine-tools like those on the production line. The same technical base is
involved.
18
   From board meeting minutes and interviews carried out in the 1980s.
19
   This episode is viewed, in 20th century literature about manufacturer-supplier relationships, as manufacturers using their
bargaining power to shift the burden of fluctuations in demand to auto parts suppliers in the form of storage, opportunity and
idle capacity costs, which is done by means of the relationship with manufacturers being based on the proportion of total
purchases and not on fixed quantities (Grote, 1971).


                                                                                                                                 7
Leve’s competitor in the bearings market needed to cede half of its control to a foreign company to have
access to technology. We must not be fooled by ML’s success in its initial relationships with foreign
piston and bearings firms: other experiences of relationship with foreign firms to obtain technology for
diversification in the next phase were not as successful as ML’s first experiences, as we will see below.
Relationship with foreign companies aiming at technological capacitation is not a simple matter, as it
frequently involves partnership with control among the factors that attract the foreign firm’s interest.

Resumption and maturity: diversification, technological autonomy and exports
         The company’s third phase once again followed the movement of the Brazilian economy, starting
with the upturn from 1968 that followed public investments and a spurt in the construction industry.
Again in this phase, the automobile industry was one of the drivers of national growth.
         The automobile industry was reorganized by the entry of Ford, General Motors and Chrysler into
the Brazilian passenger vehicle manufacturing market and by company mergers. The industry started to
take on features of international competition, with product differentiation, which was lacking in the
implantation phase. Income concentration, transformation of consumption patterns and financing as well
as incorporation of families into the market place were part of the process. Incentives to exports and to
external capital inflows, along with the easing of foreign liquidity through access to foreign loans
contributed to strong expansion until 1974, when economic growth slowed. The automobile industry,
which grew on average by 26% between 1967 and 1974, began growing by 6% from 1974 to 1978.
Among the limiting factors were the rise in inflation, external restriction, rising international oil prices
and their global consequences and an end to stimulus as represented by new consumption patterns with
income concentration.
         In the automobile industry, the exports responded to stimuli of tax exemption, tax credits and
drawback of import taxes on inputs, so that they were expanded in proportion to overall production –
2.5% in 1973, 7% in 1974 and 8.7% in 1978 (Guimarães and Gadelha, 1980). Another trend was the
growth in the number of small vehicles after 1974, while the recovery in 1968 featured medium and large
vehicles and the substitution of gasoline for diesel in commercial vehicles.
         Reflecting the more general movement of the Brazilian economy and of the automobile industry,
Metal Leve’s revenues grew at a rate of 20% per year in pistons and 24% in bearings between 1968 and
1974, decelerating to 13% per year in pistons and 4% per year in bearings by 1978. The company’s
market share remained high, at around 68% for pistons and 74% for bearings, in value, for the period
1973-78.20 Market-share data compiled by the company for the years 1974-75, in number of parts,
indicate a higher share in the market – around 83% for pistons and about 96% for bearings.21 What is
significant here is that the company’s share confirms, according to any criterion, the almost monopolistic
situation observed in previous phases.
         This phase was marked by the entry of foreign auto parts manufacturers into the Brazilian market.
In 1968 Volkswagen attracted KS, the other large German piston manufacturer alongside Mahle, offering
it half of its piston acquisitions. In the bearings market, Johnson Bronze was bought by Federal Mogul in
the US, and started to use the new brand on its products in Brazil from 1971. The loss ML suffered as a
result was not significant in this period. An exercise comparing ML’s sales data for automobile
manufacturers and their automobile production shows where there is evidence of other piston suppliers to
automobile manufacturers. It was found at VW (to be expected because of their invitation to KS), at GM
after 1972 and at Toyota. The latter, which at that time was making a small number of commercial
vehicles, was the only one not being supplied at all by ML. The data clearly show that ML was the only
supplier to Ford, Fiat, FNM/Fiat Diesel, Mercedes Benz and Scania at this time.22
         In terms of bearings supplies to car assembly plants, competitors were even less significant:

20
   Estimates based on data from the economic census of 1975, annual industrial surveys and sales data supplied by Metal Leve
(Kerstenetzky 1985).
21
   The company’s estimates used data from its main competitors through an exchange of information.
22
   The comparison (Kerstenetzky 1985) serves more for these general indications than for market share, given the rough
character of the estimate of the piston OEM market, based on the number of vehicles manufactured and on the number of
cylinders of each of them and not on piston acquisitions from the assembly plants.


                                                                                                                               8
Johnson Bronze/Federal Mogul, which could have been a major competitor, ended up not giving the
subsidiary in Brazil the necessary support to make it a presence on a par with its headquarters. In
Argentina, by contrast, it took up a place similar to that of Metal Leve in the Brazilian market. These
results may be a consequence of ML’s reaction to the entry of competitors, making long-term agreements
with car manufacturers (both for pistons and bearings), in exchange for favorable conditions. The
economic slowdown in 1974 may have reinforced entry barriers, as the minimum scale of light piston
production at the time was of 500,000 pistons per year.23 Later, in 1977, one of the largest bearings
manufacturers in the world, Glyco, presented a project to the CDI (Conselho de Desenvolvimento
Industrial) and set up a small capacity factory in 1978.
        Competitors’ penetration into the aftermarket was faster than into the assembly market. KS
adopted the strategy of making kits including other parts besides pistons and of offering a time frame of
180 days for payment to compete with ML’s products, which were to be paid for in 60 days. M L
responded by putting together their kits with their and Cofap’s products, without increasing the deadlines
for payment. All in all, KS’s entry brought about more losses to Cima and to other smaller-scale
manufacturers.24
        To defend its aftermarket share, ML developed different strategies to deal with the range of
buyers’ size and market fragmentation.25 Regional representatives were replaced by regional offices,
large-scale clients received frequent problem-solving visits, the company used its size to demand
exclusivity from distributors, and dispersal and relative insignificance of small dealers or repair shops
were solved by sending technical booklets and offering local technical courses and factory visits, to
establish contact and to raise awareness among mechanics of the importance of the quality of spare parts,
which would be demonstrated by company products. The first of these courses was given already in 1964,
and with time the duration was extended from 2 to 12 hours.
        Export development, begun in the previous period, grew in this decade, going from 0.5% revenue
in 1968 to 21% in 1978 in the case of pistons and, with bearings, from 0.01 to 7.4%, growth having been
continuous from year to year. As mentioned previously, the main export market was the US, absorbing
from 60 to 80% of exports, depending on the year, the product and if in value or quantity.
        The American market presented special market opportunities for Metal Leve and other auto parts
manufacturers’ exports due to the American automobile industry’s having developed with an
extraordinary degree of verticalization in auto parts manufacturing. This was partially explicable by each
manufacturer’s scale and (in the case of pistons and other engine components) little concern about fuel
consumption, which dominated until the oil crisis and the entry of Japanese automobiles into the country.
The export opportunities emerged when the competition from Japanese automobiles forced American
manufacturers to concern themselves with more modern engine designs, leading to a decline in the
verticalization of the industry. After 1976 the American piston market went on to be disputed by Mahle
and KS with branches being set up. The European markets, on the other hand, had different structures,
with smaller fleets, more auto parts manufacturers, and less verticalization.26 Additionally, Metal Leve
did not pursue markets served by Mahle due to contractual commitment, while technical assistance was in
place, which is to say until 1978, after which ML began to openly pursue the European market,
developing samples and carrying out product quotations for manufacturers.
        At this point, it is worth detailing the end of the relationship with Mahle. It had been transformed
over time because of the capabilities progressively developed by ML, which were reflected in the
different terms in the three technology transfer contracts signed with the German firm. Foreign markets
represented the main reason for the emerging questions between the two companies in this phase: ML
was becoming increasingly present in foreign markets, and Mahle was already developing its
internationalization process.
        The first contract, signed with Ernst Mahle himself, remained in force until 1968, giving ML
23
   Considerations based on interviews at ML carried out in the 80s.
24
   Based on interviews.
25
   The units that make purchasing decisions in this market are not, generally, individual car owners, but a diversity of
professionals and entrepreneurs as the automobile mechanics, retailers and owners of large fleets.
26
   Which means less potential market related to deverticalization.


                                                                                                                           9
access to Mahle’s piston-making processes and patents, its developments and to the use of the Mahle
brand in Brazil. German technicians were responsible for the technical knowledge of process engineering
and training the workforce, until they could be complemented or substituted by Brazilian engineers and
technicians trained in the factory. The relationship included a training period of Brazilian staff in the
German factory. In this way, ML absorbed the production process technology and stayed abreast of its
developments. In exchange, ML gave Mahle preference to participate in future business ventures it would
realize in the country and remunerated it with 2% of pistons revenue.
         In 1968 a new contract was signed, this time with Mahle GmbH, because the German firm had
been restructured, going from owners running the firm to a more complex structure of ownership by a
foundation and a management company (Lippert et al., 2014). In this agreement, Metal Leve was
obligated to share results obtained perfecting production techniques, albeit through remuneration to be
agreed on by the companies, while Mahle pledged not to go into partnership or supply technical
assistance to other firms in Brazil or even to set up business until two years after the end of the contract,
except if ML had decided not to renew it. Remuneration went down to 0.8% of revenue after indirect
taxes.
         A centre for research and development was set up in 1970 to centralize activities that were not
directly linked to production, to develop ideas put forward by management, and to make studies into
rationalization of technical problems and cost reduction. After the first few years in which the centre
carried out studies into the rationalization of processes and operations, experimental projects gained
importance from 1973.
         Metal Leve’s exports started to cause problems with Mahle from 1971. The contract with Mahle
only mentioned the companies’ exports between Brazil and Germany, which should have been done
exclusively through the partner company. Mahle feared a move by ML on its international market, and
consequently began to put pressure on ML to have a share in its capital, the Brazilian market, and even in
the management of its pistons division as compensation for the threat it represented. Furthermore, Mahle
complained that the licensing fee was small compared to R&D costs. ML sensed Mahle wanted to come
to Brazil.
         ML gave six months notice of their intention to rescind the contract in 1974, and discussions to
settle the differences gave rise to a third contract, this time concerning ‘technological cooperation’, with
ML and Mahle taking part in joint R&D projects and both covering the costs. Regarding results leading to
industrial property rights, the parties to the contract would have the right to free use. The other export
commitments related to exports and non-entry of Mahle into the Brazilian market were maintained.
         Renewal discussions were fruitless and the last contract between Mahle and ML expired in 1977.
In May 1978, Mahle bought Cima, thus entering the Brazilian market. In this year, they also set up in the
US with capacity to produce 1,200,000 pistons per year.
         ML restructured its R&D activity, creating a technical management team which brought together
quality control and R&D. R&D started to have a say in decision-making and mobilization of resources,
like the other management areas. The main modification was the setting up of a technology centre in a
building of its own in 1978, complete with chemical, metallurgical, electronic and photoelastic
laboratories, and 57 staff members, 19 with engineering doctorates, masters or degrees. The centre was
financed by FINEP.
         As for bearings, ML also had access to advanced technology through technical assistance
contracts, with progressive technology absorption. The relationship went on to patent exploration
contracts with revenue-based payments which decreased over time. Here the peculiarity was the
transformation that took place with the licensing company Clevite, which, having been bought by Gould
inc., a company whose main product was batteries, started to be overtaken by European manufacturers. In
the 80s Clevite was sold by Gould, thereby pursuing an edge in technology again as far as bearings were
concerned.
         Meanwhile, other international bearings manufacturers became interested in partnerships with
ML, which, however, thought this would end up bringing Gould to Brazil. High profit margins and
precarious entry barriers suggested caution. The relationship with Gould did not have high costs,
reinforced the relationship with Ford and, above all, ML judged it could follow technological


                                                                                                                10
developments on its own. In fact, it accumulated patents in bearings manufacture, and installed the whole
range of lines it needed for bearings, such that it appeared that it could do away with foreign sources to
achieve cutting-edge technology. However, this did not happen. The main technological efforts ended
being placed on piston research as a result of the problems and the end of the relationship with Mahle.
         In this phase, ML’s move towards diversification began. Around 1972 the company was in a solid
financial situation and prospects for the Brazilian economy were good. ML had successfully gone public,
and had easy access to financial sources. There were advocates in the company both in favor of
diversification (to reduce the risks associated with a sector prone to the entry of foreign companies) and in
favor of investment concentration in traditional areas (no need to seek new knowledge). There were even
those who advocated speculation with raw material stocks. The idea of concentrating resources in what
“we know how to do” seemed to win the day: if we exclude a juice manufacturing business in the North-
East of Brazil, Maraú, which benefited from tax incentives and had good export prospects, the
diversifications were still concerned, in one way or another, with the firms areas of knowledge. This bears
out Penrose’s (1959) proposition of diversification occurring on the same technical base or in the same
market area. Moreover, ML sought to enter into partnership with foreign companies to gain access to
technology in the diversification process.
         Ex-cell-O Metal Leve Máquinas was set up as a spin-off of ML’s machinery manufacturing
capabilities. It partnered Ex-cell-O co., a cutting-edge American machine tool manufacturer, with 36
factories around the world. ML had the controlling stake in the subsidiary and Ex-cell-O co., 40%.
However, the American firm showed little interest in the enterprise, a problem which added to its
inexperience in passing on technology and to ML’s lack of experience in the machinery market. As a
result, projects took a long time to develop, when, ideally, pre-existing projects would have been adapted
to clients’ needs and, without a costing system, sales prices were frequently inadequate. The factory
operated with a high idle capacity, low competitiveness, and was unable to cover its costs. ML ended up
accepting Thyssen Hueller’s proposal to take over the subsidiary, with Metal Leve keeping a 30% stake.
This enabled it to stay in the sector with technological support, albeit losing its majority stake.
         Metal Leve Gould, on the other hand, was founded in 1974 to manufacture sinterized products,
(that is, products made out of iron and steel powder, replacing cast and forged components), and to supply
clients not only from the automotive sector but also from the office machinery, electronics and
refrigerator sectors. This can be understood in terms of the good relationship with Gould inc. discussed
above.
         The turn of the 80s saw the end of this phase in the firm’s life. It is marked by the worsening of
problems in the Brazilian economy caused by balance of payments problems related to oil and capital
goods imports. These problems had already manifested themselves after the first oil crisis in 1973, and
were tackled by the government still at this phase with a policy of deepening import substitutions between
1974 and 1978, so that the economy kept growing. Followed by a second oil crisis in 1979 and rising
international interest rates, the problems ended up resulting in the so-called “lost decade” of the 80s, with
stagflation in 1981-3, succeeded by fluctuations in economic activity and a gradual worsening of inflation
for the remainder of the decade. The fluctuating pace of production was the result of the increasingly
ephemeral results brought by stabilization plans and Brazilian exports favored by the upturn in economic
activity of developed countries.27
         In this context of growing difficulties faced by the Brazilian economy, we can identify Metal
Leve’s fourth phase. Nonetheless, the firm kept on growing, such that it was not affected in a simple way
by greater economic problems.

Golden Years?
       ML’s fourth phase was even qualified as the golden years (Faldini, 2005). The period, however,
contains contradictory developments, not only in terms of the firm, but also in the contrast between its
performance, the difficulties of the Brazilian economy mentioned above and its action facing the
challenges brought about by the great transformations under way in the world economy and automotive

27
     Hermann (2005).


                                                                                                                11
industry. We can say in advance that ML achieved great things from the viewpoint of a company from a
peripheral country, but that they were not enough to prepare it for the times of global competition that
would mark the following phase.
        ML understood well enough the questions of reorganization of the world automotive industry and
sought to adapt to the transformations, which made it clear to the company that it was not enough
anymore to master the production process and to produce a good product.28 In the past, orders for parts
came with their specifications, reflecting the fact that automobile projects were completely developed by
automobile manufacturers. The change under way pointed to the need for parts manufacturers’
involvement along with the automobile manufacturers in the development of automobile projects,
bringing with it new technological challenges. Joint development also made parts manufacturers the
chosen supplier for the model on a global scale, raising their business challenges, insofar as the
production scale was concerned. Thus, in addition to diversification and exports begun in the previous
phase, which were ongoing, efforts to internationalize were undertaken, with the direct investment
overseas, at the end of the decade.
        As mentioned, the decade saw a long period of stagnation for the Brazilian economy. That the
Brazilian automotive industry remained particularly stagnated can be seen in the fact that it only managed
to surpass the vehicle production of 1980 in 1993. To make matters worse, the lag in relation to foreign
manufacturing grew, because American and European parent companies, pressured by Japanese
competition, were busy trying to adapt to the new competition, and their Brazilian subsidiaries remained
out of the dispute.
        For the auto parts sector, exports became the outlet for the use and expansion of its production
capacity, so much so that it made up for the prevailing stagnation in the decade. A number of companies
in the sector made their presence felt on the international market, particularly after 1982. Metal Leve was
one of them and stood out among them, gaining a lot of ground in the American market, including quality
recognition, as evidenced by the Caterpillar certificate of guaranteed quality supplier, a distinction
obtained at that time by only 50 out of 4500 suppliers. Exports to the United States represented half of
overseas sales. In the European market, their presence was also felt but comparatively less favorably, for
the reasons outlined above.
        Metal Leve exports grew year after year, with few exceptions,29 and direct overseas investment
began more towards the end of the decade, linked to a specific order from an American client who
requested for a plant to be installed in the US, as we will see below. However, hikes in demand caught the
company unawares, unable to meet all the national and international orders. The period from 1985 to
1987 showed, one after the other, an increase in demand owing to an upturn in the American economy
and the Cruzado Plan,30 leading the firm to operate in full capacity for three years. In the dramatic year of
1986, installed capacity was not enough to meet all the demand, such that the firm was obliged to reduce
its exports. The limitation of capacity faced with the hike and the difficulty in pressing ahead with the
growth in exports was not limited to Metal Leve; it happened with the whole auto parts sector.31
        The conjunction of transformations in world industry with the period of insufficient manufacturing
capacity appears in an episode revealed in the minutes of an executive management meeting in 1986,
about the appropriateness of responding to a call from General Motors, to develop together the Saturn
model, which appears as a pilot of a new form of structuring and adaptation of GM to the trends under
way. The question under discussion concerns their capability of, should they beat the competition,
becoming an exclusive production supplier of the model, given the commitments already undertaken. For
this reason, one of the executive managers is against responding to the call. The discussion develops
around the importance of the opportunity and another executive manager even suggests responding to the
call, but making it clear that the company cannot be the only supplier. The proposal is not considered
acceptable because the call is explicit on this point. The discussion moves on to the idea that staying in
this line of business means answering the calls. The incapacity that emerges in the discussion does not
28
   Kerstenetzky (1985).
29
   Metal Leve Annual Executive management report, various years.
30
   A heterodox plan to fight inflation in 1986.
31
   From the newspaper, Estado de São Paulo, October 3rd, 1986.


                                                                                                                12
relate to technical competence, but to production capacity, which is one of the dimensions of the firm’s
reduced scale faced with the industry’s new challenges.
        As a consequence of the capacity shortage, by the middle of the decade Metal Leve assumed the
need to accelerate the growth of production capacity again. However, in the years following the hike,
market stagnation prevailed again in Brazil, and we find in the press signs of negative expectations
concerning investments and dismay among auto parts manufacturers. Accordingly, we find in Metal
Leve’s Annual Executive management reports, for a number of years reference being made to investment
projects consisting of equipment rationalization and modernization. In the annual report of 1987,
concerning 1986, ML still complained of instability, of late delivery of ordered equipment, and announces
that investments were reduced and that the company is ready to effect additional revisions to its plans. In
the context of the prevailing stagnation of most of the decade, rationalization and modernization
investments make sense, but the Saturn episode points to vulnerability in an important question of
competition in sectors of activity typical of the second industrial revolution, which is the strategic
availability of idle capacity through investment ahead of demand, so as to compete for market shares
deftly. In this way, if in the times of the Cruzado Plan, the hike in demand caused by the plan was tackled
by resorting to a third production shift, with the advantage of saving on overtime pay, ML was not able to
meet all the export demands in 1986. Only in the beginning of 1989 we find again resolute statements of
capacity growth, in the annual management report and in press interviews with José Mindlin, who incites
other entrepreneurs to invest regardless of the political situation – it was a presidential election year, and
Lula was one of the candidates. Mindlin defends the position that there are no alternatives to investing in
the country. At least for Metal Leve, the thrust of growth came to the fore again. In agreement with this
attitude, the Annual Report of 1989 also mentions ML’s acquisitions of companies, which is where we
pick up again below.
        ML’s diversifications at this phase evolved in two ways. Attempts at diversification that were
closer to the company’s main line of business and capabilities were enhanced. Those that were
complementary to its line of business and capabilities, however, did not develop vigorously, and ML
ended up ridding itself of them at this phase or the next. Occasionally, partnerships were dissolved, with
ML taking over when capabilities and line of business were similar, and withdrawing from the ventures
when they were complementary.
        Metal Leve Controles Eletrônicos was set up in 1984, in order to venture into the area of
microelectronics and IT, more specifically into the manufacture of programmable logic controllers, with a
view to supplying products and services in the industrial control and factory automation market. As part
of the same move, ML took up a majority stake in a partnership with the American firm Allen-Bradley,
creating Metal Leve Allen-Bradley Sistemas Industriais Ltda and Lógicos Sistemas de Controle
Industrial, the former acting in the area of electromechanical industrial control products and the latter
representing commercially these products and those of Metal Leve Controles Eletrônicos. The company
divested itself of its three subsidiaries in the next phase in 1992, alleging that the company Rockwell,
which had taken over Allen-Bradley, did not want partnerships anymore, but only wholly-owned
subsidiaries. Apparently, ML had to choose between ending the business or branching out alone.
        The machinery factory in partnership with Thyssen Hueller, created in the previous phase, was
sold to the partner, so that ML withdrew from the field of special machinery manufacturing, alleging it
had other investment priorities in the management report of 1989.
        Other investments in the form of acquiring companies or establishing partnerships took place
within the ambit of the auto parts sector. The Metalúrgica Mogi-Guaçu, which was the result of a
partnership with Mahle in 1981, was among those directly linked to the company’s key area. ML went in
with machining technologies, and Mahle, with casting.32 It represented diversification in the direction of
cast-iron components such as ring carriers, drive camshafts and cylinders. The partnership was lasting,
continuing until ML was denationalized.
        In another development linked to its original core business, in 1989, ML bought out Imperial
Clevite’s part in its subsidiary of sinterized products set up during the previous phase under the name,

32
  This confirms what José Mindlin said in interviews that the end of the contracts left no hard feelings.


                                                                                                                 13
Metal Leve Gould. The subsidiary became known as Metal Leve Produtos Sinterizados Ltda. Also in the
same year, ML bought the company, Bimetal, a small bearings and bushings maker, located in Rio de
Janeiro, which was controlled by the American firm, Federal Mogul. Even if the plant was not a
significant acquisition in terms of state-of-the-art technology, the acquisition marginally strengthened
ML’s presence in bearings and bushings manufacture.
        These diversifications and moves in previous diversifications ended up leading to a direction to
the growth that eliminated, over time, initiatives not strictly connected to the auto parts sector. Machinery
and electronics, strategically thought out and linked to the company’s activity though they were, in the
end revealed a change in focus and an outflow of resources and energy, and were later discontinued.
        Particularly significant was the foreign direct investment, not only as it represented a watershed in
the effort to internationalize, but also for the technological content involved, definitively proving ML’s
potential to follow trends of transformation in the world automotive industry. It stemmed from the
development of an articulated piston for high-capacity diesel engines developed in the company’s
technology center. ML’s product had a competitive edge over those developed by Mahle and KS, with the
advantages of having a longer working life, of being smaller, lighter and less polluting , surpassing them
in the occasion of a call to supply Caterpillar in the US. Other manufacturers also later adopted this ML
piston, including Volvo and Cummings. The materialization of the foreign direct investment in
Orangeburg, North Carolina, took place in response to Caterpillar’s demand for just-in-time supply. The
factory’s installation began at the end of 1988, with a US$10 million investment project and projected
capacity of 230,000 pistons per year. In addition to the pistons factory, ML set up an American extension
of the Brazilian technology center in Ann Arbor, with this proximity to manufacturers enabling it to
discuss their needs and, close to developments, to pass them on to the production chain.
        In Europe, the strategy was to set up subsidiary companies to stimulate ML’s exports. Direct
investment on the continent was considered at the end of the decade, with the creation of the European
Union in mind. Portugal was considered a possible location, but the discovery that the EU would not set
up trade barriers to the continent meant the move did not go ahead.
        In this way, it was a phase of consolidation of quality and acceptance of the company’s products,
with worldwide reach. In the Brazilian market, it was able to protect itself against the entry of foreign
firms, which still offered reduced threat to its stake of the market.. And so began its adjustment to the new
age of world industry, not only through exports, but also direct investment. ML proceeded with relatively
high profits initially, with more modest results, however, in later years of the decade.
        The main contradiction in Metal Leve’s development in this phase, referred to in the beginning of
this section, can be seen in its overall difficulties in promoting production capacity growth.33 The
subsidiary Thyssen Hueller was meant to be strategic for the expansion of the parent company’s
production capacity, but it was unable to meet Metal Leve’s needs – there were problems of cost and
delivery time in the middle of the decade, marked as it was by a shortage of idle capacity. In any case,
the diversification begun with Excell-O and continued with Thyssen Hueller never became an effective
source of machine supply for Metal Leve. Nor were other Brazilian capital goods firms considered a good
supply option by Metal Leve.34 Neither was importing the equipment, because this option was affected
by the difficulties of the Brazilian economy with external credit due to debt negotiations. ML again
resorted to internal reform and manufacture of machines as a partial solution that, as we saw before, was a
characteristic of the sector. But Metal Leve lagged in this respect when compared with international
competitors.
        The investment needs of the decade were also thwarted by difficulties in internally generating the
necessary funds. Metal Leve became aware of a circular problem involving revenue and production
capacity: revenue should grow in order to finance capacity growth, and capacity should grow in order to
produce more revenue. This had to do with the problem of scale that revealed itself to ML in this phase:
as competition progressively acquired international dimensions, firm size became critical for

33
  The appraisal that follows in these two paragraphs is based on a set of executive board minutes from 1986.
34
  In one of the minutes of the executive management meetingsin 1986 an executive mentioned that BNDES had a different
opinion in this respect. However, the fact that Metal Leve was the user of the machines gives their opinion more weight.


                                                                                                                           14
competitivity. The problem of scale was also felt in the production cost of samples for new orders from
automobile manufacturers as well as in the expenses related to R&D activities, because both activities are
backed by revenues from current activities. To exemplify, Mahle and Metal Leve were developing at the
time a similar number of samples, but these represented a much heavier weight for ML than for Mahle. It
is worth adding that Metal Leve’s subsidiaries could have been part of the solution for the issue of size,
revenues and internal generation of financial resources, but their meager returns implied that they were
not able to financially participate in the growth process.
         The company’s history was transformed quickly from the turn of the decade. The change came
from abroad with globalization (though still under stagnation in the Brazilian economy), with trade
opening accentuating the long-term weakening of traditional frameworks which, in the beginnings of
Brazilian automobile manufacturing, reserved the auto parts assembly market for Brazilian
manufacturers. The company and the sector were swept up in a whirlwind of national changes with very
little formulation of development planning. ML and other such companies depended on capabilities
acquired until then to navigate unfamiliar waters.

Decline and denationalization
        The fifth and final phase of ML’s history starts with the trade opening that brought Brazil into line
with the globalization process of 1989-1990, and which stimulated the competitiveness of international
companies. However, before the depth of globalization’s effects had become clear, the beginning of the
phase brought on difficulties of another order for ML and Brazilian auto parts manufacturers as a whole.
Following the problems of the previous decade with the Brazilian economy and its automotive sector
came the US recession caused by the recessive impact of the Gulf War (Zimmerman 1998), which
affected the US automobile and truck market - ML’s main export market.35 In 1990 the company still
made profits, helped by exports to other markets such as the European market. In fact, ML managed to
raise exports to US$54 million in the same year. Nevertheless, in 1991 ML’s accounts showed losses for
the first time since the founding of the company. From then on until 1996, ML’s performance in terms of
profits was negative practically every year, despite the upturn in American and Brazilian automobile
manufacturing after 1992 and the increase in the company’s sales. The only profitable year was 1994, but
even so profits were modest. These results and the assessment of the group that directed and controlled
the company throughout its history of the poor chances of reversing the situation ended up leading to the
sale of their shares in 1996.
        Globalization affected auto parts manufacturers particularly severely. Global competition started
to go beyond product quality and reliability, involving systemic questions relating to the world
organization of the sector and to the way automobile manufacturers restructured themselves to compete in
markets that came to be part of a global logic.36 With the opening of the Brazilian economy in the 1990s,
the auto parts manufacturers’ situation was transformed suddenly: in an attempt by foreign automobile
manufacturers to modernize Brazilian subsidiaries, and with the new dynamics of competition, there was
no time, with few exceptions, to restructure auto parts manufacturing companies adequately to the new
environment. The decline in protection represented by the reduction of tariff barriers led to an increase in
imports. Automobile manufacturers benefited from the reduction in import tariffs on their inputs - auto
parts - much more so than on their products, and also from the chance to import parts in proportion to
their exports. Added to this, later, in 1994, there was the exchange rate valuation from the Real Plan. The
makeup of the sector underwent a radical change with a reduction in the number of auto parts
manufacturing firms,37 due to company closures, mergers and acquisitions, and downsizing of levels of
hierarchy in companies.

35
   The American automobile production was already under a slowdown which combined the effects of the penetration of
Japanese automakers with a cyclical short-term decline of the sales in the American market, after a four-year period of brisk
sales in the second half of the 80’s (Wong, 1990).
36
   The many aspects involved in this transformation will not be detailed here and can be found in Arbix et al (1997). Only
those most directly relevant to ML’s case will be dealt with.
37
   According to The Study on the Competitiveness of Brazilian Industry, the number of auto parts manufacturers fell from 2000
in 1989 to approximately 1200 (p. 268). The year of publication is 1993.


                                                                                                                                15
         In this phase, ML went on making investments and pursuing the strategy of internationalization,
with the focus on the North-American market. In 1991, in a joint venture with the second biggest piston
manufacturer in the world, KS, it bought the bearings factory Bohn Bearing in Greensburg, Indiana. It
increased its presence in this market further in 1992 by opening its second American diesel piston factory
in Sumter, South Carolina, with a capacity for 230,000 pistons per year, and by raising its production
capacity in Orangeburg to 600,000 pistons per year. It also increased its export efforts to other markets,
gaining new clients, such as Renault and Mitsubishi in their respective countries of origin. Exports
continued with some fluctuation, keeping around the level of US$ 54 million attained in 1988, but rising
to US$ 68 million in 1994.
         In the two previous phases we saw how the entry of foreign competitors took place in the
Brazilian market, with consequences still limited to specific markets. In the case of bearings, foreign
manufacturing did not prosper and the actual entry of competitors only came to pass in the 90s. In the
case of pistons, Mahle and KS occupied markets slowly, so that real competition was gradually forming.
Mahle, in particular, focused on especially profitable markets of the replacement segment, like that of a
diesel pistons model for Mercedes-Benz vehicles, which had been a hit for ML sales and profitability and
which was being lost to the German firm. Complementing the strategy, Mahle installed a modern factory
in Brazil.
         If in the 1980s losses to competitors were small, in the face of liberalization and globalization,
ML’s business destabilized. National bearings markets, which showed the largest profit margins, began to
be served by imports at lower international prices, drastically affecting ML’s profitability. Two years of
losses were necessary for ML to realize there were structural problems in its operation. During the initial
moments of difficulty, some company members defended the position that it was solid in terms of
production, and that the troubled environment was to blame for the opposite results. Such a position,
though mistaken, was comprehensible as it had been conceived over many years of high inflation
permeated by stabilization plans that included price freezing and subsequent hikes. The effect on the
quality of financial statements and on entrepreneurial calculations was to disturb the whole Brazilian
economy – and certainly to keep foreign capital at a distance.38 In the specific case of ML, the difficulties
were aggravated by the fact that the company did not produce any separate verification of results of
operations for business units, so that bearings margins were mixed up with the lower piston margins.
Much less did ML know the operational cost for each of its products, so that some of them contributed to
the company losses without the possibility of using objective criteria to discontinue them. ML’s
continued role and culture of meeting the whole range of national needs for products also contributed to
less favorable results, in such a way that this possibility of phasing products out was not considered.
         In 1993 however, even before the Real Plan stabilized the price system and made it easier to check
product profitability, two years of negative results gave ML’s board warning of problems in the way it
was doing business and made it begin a restructuring process.
         Parallel to the restructuring process, ML began to negotiate a partnership with Mahle in pistons, as
it was clear to ML that there was at least a hard problem to solve, which was its lower production scale
compared to that of competitors. This problem had different facets. Firstly, ML’s smaller size in relation
to its foreign competitors put it at a disadvantage in terms of costs. This disadvantage did not refer to the
day-to-day production operation, but to the smaller dilution of the costs of R&D and producing samples
for new orders through revenue. Thus, although Metal Leve had the competitive capability to develop
new products, as demonstrated by the episode of the articulated pistons for Caterpillar in the 80s,
development costs weighed more heavily on its lower revenue. Secondly, internationalization and
following trends in the world automotive industry demanded much greater investment than the company
could finance. Not only was it necessary to deepen its presence in markets where it was already, but also
to enter into Asian and Australian markets. Negotiations with Mahle advanced the most, though they did
not reach a conclusion - other companies approached were KS and Dana. In interviews to newspapers
given in 1996, during the sale of ML, José Mindlin explained that the negotiations did not bear fruit
because the controlling group did not want to become a minority, which the foreign companies were not

38
     Castro(2001)


                                                                                                                16
willing to consider. He also explained on this occasion that another option would be to make an
investment that would literally multiply the company’s production capacity. But this solution encountered
a problem of circularity already known to ML’s senior management since the mid-1980s that exists
between increasing revenue and financing investment, making these objectives mutually dependent.
Added to this was the fact that difficulties of financing such an effort to raise production capacity were
increased during the 1990s by the losses.
        In the context of the restructuring of ML in 1993, and regardless of the success of the partnership
proposal with Mahle, the consultancy firm Consemp gave a harsh diagnosis, confirming correction
measures already under way,39 but pointing to other needs. Their report made clear the enormity of the
task and gave a glimpse of the uncertainties inherent in putting the company back on a competitive
footing. Among the recommendations, the needs for relocation, operational reengineering, change of
processes and automation were most prominent. Among the short-term modifications introduced by ML
was the reorganization of business units so that production costs by product family were known,
involving transformations in IT, with a consequent phasing-out of products.
        The restructuring made ML return to modest profits in 1994, and other measures were to be
implemented and come into effect in the longer term. However, Mahle lowered its prices by 30% between
1993 and 1996, and ML had to follow suit. It is worth noting that Metal Leve, until its denationalization,
remained the largest national piston manufacturer, with a large share of the market and growing sales,
remaining from 1994 to 1996 with around 65% of the OEM piston market (against 23% of KS and 11.9%
of Mahle) and 42.1% of the aftermarket (against 26.3% of Mahle, 16.1%, KS, 11.8% of a company called
Suloy and only 3% imports).
        In this way, after signs of recovery in 1994 through a small profit, losses reappeared in the
following two years. What was gained in cost reduction was quickly lost with the continuation of the
same trends. In 1996, the controlling group sold its shares to a group consisting of Mahle, COFAP and
Bradesco.
        Thus, trade opening in the context of difficulties for automobile manufacturers and their parent
companies and, in particular, of obsolescence in Brazil brought about, throughout the sector, a frantic
search for modernization with cost-cutting, and ML did not have time to restructure properly.
Occasionally, the attempted restructuring went in the right direction, but there would be further
transformations to make, among others to the production scale.

An assessment of Metal Leve’s life cycle
        Metal Leve’s case provides an example of how entrepreneurs accumulate solutions and
capabilities in different areas during the company’s lifetime, eventually getting to a point where changes
in the environment are not accompanied by new solutions, so that the cycle is closed.40 This last section
gathers elements from areas of capabilities in the company’s history in order to piece together an
explanation for the decline.
        It is worth starting with management, explaining who the entrepreneur was and who we are
referring to when we say anything about decisions made ‘by Metal Leve’. The partners who made up
Metal Leve established a practice of joint management, with the most important decisions taken by the
group of managing partners, suggesting there was a collective spirit of agreement which brought with it
unity and mutual confidence. Metal Leve was transformed into a publicly-traded company in 1971.
Resistance from some of the partners to transforming the legal status of the company and
professionalizing company management seems to have been overcome by the power invested in the board
of directors to which the partners were transferred. At the end of the company’s history, this board was
identified as taking part in all the decisions. Thus, despite having become publicly-held, the company
went on being run by its founding families, with some members of these families in executive positions,
so that it could still be considered a family firm. On the positive side, this meant that the mutual unity and

39
  a reduction of hierarchical levels and big layoffs.
40
  Remembering that, in this specific case, if the company continued to exist, management changed and its resources started to
be subject to another larger hierarchy in a global corporation, justifying the idea of the end of its life cycle.


                                                                                                                                17
trust, and also the way of doing business continued, with lasting values in staff policy, and a vision which
was not limited to short-term financial results. On the negative side, it meant maintaining deep-seated
rules of financial management and little flexibility to adjust to changes in the environment.
        Moving on from the observation about entrepreneurs, the problem of scale highlighted before will
be combined with the firm's capabilities, areas of which, if managed differently, could perhaps have
resulted in a different story from the one that took place in ML’s final years.
        ML’s history told in the preceding pages shows that the technological area received constant and
effective attention and management, having been the star and basis for the business success story. In
operations, a lag in the production processes in comparison with the competition proved important in the
final phase, added to which was the administrative deficiency in cost tracking. Management of the
financial area however, once considered by the company as one of the bastions of its solidity,41 at the end
of the story had to contend with the impossible task of financing an investment of US$100 million, which
would have represented the solution for the problem of competitivity by means of the increase in scale. In
fact, this financial obstacle reproduces on a larger scale the awareness of investment needs that were
greater than the financing capacity already seen since the mid-1980s.
        The pieces presented above - management, technological know-how, operational problems linked
to outdated machinery, the problem of scale and financial insufficiency - can be put together to explain
the phase of decline in the firm’s life cycle and how the history of an iconic company of Brazilian
industrialization ended.
        ML’s decision to maintain a notoriously low debt ratio throughout its history can be understood as
a self-imposed limit to growth. Such austerity originated in the remote episode of piston imports at the
time of the Korean War, which meant that ML had to “go from bank from bank”. An attitude of caution
and financial self-restraint in relation to government plans and debt ratio was built around this episode,
which was told and retold. As a result, ML did not resort to debt as a way of financing growth as much as
was possible.
        Self-sufficiency in investment was for the most part of ML’s life provided by high profit margins
obtained through protection, which allowed the company to grow in such a way as to dominate the
Brazilian market.42 However, these margins, which fueled exponential growth at first, decreased over the
course of the company’s history, which is explained by the succession of phases with change in the
business environment. At birth, there were premium quality producers’ margins at play in the aftermarket,
with a 75% market share of national manufacturing capacity and protection against imports. Then, at the
beginning of the Brazilian automobile industry, average margins fell, with a part of the sales destined to
the OEM market. Next, exports grew, with international prices lower than national ones. Finally, the
market was opened to international competition and all prices were international.
        In terms of technology, partnerships made with Mahle and Clevite were fundamental for Metal
Leve to get a head start, later going all the way from mastering the production process to developing new
products. Having benefited from these good relationships, ML learned more and more to advance by its
own means.
        Other relationships with foreign firms also aimed at technological input and took the form of
partnerships. They were strategic to company growth but were not successful like the first two. The
attempt to transform capabilities developed internally in equipment manufacture into a machinery
company with foreign partnership did not end well. ML had to opt to obtain equipment from other
sources. The company’s history again registered internal equipment manufacture, and later ML sold its
participation in the subsidiary. The incursion into the IT sphere in partnership with Allen-Bradley can
also be explained as a strategic investment in a source of technologically advanced equipment with
numerical control and automation. With the change in the IT public policy that put an end to the market
reserve for Brazilian firms, that had favored the project, the foreign partner lost interest in the partnership
and the relationship ended. Because of their failure, these diversifications might appear to lack focus, but

41
  See, for example, the Company’s 1981 Executive Management Report.
42
  The explanation of Metal Leve’s growth must also consider commercial and other areas and capabilities developed in the
course of time.


                                                                                                                           18
they can be explained by the need to improve access to equipment in a country in which imports, their
financing - which involves international payments and all the resulting issues - and national supply do not
offer the same conditions that are presented to international competitors. Unsuccessful as they were, these
efforts resulted in an outflow of resources.
        Failure in attempts to solve the problem of machinery provision gains special meaning when
foreign competitors set up in Brazil with more modern automatized factories. Metal Leve was also able to
set up modern, competitive factories in the US, with equipment acquired there. In Brazil it adapted its
production lines with numerical control, but this is not the same as installing lines which are wholly
conceived with automation. It is important to note that operational deficiencies and the strategies to obtain
equipment are linked to the Brazilian business environment, with its deficiencies and opportunities, and
cannot be entirely put down to Metal Leve.
        The nuances discussed here allow us to better qualify the importance of protection for the
company’s survival, in order to avoid simplistic and extreme explanations, as would be the case of
attributing the elimination of the company to globalization and to sudden trade opening, or at the other
ideological extreme, of gauging that the company just lived under the auspices of protection. It needs to
be noted that, although protection was shown to be important, achievements in terms of exports and
product development indicate that ML was technologically qualified in auto parts manufacturing, and,
even in the final years of its life, the company demonstrated in many ways its capacity, receiving orders
for new projects, winning new clients and obtaining certifications. As an example of this, just three
months before control and ownership were transferred the firm beat international competition to supply
sintered connecting rods for a new Volkswagen engine.
          Next there was the problem of scale, to which we can link the financial area, which was already
described as capable of promoting high levels of growth with a low debt ratio, fed by high but decreasing
margins. In the fourth phase of ML’s history, when the Brazilian market stagnated in the 1980s,
production continued to grow through the exploration of foreign markets. But in the first half of this
decade there was a lapse in expansion efforts when, in addition to the financially conservative attitude of
low debt, a relaxation of the expansion policy took place: piston production capacity rose only marginally
and the distribution of dividends was markedly greater than in other periods of its history, exceeding half
the profits in three years and in another year almost reaching the same level, while in most of the other
years as a publicly-traded company it did not surpass 30% of profit distribution and was usually well
below this. The lapse came to cause difficulties a little later when installed capacity had to be completely
used in the period between 1985 and 1987 and the company could not make the most of all of its business
opportunities.
        The episode above can even be justified by the recessive state of the national and international
economies of the early 80s. Nevertheless, it can be speculated that a more aggressive expansion strategy
would have been advantageous, including going from nationally protected markets to international
competition through foreign direct investment earlier than Metal Leve did at the end of the 80s. This
could have made the company grow faster, so that it would have become more internationalized by the
1990s, with greater revenue and capacity to finance more expansion. It could even have had repercussions
from international experience on its national operative practices. Perhaps this strategy could even have
benefited from the resources that were alternatively destined for diversifications that I qualified before as
complimentary. This reasoning is reinforced by contrasting it with Mahle’s strategy, which bought
companies in many countries from the 1960s on, taking over international markets and becoming an
engine of growth.43
        These observations remain speculative: we do not know if companies bought or set up by ML
abroad would have been successful in their battle for markets. But we do have the success of Metal
Leve’s American plants, suggesting that its international expansion was in the right direction. Had it been
earlier and deepened, we can risk saying that it would have been a better strategy. If it had been


43
  I think the comparison is valid even though the difference between the two companies in terms of age and position in the
context of the international automotive industry.


                                                                                                                             19
successful, it would have gone towards tackling the problem of circularity between revenue and
investment posed by the board in a meeting in 1986 and which was present in the 90s.
        Even so, we cannot know if it would have been enough, or how much better Metal Leve’s
situation would have been in the 90s faced with globalization. Counterfactual reasoning puts us in a
slightly more comfortable position than that of businesspeople on the spot; however, this does not change
the fact that, remembering Keynes, all business activity is speculative.

References
Arbix, G and Zilbovicius, M. De JK a FHC. A Reinvenção dos Carros. São Paulo: Scritta, 1997.
Baer, W. The Brazilian Economy. Growth & Development. Boulder and London: Lynne Rienner, 2014.
Campos, I. and Pinto, P.S. “A força de uma vida”. Entrevista com José Mindlin. Indústria Brasileira,
       vol.7, n.76, pp.10-16, 2007.
Castro, A. de B. “A reestruturação Industrial Brasileira nos Anos 90. Uma Interpretação”. Revista de
       Economia Política vol. 21, n. 3 pp. 3-26, Julho-Setembro 2001.
Faldini, R. “Experiência empresarial vivida: o caso Metal Leve”. IBCG, PDF, 2005. Accessed July 20,
       2015.
Grote, H. “Position and Prospects of Suppliers with Special Reference to the Motor Industry.” German
       Economic Review, vol.9 n.3, pp.269-273, 1971.
Guimarães, E.A. and Gadelha, M.F. O Setor Automobilístico no Brasil. Rio de Janeiro: Relatório de
       Pesquisa FINEP, mimeo, 1980.
Hermann, J. “Auge e declínio do modelo de crescimento com endividamento: O II PND e a crise da
       dívida externa (1974-1984). In: F. Giambiagi et al., Economia Brasileira Contemporânea (1945-
       2004). Rio de Janeiro: Editora Campus, 2005.
Kerstenetzky, J. A História da Metal Leve S.A.: Empresa nacional líder do setor metal-mecânico. Rio de
       Janeiro: IEI/UFRJ, Tese de Mestrado, 1985.
Kerstenetzky, J. “Alfred Marshall on Big Business”. Cambridge Journal of Economics, vol.34, n.3, pp
       569-586, May 2010.
Lippert, I. et al. Corporate Governance, Employee Voice, and Work Organization. Sustaining high road,
       jobs in the automotive supply industry. Oxford: Oxford U.P., 2014)
Marshall, A. Principles of Economics. 9th edition (variorum). London, Macmillan, 1961.
Penna, Maria Luiza Luiz Camillo: Perfil Intelectual. Rio de Janeiro: Editora FGV, 2014.
Penrose, E. T. The Theory of the Growth of the Firm. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1980 (second edition),
       [1959].
Coutinho, L. and Ferraz, J.C. (coord.) Estudo de Competitividade da Indústria Brasileira. Research report
       IE/Unicamp, IEI/UFRJ, FDC and FUNCEX, 1993.
Vassalo, C. “Como a Metal Leve perdeu o passo”. Revista Exame, July 3rd, 1996.
Wong, D. “The U.S. Auto Industry in the 1990s”. Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Business
       Review, July/August 1990.
Zimmerman, M. B. “A View of Recessions, from the Automotive Industry”. In: J.C. Fuhrer and S.
       Schuch (eds.) Beyond Shocks: What Causes Business Cycles. FRBB Conference series 42, June
       1998.




                                                                                                            20
