                                                                                     1


  Reacting to Samuelson: Early Development Economics and
            the Factor-Price Equalization Theorem
                    Mauro Boianovsky (Universidade de Brasilia)
                            mboianovsky@gmail.com


Abstract. Paul Samuelson’s famous 1948 “factor price equalization theorem” was his
main contribution to international trade theory. He demonstrated conditions under
which trade in goods only would lead to full equalization of the remuneration of
productive factors across countries. In practice, general factor-price equalization has
not been a feature of the international economy, as Samuelson acknowledged. His
theorem came out when development economics was starting to emerge as a new field
of research and policy, largely based on the observed international income
asymmetries between poor and rich countries. The paper investigates how
development economists reacted mostly (but not always) critically to that theorem,
with attention to the methodological issues involved and to Samuelson’s own
perception of the theorem’s relevance.

Key words. Samuelson, factor-price equalization, development economics, trade
theory

JEL codes. B20, B27, B30


Resumo. O famoso teorema de 1948 da “equalização dos preços dos fatores” de Paul
Samuelson foi sua principal contribuição à teoria do comércio internacional. Ele
demonstrou condições sob as quais o comércio de bens iria conduzir à plena
equalização das remunerações dos fatores entre os países. Na prática, a equalização
dos preços dos fatores não tem ocorrido em geral, como Samuelson reconheceu. O
seu teorema veio à tona quando a economia do desenvolvimento estava começando a
emergir como nova área de pesquisa e política, baseada largamente nas assimetrias
internacionais de renda observadas. O trabalho investiga como economistas do
desenvolvimento reagiram em geral (mas não sempre) de forma crítica àquele
teorema, com atenção às questões metodológicas envolvidas e à própria percepção de
Samuelson da relevância do seu teorema.

Palavras-chave. Samuelson, equalização dos preços dos fatores, economia do
desenvolvimento, teoria do comércio internacional

Códigos JEL. B20, B27, B30

Área Anpec. Área 1
                                                                                      2


1. A devastating boomerang?

In 1948 Paul Samuelson put forward his seminal “Factor-Price Equalization” (FPE)
theorem of international trade theory, further developed in Samuelson (1949, 1953-
54). Together with another well-known theorem advanced in his 1941 joint article
with Wolfgang Stolper – that the relatively abundant factor gains, and the relatively
scarce factor loses, in both relative and absolute terms, when a country opens up to
free trade – Samuelson’s FPE theorem formally grafted the Heckscher-Ohlin trade
model (sometimes called Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson) onto the general equilibrium
analysis of the relation between commodity and factor prices, which had been only
partially accomplished by Eli Heckscher ([1919] 1991) and Bertil Ohlin ([1924] 1991;
1933). Whereas the Stolper-Samuelson result was about the effects of trade on income
distribution in a single country, the FPE theorem concerned the impact of trade on
factor remunerations in different countries.
        Samuelson showed that, for countries sharing the same (constant returns to
scale) production functions and for given world demand conditions, free trade is
sufficient to equalize factor remunerations across countries even if factors are
internationally immobile, as long as the number of factors is not larger than the
number of commodities and international differences in factor endowments are not
large enough (in the sense that they lie in the same “cone of diversification”) to cause
specialization in one commodity only. Eventually, it became clear that those
assumptions were also enough to produce the Heckscher-Ohlin factor-proportion
model proposition that a country will export commodities that are intensive in the
country’s relatively abundant factor, and import commodities intensive in the
country’s scarce factor (see Chipman 1966, pp. 19-25; De Marchi 1976, pp. 110-12;
Jones 1983, pp. 84-93; Niehans 1990, pp. 428-29). Samuelson’s theorem of
international convergence of factor prices (particularly wages) – and its implication
that free trade ensures world Pareto optimality and maximization of production –
went significantly beyond the classical (Ricardian) comparative advantages theory
that trade would bring about mutual gains for all trading countries.1
        Development economics, with its focus on international economic
heterogeneity, emerged as a new economic sub-discipline in the post-war period,
around the same time when Samuelson published his FPE articles (see Arndt 1987,
chapter 3; Meier 2005, chapters 4 and 5; Perrotta 2016; Alacevich and Boianovsky
2018a; Alacevich 2018). According to Albert Hirschman ([1977] 1981, p. 60) – who
was of course one of the prominent development pioneers (Hirschman 1958) – that
was not just a coincidence: the widespread attention commanded by development
economists’ burgeoning explanations of international inequalities was elicited
precisely by the apparent contradiction between Samuelson’s “brilliant theoretical
capstone of classical and neoclassical theory” of international trade and the increasing
perception of acute widening income differences.
        While in Kuhn’s scientific revolution sequence, the accumulating facts is
        supposed to gradually contradict the paradigm, here the theory contributed to
        the contradiction by resolutely walking away from the facts. As a result,
        Samuelson’s findings – even though they have been put forward with all due
        warnings about the unrealistic and demanding nature of the assumptions on

1 Abba Lerner demonstrated factor-price equalization in a seminar paper presented at
the LSE in 1933, but published only in 1952, under Lionel Robbins initiative, upon
the publication of Samuelson (1948a).
                                                                                     3


        which they rested – acted as a devastating boomerang for the traditional
        theory and its claim to usefulness in explaining the problems of the real world.
        (Hirschman [1977] 1981, p. 60; italics added)
Hirschman (ibid) ascribed the credibility of the less refined challenges advanced by
Raul Prebisch (1950) and Hans Singer (1950) – based on the hypothesis of secular
declining terms of trade of primary commodities exported by developing countries,
called the “Prebisch-Singer thesis” – to the double fact that they tackled upfront the
international asymmetry issue and to the “self-inflicted wound from which the
classical theory was … suffering” after Samuelson’s FPE articles.
        Historians of development economics have endorsed Hirschman’s claim (see
e.g. Love 1980, p. 63; Streeten 1981, p. 102). However, as discussed in the present
paper, the general picture is more complex and nuanced than suggested by
Hirschman’s suggestive but all too brief remarks. Prebisch and Singer, the authors
mentioned by Hirschman, did not refer to Samuelson’s FPE theorem – or to the
Heckscher-Ohlin model for that matter – at the time.2 Instead, they criticized the
classical Ricardian approach to the international division of labor. Ragnar Nurkse
(1961a, 1961b), another influential development economist, expressed his
bewilderment at Samuelson’s FPE proposition and, like Prebisch and Singer, took
classical trade theory instead as his main target. Surely, the absence of explicit
reactions – which may be regarded as a sort of reaction – to the FPE theorem by
Prebisch, Singer and some other development economists (such as Arthur Lewis 1954,
1955) does not imply that they were unaware of it, but the reasons for they not
referring to that theorem should be taken into account.
        Explicit critical reactions to Samuelson (1948a, 1949), from the perspective of
development economics, came from Thomas Balogh (1949) and, especially, Gunnar
Myrdal (1957, chap. 11), who fits best Hirschman’s claim. However, Gottfried
Haberler and others disputed Myrdal’s interpretation and criticism of the FPE theorem
at the time. Both Balogh and Myrdal rejected the “static” equilibrium approach of
Samuelson’s trade model, and urged the adoption of “dynamic” formulations
featuring increasing returns and cumulative causation. Their reactions reflected
misgivings about the broader issue of formal modeling as a method of economic
enquiry, of which Samuelson was a major representative at the time (see Morgan
2012). Development economics as a whole did not join the drive for formalization
that dominated economics after World War II, in part because of the intrinsic
difficulty of concepts such as multiple equilibria and coordination failures, deployed
by early development economists.3
        Development economists did not generally engage with the mathematical
debates about the validity of Samuelson’s proofs of the FPE theorem. Tinbergen
(1949) was an exception, written before his path-breaking contributions to the
theories of economic policy and development planning in the 1950s. He called
attention to the problems posed by specialization After Samuelson (1953-54), the
main theoretical issue involved in the FPE theorem turned out to be whether factor

2 It was only much later that Singer (1998, p. 23) would refer to the contradiction
between the “assumption of a tendency towards global convergence implicit … in the
Stolper-Samuelson [sic] thesis of an equalization of factor prices” and the empirical
evidence.
3 See Krugman (1993, p. 26), who contrasts Samuelson’s mathematical formulation of

the Heckscher-Ohlin model with the largely verbal approach of contemporary
development economics.
                                                                                        4


prices are uniquely determined from goods prices in a general equilibrium world of
many factors and goods (see Chipman 1966, pp. 25-35; De Marchi 1976, pp. 116-17).
The formal theoretical concern with uniqueness was alien to development economists’
overall preoccupation with the empirical implications of the theorem.
        Interpreting Samuelson’s (1948a, 1949, 1953-54) trade model was anything
but straightforward. Samuelson was, of course, aware that his theorem was violated
by conspicuous differences in observed international factor prices. Sections 10 and 11
of his 1948 article presented a discussion of the reasons behind persistent differences
in wages and other factor prices even under free trade conditions. As he
acknowledged, “I cannot pretend to present a balanced appraisal of the bearing of [the
FPE theorem] upon interpreting the actual world, because my own mind is not made
up on this question” (Samuelson 1949, p. 181). He seemed torn between the purely
theoretical and pedagogical relevance of the theorem and its empirical validity.4 Paul
Rosenstein-Rodan’s (1957, 1961), author in 1943 of a pivotal article often regarded as
the founding analytical text of development economics (see Alacevich 2018),
interpreted Samuelson’s theorem as relevant for specifying the circumstances
explaining the observed absence of international factor price equalization. That does
not square with Hirschman’s ([1977] 1981) thesis. At the time, Rosenstein-Rodan was
Samuelson’s colleague at MIT, where they interacted about development issues,
which increases the likelihood that his reading of the theorem was relatively close to
Samuelson’s own meaning.
        Samuelson was well informed about the booming literature on economic
development, as witnessed by the new chapter about that topic (one of the first in an
introductory textbook) and by his non-critical mention of Prebisch’s terms-of-trade
argument, introduced in the third and fourth editions respectively of his hugely
successful Economics (Samuelson 1955, 1958). Indeed, Samuelson’s new chapter
placed him as part of the development economics landscape, even if he could not be
called a development economist per se (see Boianovsky 2019a). Samuelson was
affected by the general interest in economic development (and growth) that took the
economic profession by storm in the 1950s and 1960s, which Hirschman overlooked.
Economics is full of references to the widening gap between rich and poor countries,
called “Two Worlds” in the book (Samuelson 1961, pp. 116-18). Interestingly enough,
as pointed out by John Toye and Richard Toye (2003, p. 441), Samuelson asserted in
the final pages of his 1948 article the empirical declining trend of the terms of trade of
primary producers, shortly before its canonization by Prebisch and Singer.
        Significantly, Economics contained, from the first edition, a subsection on
“International commodity movements as a partial substitute for labor and factor
movements” (Samuelson 1948b, p. 557), which presented Ohlin’s ideas about the
tendency to partial equalization of factor prices, with reference to his 1933 book.
Puzzling enough, there was no mention of Samuelson’s own theorem put forward that
same year.
        Samuelson’s (and Lerner’s) FPE theorem raised mixed reactions from trade
economists. Gottfried Haberler ([1955] 1961), p. 19) – who had taught Samuelson
trade theory at Harvard in the 1930s – concluded in his well-known survey that the

4 Samuelson (1948b, p. 8) insisted that “the test of a theory’s validity is its usefulness
in illuminating observed reality. Its logical elegance and fine-spun beauty are
irrelevant. Consequently, when a student says, ‘That’s all right in theory but not in
practice’, he really means ‘That’s not all right in the relevant theory,’ or else he is
talking nonsense.”
                                                                                      5


theorem, “though formally correct, rests on such restrictive and unrealistic
assumptions that it can hardly be regarded as a valuable contribution to economic
theory.” Haberler’s reaction is significant also because he was a development
economist, although he belonged (together with Jacob Viner, Peter Bauer and Gerald
Meier) to what was then the neoclassical minority view that opposed such notions as
the Prebisch-Singer thesis, disguised unemployment and the role of market failures in
explaining underdevelopment phenomena (see Little 1982, chapter 4). This indicates
that Hirschman’s ([1977] 1981) association between orthodox trade theory and the
FPE theorem should not be taken at face value.
        Some of the methodological issues involved in the interpretation of the FPE
theorem came to the fore when Fritz Machlup (1964) used it as evidence against
Samuelson’s (1963) indictment of theories that deploy unrealistic assumptions, as in
Milton Friedman’s economic methodology. Unlike Haberler (and closer to
Rosenstein-Rodan), Machlup, who was also a trade theorist, argued for the relevance
of the FPE theorem as instrumental in showing how divergences between real
economic conditions and the assumed ideal ones could account for actual factor-price
differentials. Clearly, Samuelson’s theorem offered distinct reading possibilities, not
least by development economists. Such hermeneutic issues should not surprise
historians of economics (see e.g. Brown 2003).

2. Samuelson vs. Ohlin on Factor-Price Equalization

In a Swedish article published in 1919 (translated in part in 1949 and in full in 1991)
as part of a controversy with Knut Wicksell, Eli Heckscher had argued, but not
proved, that factor-price equalization through trade would be complete under the
assumption that (linear homogenous) production functions are the same across
countries. International trade stemmed from differences in factor endowments, unlike
the Ricardian version of comparative costs, which stressed instead relative differences
in productive efficiency under the assumption of a single productive factor (labor).
From the perspective of Ricardian trade theory, factor price equalization could only
be the result of perfect international mobility of productive factors, but that would
eliminate the reasons for trade altogether. David Ricardo’s classical model led
necessarily to specialization, instead of diversification as in Heckscher’s neoclassical
formulation. Heckscher, however, did not believe factor-price equalization was
actually observed. The main reason was specialization à la Ricardo, caused by the
high probability that factor proportions would be outside of (what is now called) the
cone of diversification, so that no good is produced in both countries (Heckscher
[1919] 1991, pp. 54-55, 58-59; Flam and Flanders 1991, pp. 8-10).
        Ohlin ([1924] 1991; 1933) combined Heckscher’s trade theory with Walrasian
general equilibrium, which he had learned in Stockholm from Gustav Cassel, adding
several new elements on the way. As a result of the shift towards enlarged production
of those commodities in which the abundant factors predominate, trade will bring
about an increase of the price of such factors and reduction of the price of the scarce
factors in each country. Hence, there will be a tendency, deemed necessarily
incomplete by Ohlin, towards an equalization of factor prices between trading
countries. Commenting on Heckscher’s suggestion of factor-price equalization, Ohlin
(1933, p. 38) asserted that “such a result is, however, almost unthinkable and certainly
highly improbable”; but, as Samuelson (1948a, pp. 167-69) pointed out, he did not
produce a proof that equalization is necessarily partial. Despite Ohlin’s mathematical
appendix, formal modeling had not yet reached the dominance Samuelson would
                                                                                       6


achieve with his 1947 Foundations and many models he put forward before and after
that, particularly in trade theory, his favorite subject. As put by Edward Leamer (2012,
p. 53), a mathematician like Samuelson would never say that a theorem is
“unthinkable” and “highly improbable”. The mere statement of a theorem “makes it
thinkable and whatever the theorem says, it is true, false, or not decided yet”.
        Samuelson (1948a, p. 169) set out to prove Ohlin’s claim of partial FPE.
Instead, to his own surprise, he established that factor-price equalization was not only
“possible” and “probable” but in a wide variety of circumstances “inevitable” (ibid).
Given the assumptions listed in section 1 above, and restricting the argument to two
countries, two factors (labor and capital) and two goods, the first step in the
demonstration is that trade, in the absence of transportation costs and tariffs, equalizes
the relative prices of the two goods between the two countries. Second, in each
country the marginal product of each factor in each industry depends only on the
capital/labor ratio in that industry (because of the linear homogeneity assumption).
Costs depend only on the relative amount of inputs, not on the scale of output. Third,
factor intensities in each industry are determined by the relative prices of goods in
each country, which implies that, since both countries have the same production
functions, their factor intensities are the same in each industry, even if factor
endowments are different. Finally, with the same factor intensities, the marginal
productivity of each factor is also the same in both countries, which means that factor
prices are equalized. If, under free trade, factor-prices were not equal, then costs and
commodity prices could not be equal (Samuelson 1948a; see also Meade (1955,
chapter 20; Haberler [1955] 1961, pp. 18-19; Niehans 1990, pp. 429-30).5
        Ohlin had fallen into the “fallacy that regions with divergent endowments
could not without contradiction generate exactly equal factor returns” (Samuelson
1991, p. ix; italics in the original). However, in his 1941 article with Stolper,
Samuelson still endorsed Ohlin’s argument about partial equalization and went as far
as making the fallacious point that “It is clear that equalization is only partial because
otherwise we would be involved in the contradiction that differences in comparative
cost would disappear, and there would be no trade” (Stolper and Samuelson 1941, p.
59). In fact, the Stolper-Samuelson theorem was derived as a direct extension of the
Heckscher-Ohlin original concern with the effects of trade on distribution. Ohlin
(1967, pp. 27, 310) accepted Samuelson’s “penetrating” analysis of the conditions
under which complete equalization occurs, but warned against excessive emphasis on
the factor proportions (Heckscher-Ohlin) model as compared to the investigation of
the influence of practical matters such as the roles of transportation costs and taxation
in trade.
        Samuelson’s language changed between the Stolper-Samuelson and the FPE
theorems. The proof of the Stolper-Samuelson was essentially verbal, with some help
from graphs. The mathematical proof of factor-price equalization increased in
complexity throughout Samuelson’s three original articles on the topic (see Leamer

5 Samuelson (1953-54) later extended the demonstration to n goods, n countries and n
factors, establishing in the process the general “mapping” proposition that to a given
set of commodity prices there corresponds a certain set of factor prices, which raised
criticism and further mathematical proofs from H. Kuhn, D. Gale, H. Nikaido, L.
McKenzie and I. Pearce, among others (see Chipman 1966, pp. 29-31, Takayama
1972, chap. 18). Haberler ([1959] 1985, p. 507) referred to that literature as a “highly
esoteric disputation,” an opinion probably shared by (other) development economists
at the time.
                                                                                      7


2012, pp. 54-60). In 1949 he took into account the possibility of factor-intensities
reversals and their implication for multiple equilibria and for the relationship between
factor prices and commodity prices, which would prevent factor-price equalization, as
Lerner had pointed out in 1933 (Samuelson 1949, p. 188; Jones 1983, pp. 88-89). The
controversial character of the FPE theorem persisted, nevertheless. As Samuelson
(undated, p. A3) recalled, “the theorem is in the fascinating range of being almost, but
not quite, obvious. My first exposition was evidently a provocative one; it certainly
evoked an explosion of discussion, and a tempest of refutations and doubts”.6 That
was not true of the Stolper-Samuelson theorem, which from the beginning was far
less polemical. The same may be said of Ohlin’s argument about partial factor-price
equalization, often regarded as more general than Samuelson’s 1948 theorem.
        Haberler’s ([1955] 1961, p. 18) verdict – that the assumptions behind the FPE
theorem are so unrealistic that it can be said to prove the opposite of what it seems to
intend, “namely that there is no chance whatsoever that factor prices will ever be
equalized by free commodity trade” – proved to be influential. Instead, Ohlin’s
“more modest and somewhat imprecise contention”, of a tendency to partial factor-
price equalization, seemed to be a valid empirical proposition (Haberler [1955] 1961,
p. 19).7 That illustrated, from Haberler’s (ibid) perspective, the trade-off between
uncertain and approximate results based on realistic general assumptions on one side,
and precise and unambiguous conclusions generated by highly specific assumptions
on the other. Leamer would come close to Haberler’s assessment years later: “Ohlin
was suggesting something useful, not necessarily valid; Samuelson was offering
something valid, not necessarily useful” (Leamer 2012, p. 50).
        Samuelson’s (1948b, p. 557) mention of Ohlin’s (1933) partial equalization,
instead of referring to his own theorem of complete equalization, suggests that he
shared the view about the generality of Ohlin’s proposition. It might also reflect the
fact that he was not willing to discuss, in an introductory textbook, the assumptions
behind the FPE theorem. According to Samuelson, Ohlin made an important addition
to the classical doctrine of comparative costs:
        Free movements of labor and capital between countries will tend to equalize
        wages and factor prices between countries. However, even without any
        movements of productive factors across national boundaries, there will result
        a partial (but not necessarily complete) equalization of factor prices from the
        free movements of goods in international trade. (Samuelson 1948b, p. 557;
        italics in the original)
        Samuelson (ibid) emphasized the implications of the “Ohlin proposition” for
the impact of free trade on income distribution, along the lines of the Stolper-
Samuelson 1941 theorem, which he mentioned on p. 565. The fact that free trade
acted as partial substitute for the immigration of labor into the United States meant
that labor scarcity in that country would be alleviated by increasing production and
exports of labor-saving goods – aggregate output would go up, but the relative and

6 Balassa (1961) produced a first survey of the literature.
7 Charles Kindleberger (1968, p. 33), Samuelson’s colleague at MIT, deemed the FPE
theorem an “intellectual curiosity,” whereas the trend toward partial equalization was
considered a “significant” proposition for the “real world”. James Meade (1955,
chapters 20-23 and appendixes 6 and 7) provided a first detailed verbal, mathematical
and arithmetical discussion of the theorem (from the perspective of welfare
economics), with the conclusion that maximization of world production would require
international movement of production factors.
                                                                                     8


absolute share of workers in income would decline (Samuelson 1958b, pp. 564-65).
The subsection on Ohlin was kept until the joint edition with William Nordhaus in
1985, when it was removed. In the 4th edition (1958), Samuelson deleted the word
“partial” from the subsection title, but kept the wording of the relevant passage quoted
above. That was changed in the 9th edition, when he mentioned a “tendency toward
equalization of factor-prices” (Samuelson 1973, p. 690) without the qualification
“partial (not necessarily complete)”. Despite moving closer to his own FPE theorem,
Samuelson, throughout successive editions of Economics, referred only to Ohlin
(1933) in that connection. Surely, factor-price complete equalization was
incompatible with lack of international convergence of income per capita discussed
elsewhere in that book (see, e.g., Samuelson 1961, pp. 117, 778).
        Upon proving his FPE theorem, Samuelson (1948a, p. 178) asked whether he
had not “proved too much”, since factor-prices differentials had persisted even in
periods when trade was relatively free, as between the last quarter of the 19th century
and the first decade of the 20th. In order to account for such persistence, Samuelson
pointed to the problematic realism of three assumptions. The first was the absence of
transportation costs. Second, factor-price equalization would be prevented by
complete specialization provoked by huge differences in factor endowments or by use
of productive factors in the same proportion in different commodities. Finally, and
most importantly from Samuelson’s (1948a, p. 181) perspective, Ohlin’s proportions-
of-the-factors trade theory suffered from some fundamental shortcomings, as it was
based on two debatable assumptions: (i) production functions are the same all over the
world and (ii) productive factors are homogenous and commensurable across
countries. Ohlin thought it self-evident that the production function should be the
same in every country, since the same causes everywhere produce the same effects,
which he called the “laws of nature” (see also Haberler [1955] 1961, p. 19, n. 6).
Samuelson disagreed.
        The laws of nature may be the same “everywhere,” but the laws of nature and
        the economically relevant production function, relating maximum output
        obtainable from specified concrete inputs, are two quite different things.
        Effective knowledge (“know-how”) is probably as important a variable in
        understanding economic history and geography as is specific factor
        endowment … The “effective organization” is different. (Samuelson 1948a, p.
        181)
Differences in productivity among countries, for the same amount of productive
factors, could not be accounted by assuming that “knowledge” is “scarce” in one
country relative to another. The factor of “technical knowledge” should be regarded
as an input in the production process, but with its peculiarities, Samuelson claimed:
“knowledge is not an input such that the more you use of it, the less there is left”
(Samuelson 1948a, p. 181). This pointed to the specificity of knowledge (or “ideas”)
as non-rivalrous economic goods, leading to increasing returns. Samuelson left it at
that. The issue would become central to models of endogenous technical progress and
growth developed by Paul Romer and others in the 1980s and 1990s (see Boianovsky
and Hoover 2014).
                                                                                      9


3. Development, trade and international divergence

3.1 Rosenstein-Rodan, Nurkse and balanced growth
Samuelson’s (1948a, 1949) discussion of factor-price equalization and the reasons for
persistent divergence across countries caught Rosenstein-Rodan’s (1957, 1961)
attention in his contribution to the first ever international conference on economic
development, held by the International Economic Association in Rio in 1957.
Rosenstein- Rodan was a member of the MIT Center for International Studies
(CENIS), a foremost research center on economic development, which circulated his
conference paper (Rosenstein-Rodan 1957; see also Boianovsky and Hoover 2014).
The paper was probably read by Samuelson, who referred often in his Economics to
Rosenstein-Rodan’s influential argument about the role of external economies,
indivisibilities and increasing returns in explaining underdevelopment, as well as the
balanced growth and big push development strategies (see Boianovsky 2019a). Apart
from his research activities at CENIS, Rosenstein-Rodan taught development
economics at the MIT economics department. According to the reading lists of
courses on “Economic Development” at some of the main American economics
departments (MIT, Harvard, Chicago, Columbia and Yale), collected as “Readings in
Economic Development” in the American Economist in 1963, Samuelson (1948a,
1949) figured only in the bibliography for the MIT development course (of course,
those articles were listed in the bibliographies for international trade courses nearly
everywhere).
        Rosenstein-Rodan (1961, pp. 63-65) discussed whether the international
market could solve the problems of complementarity and indivisility of demand in
closed developing economies, and by that obviate the need for a minimum quantum
of investment to get such economies out of their low level equilibrium trap. He argued
that the international mobility of products was an imperfect substitute for the mobility
of factors. Trade reduced, but did not eliminate, the size of the minimum push
required. The argument was based on Samuelson (1948a, sections 10 and 11), to
which Rosenstein-Rodan referred while discussing the three reasons for persistent
inequality given by Samuelson. The great expansion of the world market in the 19th
century did not brought about equalization or even reduction in price-factor
inequalities. The reasons were not transport costs or complete specialization.
Transport costs had been sharply reduced up to mid twentieth century, and partial
specialization become increasingly important. “Therefore,” argued Rosenstein-Rodan
(p. 64), “the main explanation of why this tendency to a growing equalization of
factor rewards did not materialize – why, in fact, labor rewards tended to become
more unequal – must rest on the assumption that production functions are different in
various parts of the world.” That was, of course, Samuelson’s own explanation of the
observed divergence. Rosenstein-Rodan quoted Samuelson’s remarks about the
character of “knowledge” as an input, and noticed its role as a major source of
increasing returns.8
        From a methodological perspective, Rosenstein-Rodan’s reading of
Samuelson’s FPE theorem was relatively close to Machlup’s (1964) later
interpretation, although in a different context. Machlup was critical of Samuelson’s
(1947, 1963) claims that economists should restrict themselves to “operationally

8 External economies also explained why, despite lower wages in underdeveloped
countries, foreign investment in those areas had not been big enough to reduce the
international inequality of factor rewards (Rosenstein-Rodan 1961, pp. 66-67).
                                                                                      10


meaningful theorems” and avoid using “unrealistic” assumptions as in Friedman’s as
if methodology, called “F-twist” by Samuelson (1963) (see also Blaug 1980, pp. 99-
103, 113, 213, and Caldwell 1982, pp. 189-95, who both side with Machlup’s
counter-criticism). According to Machlup (1964; see also Machlup 1978, p. 455),
Samuelson’s formulation of the FPE theorem showed that he often did not practice
operationalism and was in fact close to Friedman’s version of falsificationism. That
theorem, Machlup pointed out, is deduced from a large set of abstract, unrealistic
assumptions, some of which are patently counterfactual. Machlup noticed how
Samuelson (1948a, sections 10 and 11; 1949, pp. 196-97) introduced several
“qualifications” to reconcile the abstract analysis with the observed absence of
equalization.
        These “qualifications” to the theorem furnish Samuelson with the “causes” of
        the factor-price diversities. In other words, he does not hesitate, quite rightly
        in my view, to explain the observed facts of life – factor-price differentials –
        by divergences of real conditions from the ideal ones which form the basis of
        the factor-price equalization theorem … Samuelson … produces his best work
        when he deduces from unrealistic assumptions general theoretical propositions
        which help us to interpret some of the empirical observations of the complex
        situations (Machlup 1964, p. 735)
Machlup’s assessment of Samuelson’s FPE theorem was quite distinct from
Haberler’s ([1955] 1961), who claimed that its unrealistic assumptions and the
conflict between its predictions and the data rendered it largely useless. That reflected
their different methodological standpoints, as Haberler was closer to T. Hutchison’s
approach, called “ultra-empiricist” by Machlup (see Blaug 1980, pp. 96-97;
Boianovsky 2000).9
        Nurkse’s (1961a) comments on Rosenstein-Rodan’s Rio paper illustrated the
general resistance among trade and development economists alike in replacing
classical (Ricardian) trade theory for Samuelson’s new theoretical framework.
Ricardian comparative advantage was a “static doctrine, showing how, under given
conditions, output and welfare can be maximized” (Nurkse 1961a, p. 77). Persistent
and even widening differences in real wages and income per capita levels, in spite of
international trade, was not incompatible with the classical trade model (see also
Haberler [1955] 1961, p. 17). In this sense, Samuelson’s (1948a, 1949) FPE theorem,
built on a “special set of carefully selected assumptions,” represented, from Nurkse’s
point of view, not so much a refinement of but a break with the classical paradigm.
His difficulty to come to terms with Samuelson’s analysis is clear.
        I should be grateful for further instructions on this point, but my impression is
        that international income differences are a modern obsession. At any rate by
        nineteenth-century classics (of whom Samuelson is not one) trade was
        supposed to raise income levels in all countries. Was anything said about its
        tending to equalize incomes as well? (Nurkse 1961a, p. 78; italics in the
        original)
Static classical (and, for that matter, Heckscher-Ohlin) trade analysis did not go a long
way illuminating the process of economic development and growth. Dynamic
economics – as defined by Roy Harrod, cited by Nurkse (1961b, p. 252) in that

9Haberler, Machlup and Rosenstein-Rodan were colleagues at the University of
Vienna in the early 1920s. Rosenstein-Rodan’s first articles reflected his Austrian
background, which is also noticeable in some aspects of his contributions to
development economics.
                                                                                      11


connection – involved rates of change, as in the case of the values of price and income
elasticities of demand for primary commodities abroad in a growing international
economy. If world demand for those commodities should fail to expand at the same
pace as the rate of growth of income in advanced countries, Rosenstein-Rodan’s
complementarity of consumers’ wants argument becomes relevant as a basis for the
balanced growth strategy of home market expansion (Nurkse 1961a, p. 77; 1961b, pp.
250-52).

3.2 Myrdal, Balogh and dynamics
Instead of Nurkse’s discontinuity between classical and neoclassical (Samuelsonian)
trade theory, Myrdal (1957, chapter 11) – in a book that attracted wide attention, even
more so because Myrdal was then ending his term as Executive Secretary of the
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe – stressed continuity. A prominent
Swedish economist, contemporary of both Heckscher and Ohlin, he was familiar with
and critical of their trade model, which he saw as faithful to the heritage of classical
trade doctrine and its system of static assumptions, laissez-faire bias and harmony of
interest (Myrdal 1957, p. 151; see also Myrdal [1932] 1953). Myrdal perceived
Samuelson (1948a) as the culmination of a trend of thought started by the classical
doctrine, with its “implicit” notion that trade contributed to a tendency towards partial
and gradual factor-prices equalization.10 The notion of trade as a substitute for, or an
alternative to, factor movements became explicit in the Heckscher-Ohlin model (ibid,
p. 148). “Upon this foundation”, Myrdal (pp. 148-49) reported, a lively discussion
took place in the post-war years between “econometricians”, ignited by Samuelson’s
FPE theorem, which he cited.
        We thus see the strange thing that in recent decades, while international
        income inequalities have been growing and recently also become of more and
        more pressing practical concern in international politics, the theory of
        international trade has developed in the direction of stressing more and more
        the idea that trade initiates a tendency toward a gradual equalization of factor
        prices and incomes as between different countries … This discord between
        facts and theory has not generally been stressed. (Myrdal 1957, pp. 149, 154)11
This is close to Hirschman’s ([1977] 1981) claim, quoted in section 1 above, although
he did not refer to Myrdal in that connection. Myrdal took Samuelson’s FPE theorem
at is face value, without discussing the nature of the assumptions and, consequently,
Samuelson’s own misgivings about factor-price equalization in practice, which raised
criticism from Haberler ([1955] 1961, p. 18) and Gerald Meier (1958, p. 284) that
Myrdal had misread Samuelson.
        Myrdal’s main criticism was that trade theory in general – and the FPE
theorem in particular – did not address the main feature of the international economy,

10 Haberler ([1955] 1961, p. 17; [1959] 1985, pp. 506-07)) took Myrdal to task for his
interpretation and criticism of classical trade theory in that regard. “What classical
theory really teaches us,” he claimed, “is that trade will benefit every country, rich
and poor, but not that mere trade will necessarily remove or even reduce international
inequality” (Haberler [1959] 1985, p. 507).
11 Myrdal, like Nurkse and other development economists, tended to treat factor-price

equalization and income per capita convergence as the same or very close phenomena.
Factor-price equalization will indeed tend to induce income convergence, but actual
convergence will depend also on factor quantities and their distribution (see Slaughter
1997).
                                                                                      12


that is, inequality between developed and underdeveloped countries. He ascribed that
to the overall concern with static equilibrium and disregard for circular cumulative
disequilibrium processes that could explain increasing international disparity, caused
by strong “backwash effects” and weak “spread effects” in poor countries (Myrdal
1957, chapters 5 and 11). Myrdal’s claim that trade not just did not lead to
equalization but contributed to increasing international differences was challenged by
Meier (1958, p. 284; 1963, pp. 163-64) and Balassa (1961, p. 120), who both charged
him for mixing up static and dynamic issues. Instead of claiming that trade is the
cause of international inequality, it would be more appropriate to conclude, argued
Meier, that actual conditions had deviated from the optimum conditions assumed in
the FPE theorem. Accordingly, Myrdal’s policy conclusion of protectionism did not
follow, but rather the conclusion that it was necessary to remove domestic market
imperfections and obstacles to international factor mobility, so that the trend to factor-
price equalization was intensified. Only by “misinterpreting the factor-price
equalization theorem, and by ignoring all the other dynamic benefits of trade, can the
absence of equal factor prices be constructed as indicating that trade makes no
contribution to development,” Meier (1963, p. 165) contended.12
         Even though Myrdal (1957) was the best-known critical reaction to the FPE
theorem by a development economist at the time, the first thorough account came
from another heterodox economist interested in economic development, the Oxford
émigré Hungarian economist Thomas Balogh (1949). Balogh’s immediate reaction to
and familiarity with Samuelson’s work may be in part explained by the fact that they
both had contributed chapters about the post-war “dollar shortage” problem, featured
in Seymour Harris’s (1948) well-known collection. He was aware that Samuelson
(1948a) was representative of the new role of abstract theoretical models in economic
reasoning (Balogh 1949, pp. 191-92). However, from Balogh’s standpoint, models are
as good as the assumption they make. Samuelson’s “great merit” was to bring to light
the assumptions necessary to engender the factor-price equalization result, as well as
the unrealistic character of many of them. Balogh’s first impression was that
Samuelson’s (1948a) goal was to produce a damaging “reductio ad absurdum” of the
assumptions that underlie Heckscher-Ohlin trade theory. However, closer reading
indicated that Samuelson retained “considerable tenderness for the assumptions which
lead to such strange conclusions; nor do the conclusions seem so strange to him as
they do to others” (Balogh 1949, p. 193).
         Like Myrdal (1957), Balogh focused his criticism on Samuelson’s concern
with static equilibrium, instead of dynamic processes associated with increasing
returns to scale, endogenous capital supply and economic interaction between
countries of different levels of development. It should be noted – although Balogh did
not mention it – that Ohlin (1933) had discussed increasing returns and elastic
(instead of given) factor supplies and their implications for the pattern of trade and
factor-price equalization. According to Ohlin (1933, p. 124), factor “supply reactions”,
as the remuneration of the abundant factor rises, “tend to offset the price-equalizing
tendencies of trade”, because of increasing specialization caused by ensuing higher
disparity in factor supplies (see also Stiglitz 1970). Samuelson (1949b, pp. 195-96)
was aware of Ohlin’s remarks about the relevance of increasing returns for trade and
international disparities, but it was not clear how to formalize those effects, mainly

12However, according to modern trade theory (see Leamer 2012, p. 76), if countries
before trade have significant technological differences, then trade can cause
divergences in factor prices, which vindicates aspects of Myrdal’s contention.
                                                                                     13


because of the problem of modeling imperfectly competitive market structures.13
Balogh (1949, p. 198) did not formalize either, but praised Samuelson’s “brilliant
mathematical feat” for setting out the basis of static modern trade theory and clearing
the way for a “new dynamic approach to this essentially dynamic problem”.

3.3 Lewis, CEPAL and the terms of trade
Arthur Lewis (1954), who based his seminal model of development in closed dual
economies on classical economic foundations, made clear that a new framework was
necessary for the study of development in open economies. He moved away from
both Ricardian and Heckscher-Ohlin static trade models – although he preferred the
classical version of comparative advantages, with its emphasis on relative differences
in productive efficiency among countries. Lewis’s (1954, section on “The open
economy”) model of terms of trade between underdeveloped and underdeveloped
economies – specialized in the exports of “tropical” primary commodities and
manufactured goods respectively – assumed that wages in the former are determined
by a perfectly elastic labor supply and by average productivity in the production of
food (see Boianovsly 2019b, pp. 127-31, and references there cited). Falling terms of
trade followed from the lower productivity of the food sector in relatively poor
countries. That was quite different from Samuelson’s FPE theorem, which Lewis did
not mention.
        Prebisch (1950, 1959) – Executive Secretary of the United Nations Economic
Commission for Latin America (CEPAL) from 1950 to 1962 and Secretary General of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) from 1963 to
1969 – was also concerned with falling terms of trade as determinants of the growth
dynamics of open underdeveloped economies. Like Lewis, he did not refer to
Samuelson (1948a). In his 1956 essay about the “Evolution of economic thought in
the last quarter century and its influence in Latin America”, CEPAL economist Juan
Noyola referred to Samuelson’s chapter about the “dollar shortage” in Harris (1948),
but not to Samuelson’s FPE article. Ricardian comparative advantages still stood out
as the standard trade theory against which CEPAL’s arguments about the unequal
division of gains from trade between the underdeveloped “periphery” and
industrialized “center” were raised (Noyola 1956, pp. 276-77). It was only as late as
1977 that Samuelson’s FPE theorem was discussed in any detail in a CEPAL
publication (Cardoso 1977, pp. 9-11) – by apparent coincidence, in the same year
when Hirschman’s argument about Samuelson’s FPE theorem and the history of
development economics came out.
        Fernando H. Cardoso (1977, pp. 10-11) – co-author of the “theory of
dependence”, with strong links with CEPAL – noted, with reference to Haberler
([1955] 1961), that the FPE theorem was not a product of Ricardian trade theory, but
of Samuelson’s (1948a) “more extreme (and weaker)” assumptions, which he “no
longer maintained in later articles.” In any event, Prebisch’s staring-point was not the
neoclassical Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson theory of trade, but classical comparative
advantages theory (Cardoso, p. 12). According to Prebisch’s (1950, p. 1) reading,
classical theory asserted that the benefits of technical progress tend to be evenly
distributed over the whole international economy, either by reduction of prices or

13It was only in the 1980s and 1990s that Paul Krugman and others devised models
of international trade under increasing returns and imperfect competition (see
Maneschi 1998, chap. 9 on “The Heckscher-Ohlin Theory encounters the New Trade
Theory”).
                                                                                      14


increase of incomes. Hence, producers of primary commodities would benefit from
Ricardian international division of labor, with no need to industrialize in order to have
access to manufactured goods. Contrary to the predictions of classical economics,
though, data indicated that the terms of trade of primary goods had deteriorated since
mid 19th century. Whereas productivity advances had led to factor-price increases
(with constant commodity prices) in the industrial “center”, relative prices of primary
commodity had declined in the “periphery”, largely due to rural disguised
unemployment and elastic labor supply throughout the business cycle.
        Prebisch (1950, p. 16; 1959, p. 269) claimed that a process of factor-price and
income equalization would take place only if the “classical” assumptions of free
mobility of factors (especially labor) were valid. But there were great obstacles to
labor migration from the periphery to the center.
        Since prices do not keep pace with productivity … another solution has been
        found by the classical theory. If the advantages of technique were not passed
        on through prices, they would be extended to the same degree by the raising of
        income … This is what happened in the United States as well as in the other
        industrial centers. It did not, however, occur in the rest of the world. It would
        have required throughout the world the same mobility of factors of production
        … as in the internal economy of the United States. In fact … a series of
        obstacles hampered the easy [international] movement of productive factors
        … Thus the observation of one of the essential rules of the classical game
        would have resulted in a considerable lowering of the standard of living of the
        United States … But the classic rules of the game form an indivisible whole.
        (Prebisch 1950, p. 16)
Surely, Prebisch’s interpretation of the “classical” process of income equalization as
grounded on labor mobility did not take into account Samuelson’s theorem that under
certain conditions free trade of goods is a complete substitute for factor movements.
Moreover, Prebisch assumed complete specialization, which is incompatible with that
theorem (see also Boianovsky and Solís 2014).14
        By 1967, Celso Furtado – who had served as head of CEPAL’s development
division from 1950 to 1957 – provided in his economic development textbook, written
for his classes at Sorbonne University, an account of Samuelson’s FPE theorem.
Furtado (1985, p. 225) probably learned of FPE while attending Meade’s classes in
Cambridge in 1957-58. Modern trade theory was perceived as just an aspect of static
general equilibrium theory (Furtado, 1967, chapter 15; cf. De Marchi 1976 and Blaug
1980 chap. 11 for a similar assessment). The Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson paradigm
had led to a “double optimist thesis”: international trade was an element of
transmission of “dynamic impulses” that tended to equalize factor prices across
countries. However, due to the operation of Engel’s Law (stressed by H.W. Singer)
and other influences, trade had caused instead income concentration in favor of
industrialized countries through the deterioration of terms of trade (Furtado 1967, pp.
180-82). Furtado’s distinction between static trade theory and dynamic international
divergence was close to Myrdal (1957), which he mentioned in that regard.




14Flanders’s (1964, p. 310) interpretation that Prebisch assumed FPE in his argument
about falling terms of trade is inaccurate.
                                                                                     15


4. Samuelson’s vindication

In his contribution to the Haberler Festschrift, possibly as a reaction to Haberler’s
(and others’) criticism, Samuelson (1965, pp. 45-46) distinguished between “global”
and “local” FPE theorems. Even if the actual world does not display a single pattern
of factor prices, trade may still equalize factor prices for distinct sets of countries
belonging in the same cone of diversification, that is, with similar factor endowments.
Unlike the “global” theorem, Samuelson claimed that its “local” version was formally
and empirically more accurate. Hence, trade would equalize factor prices for a set of
countries formed by Australia, New Zealand, Canada and the United States, and for
labor-rich countries such as China, India, Pakistan, and so forth.
        He added a twist to the argument in one of his last (and most controversial)
articles. Samuelson (2004) came back to his FPE theorem, now from the point of
view of American international trade performance in connection with outsourcing,
international competition and their effects on employment and real wages. He argued
that if China or South Korea made technical progress (probably through imitation) in
producing goods in which the US previously had comparative advantage, this would
cause a permanent decline in real wages in the US, especially of unskilled workers.
The result would be the same if mass immigration to the US of similar workers were
allowed, accompanied by a substantial increase in income of the new immigrants as
compared to their previous income before immigration. The apparent ability of
Samuelson’s theoretical result to explain observed facts in the early 21st century, he
claimed, vindicated his FPE theorem advanced in 1948/1949.
        Therefore, as a result of my 1948-1949 revival and perfecting of the 1919-
        1933 Heckscher-Ohlin argumentation of factor price quasi-equalization by
        trade in goods alone, one could have foreseen the following at World War II’s
        end. Historically U.S. workers used to have a de facto monopoly access to
        superlative capitals and know-hows…of the United States … However, after
        World War II, this U.S. capital and know-how begun to spread faster away
        from the United States. That meant that in a real sense foreign educable
        masses – first in Western Europe, then throughout the Pacific Rim – could and
        did genuinely provide the same kind of competitive pressures on U.S. lower
        middle class wage earnings that mass migration would have threatened to do
        (Samuelson 2004, p. 144; italics in original).
        Samuelson’s argument was that, to the extent that American technology
spreads to other countries, the assumption of identical production functions – which
he had criticized in 1948 and 1949 – becomes reasonable and so does the FPE
theorem. His point about trade as a substitute for migration may be found as well in
his 1948 article and in his 1964 reply to Machlup. Indeed, writing before the Marshall
Plan, the “practical moral” he took from his theorem concerned the dubious wisdom
of large-scale migration to Canada or Australia from Great Britain, a densely
populated country that in the post-war period was suffering from loss of overseas
investment income, “high food prices and adverse terms of trade” (Samuelson 1948a,
p. 183). Widespread emigration was not the way out, since, “despite numerous
qualifications”, the core point of his article was that “relatively free commodity trade
was a better substitute for mobility of factors of production that was hitherto thought
to be the case.” Such “strong polar case”, he claimed, should shed some light on
reality (Samuelson 1964, p. 737). British migration on large scale to work on food
production abroad was not advisable even if the “abnormally favorable” agricultural
terms of trade persisted. Moreover, he was skeptical that “this abnormal trend of the
                                                                                    16


terms of trade, counter to historical drift, will continue” (ibid, p. 184).15
        Samuelson’s mention of declining agricultural terms of trade as part of his
application of the FPE theorem to a specific case indicates that he did not see them as
incompatible with one another, but as standing on different levels of analyses.
Samuelson (1955: 682-683) had given qualified support to protectionist
industrialization policies based on the Prebisch-Singer influential thesis of falling
terms of trade against agricultural goods exported by Latin American countries.
According to Samuelson (ibid; italics in original), Prebisch’s point was “really an
argument about what will be the future comparative advantage of the countries in
question. To the degree that governments are smarter than private investors in
discerning trends threatening to the terms of trade, a valid case can be made for their
interfering with free market forces.”
        A main difference between Samuelson’s (1948a, 1949) general equilibrium
international trade theory and trade models put forward by development economists,
as discussed above, was the assumption about labor supply and wage determination.
As put by Edmar Bacha (1978: 319) in his restatement of Prebisch’s unequal
exchange thesis in a Ricardian model of international trade with surplus labor and
specialization, trade under these conditions is unequal to poor countries in the
normative sense that “its terms of trade are lower then they would be under a Pareto-
efficient trade arrangement allowing for perfect international labor mobility.”
Samuelson (1981) would eventually acknowledge the effects of low wages on the
terms of trade and unequal economic development. As part of an exercise in the
forecasting of economic development trends, he stated that, only after underdeveloped
countries experienced their “industrial revolutions” and demographic transitions,

       Only then will the affluent nations stand to lose some of the historic consumer
       surplus that they have enjoyed from international trade – trade that has
       historically involved imports of fiber, food, and ores produced in the tropics
       by low-wage populations … If that happy day comes when South-east Asia,
       Africa and Latin America afford a comfortable middle class standard of living
       to their stabilized populations, we should be content to depend upon
       mechanized mines and farms for our needed raw materials, uncomplainingly
       paying the necessary costs for the goods we need (Samuelson 1981, p. 412).

That “happy day” eventually came to some parts of the underdeveloped world, as
Samuelson (2004) would claim.
        The view that Samuelson’s FPE theorem does not hold across countries, and
that its relevance comes from testing the various reasons why it does not hold –
despite Samuelson’s vindication in some circumstances – gained increasingly assent
from trade theorists and econometricians (see e.g. Kemp 1964, p. 45; Leamer and
Levinsohn 1995, pp. 1536-37; Baldwin 2008, chapter 5). This is close to Rosenstein-
Rodan’s (1957, 1961) interpretation and to Machlup’s (1964) methodological
assessment. The reactions to and the consequences of Samuelson’s 1948 theorem
proved to be more complex and diversified than Hirschman ([1977] 1981) suggested.


15Samuelson’s source was probably Kindleberger (1943), who had argued forcefully
that data pointed to secular declining terms of trade of primary commodities.
Samuelson contributed a chapter to that same volume in which Kindleberger’s essay
came out.
                                                                                 17


References
Alacevich, M. (2018) “The birth of development economics: theories and institutions,”
in Alacevich and Boianovsky (2018b): 114-32.
Alacevich, M. and M. Boianovsky (2018a). “Writing the history of development
economics,” in Alacevich and Boianovsky (2018b): 1-14.
Alacevich, M. and M. Boianovsky (eds.) (2018b) The Political Economy of
Development Economics: A Historical Perspective. Annual supplement to History of
Political Economy, 50. Durham, Duke University Press.
Arndt, H.W. (1987) Economic Development: The History of an Idea, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Bacha, E.L. (1978) “An Interpretation of Unequal Exchange from Prebisch-Singer to
Emmanuel,” Journal of Development Economics, 5: 319-330.
Balassa, B. (1961) “The factor-price-equalization controversy”, Weltwirtschaftliches
Archiv, 87: 111-23.
Baldwin, R. (2008) The Great Convergence. Cambridge (Mass.), Harvard University
Press.
Balogh, T. (1949) “Static Models and Current Problems in International Economics,”
Oxford Economic Papers, 1: 191-198.
Blaug, M. (1980) The Methodology of Economics. Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press.
Boianovsky, M. (2000) “In search of a canonical history of macroeconomics in the
interwar period: Haberler’s Prosperity and Depression revisited,” in M. Psalidopoulos
(ed.) The Canon in the History of Economics. London, Routledge: 156-79.
Boianovsky, M. (2019a) “Convergence and divergence: Paul Samuelson on economic
development,” in R. Anderson, W. Barnett and R. Cord (eds.), Paul Samuelson:
Master of Modern Economics, London, Palgrave Macmillan (forthcoming).
Boianovsky, M. (2019b) “Arthur Lewis and the Classical Foundations of
Development Economics,” in L. Fiorito, S. Scheall and C.E. Suprinyak (eds.)
Research in the History of Economic Thought and Methodology, 37A. Bingley UK,
Emerald Publishing: 103-143.
Boianovsky, M. and K.D. Hoover (2014) “In the Kingdom of Solovia: The Rise of
Growth Economics at MIT, 1956-1970,” in E.R. Weintraub (ed.) MIT and the
Transformation of American Economics. Annual supplement to History of Political
Economy, 46. Durham, Duke University Press: 198-228.
Boianovsky, M. and R. Solís (2014) “The origins and development of the Latin
American structuralist approach to the ballance of payments, 1944-1964,” Review of
Political Economy, 26: 23-59.
Brown, V. (2003) “Textuality and the history of economics: intention and meaning,”
in W.J. Samuels, J.E. Biddle and J.B. Davis (eds.) A Companion to the History of
Economic Thought. Oxford, Blackewell: 538-52.
Caldwell, B.J. (1982) Beyond Positivism. London, Routledge.
Cardoso, F.H. (1977) “The originality of a copy: CEPAL and the idea of
development”, CEPAL Review, # 4: 7-40.
Chipman, J.S. (1966) “A survey of the theory of international trade: part 3, the
modern theory,” Econometrica, 34: 18-76.
De Marchi, N. (1976) “Anomaly and the Development of Economics: The Case of the
Leontief Paradox,” in S.J. Latsis (ed.) Method and Appraisal in Economics.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press: 109-127.
Flam, H. and M. June Flanders (eds.) (1991) Heckscher-Ohlin Trade Theory.
Cambridge (Mass.), MIT Press.
                                                                                  18


Flam, H. and M. J. Flanders. (1991) Introduction, in H. Flam and M. June Flanders
(eds.): 1-37.
Flanders, M.J. (1964) “Prebisch on protectionism: an evaluation,” Economic Journal,
74: 305-26.
Furtado, C. (1967) Teoria e Política do Desenvolvimento Econômico. São Paulo, Cia.
Editora Nacional.
Furtado, C. (1985) A Fantasia Organizada. Rio, Paz e Terra.
Haberler, G. [1955] (1961) A Survey of International Trade Theory. 2nd edition.
Princeton, Princeton University, International Finance Section, Special Papers in
International Economics # 1.
Haberler, G. ([1959] 1985). “International trade and economic development,” in
Selected Essays of Gottfried Haberler, ed. by A. Koo. Cambridge (Mass.): MIT Press:
495-527.
Harris, S.E. (ed.) (1948) Foreign Economic Policy for the United States. Cambridge
(Mass.), Harvard University Press.
Heckscher, E. F. [1919] (1991) “The effect of foreign trade on the distribution of
income,” translated by A. Kalckar and S. Laursen, in H. Flam and M. June Flanders
(eds.): 43-69.
Hirschman, A.O. (1958) The Strategy of Economic Development. New Haven, Yale
University Press.
Hirschman, A.O. [1977] (1981) “A Generalized Linkage Approach to Development,
with Special Reference to Staples,” in Essays in Trespassing: Economics to Politics
and Beyond. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press: 59-97. Originally published in
Economic Development and Cultural Change, 25: 67-98.
Jones, R.W. (1983) “International trade theory,” in E.C. Brown and R.M. Solow
(eds.) Paul Samuelson and Modern Economic Theory. New York, McGraw-Hill: 69-
103.
Kemp. M.C. (1964) The Pure Theory of International Trade. Englewood Cliffs (NJ),
Prentive-Hall.
Kindleberger, C. (1943) “International monetary stabilization”, in S.E. Harris (ed.)
Postwar Economic Problems. New York, McGraw-Hill: 375-95.
Kindleberger, C. (1968) International Economics, 4th edition. Homewood (Ill.),
Richard Irwin.
Leamer, E.E. (2012) The Craft of Economics: Lessons from the Heckscher-Ohlin
Framework. Cambridge (Mass.), MIT Press.
Leamer, E.E. and J. Levinsohn (1995) “International trade theory: the evidence”, in G.
Grossman and K. Rogoff (eds.) Handbook of International Economics, vol. 3.
Amsterdam, Elsevier: 1339-1394.
Lerner, A. (1952) “Factor prices and international trade,” Economica, 19: 1-15.
Lewis, W.A. (1954) “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor,”
Manchester School, 22: 139-191.
Lewis, W. A. (1955) The theory of economic growth. London, Allen & Unwin.
Little, I. (1982) Economic Development. New York, Basic Books.
Love, J.T. (1980) “Raul Prebisch and the origins of the doctrine of unequal exchange,”
Latin American Research Review, 15: 45-72.
Machlup, F. (1964) “Professor Samuelson on theory and realism,” American
Economic Review, 54: 733-36.
Machlup, F. (1978) The Methodology of Economics and Other Social Sciences. New
York, Academic Press.
Maneschi, A. (1998) Comparative advantage in international trade – a historical
                                                                                19


perspective. Cheltenham, E. Elgar.
Meade, J.E. (1955) The theory of international economic policy, volume two – Trade
and welfare. London, Oxford University Press.
Meier, G.M. (1958) “International trade and international inequality,” Oxford
Economic Papers, 10: 277-89.
Meier, G.M. (1963) International trade and development. New York, Harper & Row.
Meier, G.M. (2005) Biography of a Subject: An Evolution of Development Economics.
Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Morgan, M.S. (2012) The World in the Model. Cambridge, Cambridge University
Press.
Myrdal, G. ([1932] 1953) The political element in the development of economic
theory, tr. by P. Streeten. London, Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Myrdal, G. (1957) Economic Theory and Underdeveloped Regions. London, G.
Duckworth.
Niehans, J. (1990) A History of Economic Theory. Baltimore, Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Noyola Vásquez, J. (1956) “La evolución del pensamiento económico en el ultimo
cuarto de siglo y su influencia en América Latina”, El Trimestre Económico, 23: 269-
83.
Nurkse, R. (1961a) “Further comments on Professor Rosenstein-Rodan’s paper,” in in
H. Ellis and H. Wallich (eds.) Economic Development for Latin America. London,
Macmillan: 74-78.
Nurkse, R. (1961b) “International trade and development policy,” in H. Ellis and H.
Wallich (eds.) Economic Development for Latin America. London, Macmillan: 234-
63.
Ohlin, B. [1924] (1991) “The theory of trade”, translated by H. Flam and M. June
Flanders, in H. Flam and M. June Flanders (eds.): 75-214.
Ohlin, B. (1933) Interregional and International Trade. Cambridge (Mass.): Harvard
University Press.
Ohlin, B. (1967) Interregional and International Trade, revised edition. Cambridge
(Mass.): Harvard University Press.
Perrotta, C. (2016) “The brilliant fifties: international trade as a cause of
underdevelopment”, in C. Sunna and D. Gualerzi (eds.) Development economics in
the twenty-first century. London, Routledge.
Prebisch, R. (1950) The Economic Development of Latin America and its Principal
Problems. Lake Success (NY), United Nations.
“Reading in Economic Development” (1963) American Economist, 7: 72-80.
Rosenstein-Rodan, P. (1943) “Problems of Industrialization of Eastern and South-
Eastern Europe,” Economic Journal, 53: 202-211.
Rosenstein-Rodan, P. (1957) “Notes on the Theory of the ‘Big Push’,” MIT, Center
for International Studies.
Rosenstein-Rodan, P. (1961) “Notes on the Theory of the ‘Big Push’,” in H. Ellis and
H. Wallich (eds.) Economic Development for Latin America. London, Macmillan: 57-
67.
Samuelson, P.A. (1947) Foundations of Economic Analysis. Cambridge, Mass.,
Harvard University Press.
Samuelson, P.A. (1948a) “International Trade and Equalization of Factor Prices,”
Economic Journal, 58: 163-184.
Samuelson, P.A. (1948b) Economics: An Introductory Analysis. New York, McGraw-
Hill.
                                                                                   20


Samuelson, P.A. (1949) “International Factor-Price Equalization Once Again,”
Economic Journal, 59: 181-197.
Samuelson, P.A. (1953-54) “Prices of factors and goods in general equilibrium,”
Review of Economic Studies, 21: 1-20.
Samuelson, P.A. (1955) Economics: An Introductory Analysis. 3rd edition. New York,
McGraw-Hill.
Samuelson, P.A. (1958) Economics: An Introductory Analysis. 4th edition. New York,
McGraw-Hill.
Samuelson, P.A. (1961) Economics: An Introductory Analysis. 5th edition. New York,
McGraw-Hill.
Samuelson, P.A. (1963) “Problems of methodology – discussion,” American
Economic Review, 53: 231-36.
Samuelson, P.A. (1964) “Theory and realism: a reply,” American Economic Review,
54: 736-39.
Samuelson, P.A. (1965) “Equalization by trade of the interest rate along with the real
wage,” in Trade, growth and the balance of payments, in honor of Gottfried Haberler.
Chicago, Rand McNally: 35-52.
Samuelson, P.A. (1973) Economics. 9th edition. New York, McGraw-Hill.
Samuelson, P.A. (1981) “To Protect Manufacturing?” Journal of Institutional and
Theoretical Economics, 137: 407-414.
Samuelson, P.A. (1991) “Foreword”, in H. Flam and M. J. Flanders (eds.): vii-x.
Samuelson, P.A. (2004) “Where Ricardo and Mill Rebut and Confirm Arguments of
Mainstream Economists Supporting Globalization,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 18: 134-146.
Samuelson, P.A. (Undated) “Notes on development of factor-price equalization
doctrines,” Samuelson Papers, Box 135, Economists’ Papers Project, David M.
Rubenstein Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Duke University.
Singer, H.W. (1950) “The distribution of gains between investing and borrowing
countries,” American Economic Review, 40: 473-85.
Singer, H.W. (1998). “Beyond terms of trade: convergence/divergence and
creative/uncreative destruction,” Zagreb International Review of Economics and
Business. 1: 13-25.
Slaughter, M.J. (1997) “Per capita income convergence and the role of international
trade,” NBER Working Paper # 5897.
Stiglitz, J.E. (1970) “Factor price equalization in a dynamic economy,” Journal of
Political Economy, 78: 456-88.
Stolper, W. and P.A. Samuelson (1941). “Protection and real wages,” Review of
Economic Studies, 9: 58-73.
Streeten, P. (1981). Development perspectives. London, Macmillan.
Takayama, A. (1972) International Trade: An Approach to the Theory. New York,
Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Tinbergen, J. (1949) “The equalization of factor prices between free trade areas,”
Metroeconomica, 1: 39-47.
Toye, J. and R. Toye (2003) “The Origins and Interpretation of the Prebisch-Singer
Thesis,” History of Political Economy, 35: 437-467.
