     Unconventional Monetary Policies: Lessons from the Past and the Present to Future Monetary
                                         Policy Frameworks
                      Cristiano Duarte*, Andre Modenesi **, Antonio Licha ***, and Emmanuel Carré ****
          Abstract:
          This article intends to shed light on important aspects related to past and recent experiences of monetary policy
accommodation, with particular attention to unconventional monetary policies. We intend to draw lessons from these
experiences to discuss the design of future monetary policy frameworks.
          First, by reporting several historical experiences of major central banks (UK 1825, USA 1932, UK and USA 1940s and
1950s, USA 1961, Japan 1999 and 2000s), we highlight that policies which after 2008 crisis were considered “unconventional”
(i.e., broad liquidity provision operations, asset purchases programs, yield curve controls) were not new. Even if in some of
those past experiences central banks took considerable time to act, they ended up intervening to avoid a broader deterioration of
macroeconomic and financial conditions.
          Moreover, we describe the recent experience of the European Central Bank after 2008. This institution has adapted its
measures according to its own former programs (“learning by doing”), and to other central banks experiences (“learning by
observing”), to face numerous challenges posed by Euro area’s macroeconomic/financial conditions and to enhance its
framework.
          Finally, we center our attention on the discussion about how will be shaped future monetary policy frameworks, and to
which extent policies previously classified as “unconventional” will be removed, or maintained (and considered as new tools
available in monetary policy frameworks). We participate to the literature by arguing that central banks should not promote a
complete return to pre-2008 standards (“normalization”) but need to take advantage from past and more recent experiences to
improve their future monetary policy frameworks. Based on this, measures previously implemented would have three possible
destinations in new frameworks: i) Be discarded, due to their predominantly negative effects; ii) Not be regularly implemented,
but be kept as tools if needed to achieve central banks’ goals, especially under situations of crisis; iii) Be incorporated as regular
measures of the monetary policy framework. In this sense, monetary authorities will need to be increasingly evolving
institutions, in a continuously adaptive and innovative process, to face challenges posed by financial markets that are each day
more dynamic, innovative, complex, interconnected and globalized.
          Keywords: unconventional monetary policy, European Central Bank, monetary policy frameworks
          Resumo:
          Este artigo tem por objetivo esclarecer aspectos importantes de experiências passadas e recentes de acomodação
monetária, com atenção particular a políticas monetárias não convencionais. Pretendemos extrair lições dessas experiências para
discutir a configuração dos arcabouços futuros de política monetária.
          Primeiro, ao relatar diversas experiências históricas de alguns dos mais importantes bancos centrais mundiais (Reino
Unido 1825, EUA 1932, Reino Unido e EUA 1940 e 1950, EUA 1961, Japão 1999 e 2000), argumentamos que políticas que
após a crise de 2008 foram consideradas “não convencionais” (ex: operações de provisão ampliada de liquidez, programas de
compras de ativos, controles de curva de juros) não eram novas. Mesmo que em algumas dessas experiências passadas os bancos
centrais tenham levado um tempo considerável para agir, acabaram intervindo para evitar uma deterioração mais ampla das
condições macroeconômicas e financeiras.
          Além disso, descrevemos a experiência recente do Banco Central Europeu após 2008. Esta instituição adaptou suas
medidas de acordo com seus próprios programas anteriores (“aprendizagem pela prática”), e com outras experiências dos bancos
centrais (“aprendizagem pela observação”), para enfrentar numerosos desafios impostos pelas condições macroeconômicas/
financeiras da Área do Euro e melhorar o seu conjunto de políticas.
          Finalmente, centramos nossa atenção na discussão sobre como serão moldados os arcabouços futuros de política
monetária, e até que ponto as políticas previamente classificadas como “não convencionais” serão removidas, ou mantidas (e
consideradas como novos instrumentos disponíveis nos arcabouços de política monetária). Complementamos a literatura
argumentando que os bancos centrais não devem promover um retorno completo aos padrões pré-2008 (“normalização”), mas
precisam aproveitar as experiências do passado e mais recentes para melhorar seus arcabouços futuros de política monetária.
Com base nisso, as medidas implementadas anteriormente teriam três possíveis destinos em novos arcabouços: i) Serem
descartadas, devido a seus efeitos predominantemente negativos; ii) Não serem implementadas constantemente, mas serem
adotadas caso necessário como instrumentos para atingir as metas dos bancos centrais, especialmente em situações de crise; iii)
Serem incorporadas como medidas regulares do arcabouço de política monetária. Nesse sentido, as autoridades monetárias
precisarão se tornar instituições em uma crescente evolução, em um processo continuamente adaptativo e inovador, para
enfrentar os desafios impostos por mercados financeiros que são cada dia mais dinâmicos, inovadores, complexos,
interconectados e globalizados.
          Palavras-chave: política monetária não convencional, Banco Central Europeu, arcabouços de política monetária
          Código JEL: E52, E58
          Área ANPEC: 2 - Economia Política

*
  PhD double diploma (Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro/ Université Sorbonne Paris Cité) and economist at Central Bank of Brazil.
**
   Associate Professor at Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro and researcher at CNPq.
***
    Associate Professor at Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro.
****
     Professor at Université Bretagne Sud. The views expressed in the article are those of the authors, and do not reflect those of the institutions
which they belong.
                                                                                                                                                1
1    Introduction
        This article intends to analyze important aspects related to past and recent experiences of monetary
policy accommodation, with particular attention to unconventional monetary policies. We draw lessons
from these experiences to discuss the design of future monetary policy frameworks.
        The main questions we aim to answer are the following: i) In which occasions the measures known
today as “unconventional” monetary policies have been previously adopted?; ii) How was the evolution of
the monetary framework implemented by the European Central Bank (ECB) since 2008?; iii) Can we
expect complete removal of unconventional policies, with a return to pre-2008 standards (“normalization”),
or incorporation of some unconventional policies as new tools in future frameworks (“new normal”)?
     In order to answer these questions, the article is structured as described in the sequence. After this
introduction, section 2 centers its analysis on past experiences of monetary accommodation. We describe
the historical background of unconventional monetary policies (UMPs), mentioning experiences which
they were implemented before 2008 (i.e., UK 1825, USA 1932, UK and USA 1940s and 1950s, USA 1961,
Japan 1999 and 2000s). In section 3, we discuss the recent experience of UMPs in the Euro area. Following
numerous macroeconomic and financial challenges that occurred in the area after 2008, we observe the
evolution of ECB’s framework, with the institution trying to improve more recent programs based on
shortcomings observed in initial measures. In section 4, we turn our attention to the debate on future
monetary policy frameworks. In particular, to which extent policies previously classified as
“unconventional” will be removed (promoting a return to pre-2008 standards, or so-called “normalization”
of monetary policies) or maintained (and considered as new tools available in future monetary policy
frameworks, or so-called “new normal”). Section 5 brings the conclusions.

2    Historical Background
        Although the expression “unconventional monetary policies” gained notoriety to name the set of
extraordinary measures implemented by central banks after 2008 crisis, it does not mean those policies are
completely new or have never been practiced before. In fact, what is called “conventional monetary policy”
today - central banks keeping short-term interest rates at positive levels, controlling them according to a
Taylor rule (Borio and Zabai, 2016) - has become a common practice only after the 1990s. Before that,
central banks have used many other instruments and did not focus exclusively on controlling short-term
interest rates. We highlight in the sequence some periods in the past when instruments that are now being
called “unconventional” (e.g., expanded liquidity provision facilities, asset purchase programs, yield curve
control measures) have already been used by major central banks, and explain the context of their
implementation.

2.1    BOE as lender of last resort in 1825
         The 1825 banking crisis in London is considered to be one of the first systemic financial crises in
modern history. According to authors as Smith (2009) and Morgan and Narron (2015), this crisis did not
have a single event as a trigger. In fact, it had several factors behind it: i) Expansionary monetary policy
fueled an increase in asset prices and stock market boom; ii) Stimulus in demand for financing
infrastructure projects - including in newly independent South American countries - fostered increase in
debt issuance; iii) New financial instruments blurred the distinction between sound projects and
speculative/fraudulent “investments”; iv) Lack of discipline by banks and market oversight by authorities
helped to spread risky activities. All of them precipitated into an environment of “panic” and contagion,
with a bubble burst and a bank run. Surprisingly, the Bank of England did not react to those problems
initially, later receiving strong criticisms from authors as Bagehot (1873). Bagehot argued that in those
occasions, the central bank had a crucial role in stopping the panic with three major rules. First, supplying
all the liquidity needed by financial institutions. Second, supplying this liquidity at high interest rates.
Third, supplying liquidity against good quality collateral. Only after the failure of some large banks in
London, Bank of England (BOE) assumed this lender of last resort (LOLR) role. It performed extensive
credit provision against different types of collateral, purchased public bills and used other tools, to put a
floor on asset prices and avoid a liquidity freeze. So, after some delay, BOE ended up using many

                                                                                                          2
mechanisms it had on its hands at that time to backstop the banking system. The institution managed to
contain the panic, although the stock market downturn and recession lasted into 1826.
        In a comparison between LOLR rules prescribed by Bagehot after 1825 crisis, and actions taken by
central banks right after 2008 crisis, one can say that numerous authors argue that central banks have
deviated from Bagehot’s rules in 2008 episode. For instance, Hellwig (2014) claims that, instead of lending
freely to solvent banks, against good collateral, and at high rates, central banks right after 2008 lent freely,
to banks of doubtful solvency, at mixed-quality collateral and low rates. In fact, central banks enacted tools
to extend liquidity to a wide variety of agents beyond banks (i.e., non-bank financial institutions, firms, and
households), acting as market makers of last resort (Mehrling, 2011).
        However, analyzing several historical experiences of financial crises in the 19th and 20th century,
other authors as Mishkin and White (2016) argue that central banks “unprecedented actions” like the ones
taken right after 2008 (deviations from Bagehot’s rules) are the norm, and not the exception. This would be
the case because by following Bagehot’s rules reactive (ex-post) approach, central banks would provide
remedial relief for solvent banks, but not impede financial shocks to spread to other financial institutions
and the real economy. Hence, central banks often preferred a preventive (ex-ante) approach, trying to avoid
failures of large institutions and buffer the economy from crises shocks. However, this approach could
foster moral hazard problems, since it can incentivize financial institutions to engage in excessive risk-
taking, eventually leading to another financial crisis. Thus, the authors argue that a successful preventive
approach, which reconciles price stability and financial stability, should not only focus if central banks can
follow instrument rules strictly. Instead, this approach should open the way for central banks to pursue
target or contingent rules that give monetary authorities more room for maneuver under such interventions,
with transparency but limited discretion, so that monetary authorities can retain their credibility and
mitigate moral hazard.

2.2    Fed asset purchase program in 1932
       In the aftermath of the New York stock exchange crash in 1929, the USA experienced a “Great
Contraction” until 1933. The Federal Reserve System (Fed) was faced with a tradeoff during that occasion
(Eichengreen, 2008). On the one hand, there was a call to pursue an expansionary monetary policy to try to
provide stimulus to the economy. On the other hand, the Fed had to keep a relatively tight monetary policy
stance, to avoid further capital outflows, which were undermining the convertibility of the dollar (gold
standard). Faced with this dilemma, Fed opted to try to safeguard dollar convertibility, by keeping a
relatively tight monetary policy stance (a contraction of monetary base and decline of nominal interest rates
lower than of inflation, implying an increase in real interest rates). Even if Fed discount rates were lowered,
banks were not using the discount window, for two reasons: i) For reputational effects, to avoid that
depositors interpreted it as a sign of weakness and withdrew their funds; ii) Banks were unable to borrow
from it because they lacked eligible collateral. This “inaction” by Fed after the 1929 crash (neither serving
as lender of last resort, nor using its tools to prevent deflation or the collapse of real economic activity) was
considered one of the major policy flaws at that time, as mentioned by Friedman and Schwarz (1963) and
Bernanke (2000).
        One exception of Fed inactivity during Great Contraction was a brief period from April to August
1932. In this occasion, under pressure from Congress, the Fed engaged in the purchase of US$ 1 billion in
Treasuries, around 2% of GDP at that time (Anderson, 2010). According to Bordo and Sinha (2016), this
program had significant effects in reducing Treasuries yields: short-term bills -90 basis points (bps);
medium-term notes -114 bps; long-term bonds -48 bps. It also temporarily reversed the decline in money
supply and led to a quick revival in industrial production and real output. This effectiveness would be
explained by the high segmentation in bond markets that prevailed at that time (non-bank agents had
difficulty in accessing public bond markets, concentrated in few banks). This fact allowed that central bank
purchases increased Treasury prices and lowered their yields, providing a positive stimulus for output.
        Nevertheless, the Fed opted to end this asset purchase program just five months after its
implementation, for several reasons. Bordo (2014) argues Fed feared that the expansionary policy
reinvigorated stock market speculation, created inflationary pressures and threatened gold convertibility.
Epstein and Ferguson (1984) point to an additional reason: the banking sector did not want that asset
                                                                                                              3
purchases continued pushing interest rates down, the fact that could reduce further their profitability, which
was already weak. That is why Epstein and Ferguson (1984) argue that facing conflicting objectives –
protecting the soundness of a specific sector (financial) and overseeing the protection of other business/
real economy - Fed ended up opting for the former.
        One should note that the asset purchase experience in 1932 and the first quantitative easing program
implemented by the Fed in 2008 (Large Scale Asset Purchase Program, LSAP 1) had various similarities.
Bordo and Sinha (2016) affirm that both programs had the following common elements: i) Were measures
to boost economic activity, adopted during severe economic downturns; ii) Were large scale operations; iii)
Were not planned to continue for an indefinite period. Nevertheless, they also point to important
differences between the two programs: (i) Use of a fixed exchange rate regime based on the gold standard
in 1932; (ii) Announcement of program’s size and time extension during the LSAP 1 episode; (iii) Use of
other unconventional tools in 2008-2009 (including lending facilities and asset purchases from non-
financial agents), instead of the single focus in public bonds in 1932. Beyond the similarities and
differences between the two experiences, those authors argue that, as bond market segmentation was higher
in 1932, and the program showed significant positive effects in the short period it was implemented, “Great
Contraction” could have ended earlier if the program had been prolonged for more time, and accompanied
by other tools that reinforced it (e.g., better communication of Fed’s reaction function to market, and
bolder set of additional fiscal and regulatory measures by government).

2.3    Yield caps on sovereign bonds by the BOE/Fed in the 1940s/1950s
        During World War II, the expansion of government budget deficits and debts exerted upward
pressure on long-term interest rates of major economies. Central banks in the United Kingdom and the
United States reacted by implementing a cap on long-term sovereign bond yields, to curb the cost of
government financing and to stabilize government bond markets.
        In the United Kingdom, the large expansion of government debt led Treasury to commission a
National Debt Enquiry in 1945. The Enquiry report recommended that the government should establish a
term structure of yields on government securities and allow the maturity structure of government’s debt to
be determined by investors. The policy implemented came to be known as “ultra-cheap money”, as
described by Allen (2012). According to this author, this policy was implemented with Treasury refusing to
issue government securities at yields higher than those which government deemed acceptable. For long-
term gilts, it was adopted a cap of 2.5%, with Treasury and Bank of England conducting gilt purchases to
try to keep this cap. Conversely, Treasury had to reduce the debt maturity profile, by increasing
significantly issuance of short-term bills to ensure its financing. Concerns with the rapid growth of credit
and inflation led Treasury/BOE to abandon the 2.5% cap in 1947, although net gilt purchases continued
until 1948.
        In the United States, Fed policy to control the rise of government bond yields began before, in 1942,
as described by Meltzer (2003). Fed imposed a cap not only for long-term bonds (2.5%) but also for three-
month bills (0.375%), incurring in large bond purchases to try to keep those caps. The cap on short-term
bills was gradually raised to around 1% and finally abandoned in 1948, but the cap on long-term bonds was
kept in 2.5% until 1951.
        Broadly speaking, those policies managed to control long-term government bond yield levels.
However, some agents at that time posed strong criticisms to it, as mentioned by Shirai (2018): i) Market
excessive reliance on central banks’ actions could not develop proper trading volumes/pricing mechanisms
by its own; ii) Central banks’ purchases were raising inflationary pressures; iii) Central banks’ policies
became subordinated to governments’ debt management framework, instead of pursuing central banks’
own objectives (e.g., control inflation). All these criticisms led to the removal of the sovereign bond yield
caps previously implemented.
        In the UK, after removal of the cap, the objective of monetary policy in the 1950s shifted towards
managing a balanced growth of aggregate demand and supply, containing excessive credit growth, inflation
and keeping exchange rate parity (Allen, 2012). However, debt management policies and lending controls
were still seen as important parts of the monetary framework, as mentioned in the Radcliff Committee
Report in 1959. Therefore, there was some coordination between the Treasury and Bank of England, with
                                                                                                           4
government funding operations trying to support monetary policy efforts to control credit. For instance,
Treasury carried out operations to sell gilts and absorb short-term bills, thus reducing banks’ liquidity and
adding to efforts of containing credit growth.
        In the USA, removal of the yield cap happened in March 1951, when the Treasury-Federal Reserve
Accord was signed. This accord not only removed the 2.5% ca but also paved the way to strengthen the
Fed’s operational independence, as mentioned by Meltzer (2003). Fed’s independence was confirmed in
1953, when this institution stated that the goal of monetary policy was to achieve price stability.
Furthermore, it announced the implementation of the “Bills Only” policy, limiting the target of its open
market operations to Treasury Bills. This policy was based on the idea that both short-term and long-term
interest rates should be determined by market forces. By then, Treasury Bills were large in terms of
amounts outstanding and transaction volumes. By limiting its scope to Treasury Bills, Fed intended to
influence reserve amounts held by commercial banks, attenuating direct effects of open market operations
on the entire term structure of interest rates.

2.4    Fed “Operation Twist” in 1961
        In the aftermath of the Korean War in 1960, USA was found in a difficult economic situation, both
in external (dollar/gold outflows) and domestic (output downturn) terms. In this context, the priorities of
incumbent President Kennedy were to improve the country’s balance of payments and recover economic
activity.
        Under these circumstances, in 1961 Fed conducted a program that was coined “Operation Twist”.
The purpose of this program was to reduce capital outflows by keeping short-term interest rates high and to
promote stimulus to the domestic economy by lowering long-term interest rates. In order to do so, the Fed
sold short-term bills (US$ 7.4 billion) and purchased long-term bonds (US$ 8.8 billion, or 1.7% of GDP,
according to Ehlers, 2012). Fed was also supported by the Treasury to reduce the maturities of the
securities issued.
         In theory, Operation Twist was expected to be effective if markets for long-term and short-term
bonds were segmented and the two classes of bonds were not perfect substitutes, as claimed by the market
segmentation theory (Tobin, 1958) and the preferred habitat hypothesis (Modigliani and Sutch, 1966).
Conversely, from the viewpoint of the expectations theory of the term structure (Hicks, 1939), long-term
bonds and short-term bonds were highly substitutable, which would turn Operation Twist ineffective.
        Among several evaluations of the program that were conducted on that occasion, one of the most
influent was published by Modigliani and Sutch (1966). Even if these authors supported the preferred
habitat hypothesis, the analysis performed by them showed that the reduction of spreads between long-term
and short-term debt was minimal, and not statistically significant. According to Amamiya (2017), this
study ended up supporting a view that gradually spread after that occasion: “central banks can control
short-term interest rates, but not long-term interest rates”.
        After 2008 crisis, this view lost some support, in the sense that even mainstream economists, who
continue arguing against direct control of long-term interest rates by central banks, now recognize
sometimes it is desirable to let long-term interest rates be indirectly “guided” by central banks through
UMPs, to achieve their price stability objectives. For instance, a new “Operation Twist” was implemented
by the Fed from September 2011 until December 2012. This time, the Fed did not count on explicit support
of Treasury shortening the maturity of its issuances like in 1961. Instead, the Fed used open market
operations, selling short-term Treasuries (less than 3 years), and buying US$ 667 billion in medium/long-
term bonds (from 6 to 30 years). The intention was to induce a reduction in long-term yields, without
needing to expand its balance sheet like in previous LSAP programs. According to Ehlers (2012), the effect
of 2011-2012 Operation Twist in long-term yields was temporary and partly offset by new issuances of
long-term bonds by Treasury. However, the reduction in overall maturity of outstanding debt held outside
Fed’s balance sheet (from 7.7 to 5.5 years during the program implementation) may have lowered term
premia and created a stimulative effect on the real economy.




                                                                                                          5
2.5 The Japan Experience in the late 1990s and 2000s
2.5.1 Zero Interest Rate Policy and Forward Guidance (1999-2000)
        At the beginning of 1999, Japan registered deflation in its two main measures of underlying
inflation: core (CPI excluding food) and core-core (CPI excluding food and energy) indexes. Before falling
into deflation, Japan experienced in the early 1990s the collapse of a bubble in real estate and stock market
prices, subsequently followed by a financial crisis in the second half of 1990s. In the view of authors as
Koo (2011), this crisis was a typical case of a balance sheet recession: instead of maximizing profits,
Japanese private sector as an aggregate tried to minimize debts/deleverage at the same time, pushing down
asset prices and economic output.
         However, this deflation was not a fast and acute deflationary episode, like ones experienced after
the collapse of bubbles in other countries. Rather, it was a prolonged mild deflation, which lasted for most
of 2000s decade, and could be explained by several factors. According to Shirai (2018), deflation was a
result of chronic demand shortage and sluggish output growth experienced since the beginning of the
1990s. The potential growth rate itself was on a long declining trend, which according to this author was
mainly attributable to a slowdown in capital stock accumulation and total factor productivity (TFP) growth.
Unfavorable demographic dynamics (aging population) also played a role in the reduction of potential
growth. Moreover, exchange rate developments, with a significant appreciation of the yen against the
dollar during several periods of the 1990s and 2000s contributed to deflation. Overall, all those events have
led households to save more because of growing concerns about future, discouraged firms from engaging
in business fixed investment and innovative activities, and prompted financial institutions to undertake
risk-averse investment strategies, explaining the prolonged environment of mild deflation and economic
stagnation.
        At the beginning of 1999, Bank of Japan (BOJ) did not have enough information to evaluate if the
deflation registered was the beginning of a fast/acute deflationary episode or a prolonged mild deflation.
However, the institution decided to act, by introducing a nominal Zero Interest Rate Policy (ZIRP) in
February 1999. BOJ initially reduced the uncollateralized overnight call rate to around 0.15% and
subsequently towards 0%. This was done by providing large amounts of short-term funds. In April 1999,
BOJ Governor Masaru Hayami provided a kind of guidance to ZIRP. However, BOJ did not provide a
formal Public Statement about its interest rate guidance at that time. Instead, during a press conference in
April 1999, BOJ Governor informally expressed his view that BOJ would maintain its ZIRP “until
deflationary concerns were dispelled”. This measure could be seen as open-ended forward guidance, trying
to signal a more accommodative monetary stance. Nonetheless, this move received several criticisms at
that time, according to Shirai (2018). First, for the vagueness of the definition of deflation (not clear which
inflation index or other indicators would be considered in BOJ’s evaluations). Second, for allowing a wide
range of interpretations about the date the policy could be ceased.
        In fact, ZIRP was implemented for 18 months, until August 2000, when the policy rate was raised
to 0.25%. In order to justify this decision, BOJ provided the following arguments: i) Downward pressures
on prices coming from weak demand had receded; ii) Policy ceasing meant an adjustment to the degree of
monetary easing in line with the improvement observed in the economy; iii) Policy rate would still be
extremely low, and hence could support further economic recovery; iv) End of policy would raise public
confidence that the economy was recovering and enhance markets’ dynamism.
        However, this perception that the Japanese economy had improved was not broad-based. Although
output and trade indicators (i.e., industrial production and exports) presented some improvement, inflation
indexes (CPI and core CPI) remained negative. On following months, Japanese economy showed signs that
it had been negatively affected by the dot-com bubble burst in the USA in that period, with exports and
output dropping sharply in early 2001, while inflation remained negative. Hence, BOJ’s decision to
increase the policy rate was reversed six months later. In February 2001, the increase in policy rate ceased,
and it was lowered from 0.25% to 0.15% (with effect from March 2001).

2.5.2    Quantitative Easing (2001-2006)
         Facing a more adverse scenario, in March 2001 BOJ adopted a new monetary easing framework,
that later came to be known as Quantitative Easing (QE). This new framework was composed of three
                                                                                                            6
essential elements, as explained in BOJ’s Statement of Monetary Policy at the occasion. First, there was a
shift from nominal interest rate targeting (uncollateralized overnight call rate) to reserve targeting
(commercial banks’ current account balances at BOJ, which roughly corresponded to the sum of required
and excess reserves). The reserve target amount was raised nine times: from an initial 5 trillion yen to
around 30–35 trillion yen in January 2004, a level that was maintained until the end of QE policy in March
2006. In order to achieve this reserve target, BOJ provided short-term funds (maturities of one year or less),
expanding excess reserves. Second, BOJ provided a formal commitment to maintaining QE policy until the
core CPI registered “stably zero percent on a year-on-year increase”. This commitment was clarified
further in October 2003 by the introduction of two QE exit conditions: (i) Most recently published core CPI
registered zero percent or above, and this level needed to be maintained for several months; (ii) Projected
core CPI would be no lower than zero percent. This was state-contingent forward guidance, based on the
actual and expected performance of core CPI, thus more explicit than the earlier ZIRP commitment. Third,
it was decided to increase government bond purchases if it was found necessary to facilitate meeting the
reserve target.
        Observing economic developments after the implementation of QE, authors as Shirai (2018) point
out that, after reaching a trough in January 2002, Japan’s economy was able to enter a moderate recovery
phase. The main engines of this recovery were exports and domestic manufacturing activities associated
with them, supported by favorable global growth and depreciation of yen’s effective exchange rate. Yen’s
depreciation, especially against euro and U.S. dollar, occurred due to interest rate differentials and risk-
taking behavior of investors, which engaged in carry trade activities (selling yen and buying foreign
currencies without hedge). Regarding the core CPI index, after remaining in slightly negative territory in
the early 2000s, it finally turned positive in late 2005, followed by higher levels from early 2006 onwards.
        Considering these developments, at the March 2006 BOJ meeting, the institution concluded that the
conditions laid out in its previous commitments had been fulfilled. More specifically, the Board presented
the following reasons: (i) Positive core CPI from end-2005 until January 2006 (the latest data available
then); (ii) Projections of further improvements in GDP growth; (iii) Expected wage increases and tighter
labor market conditions, partly as a result of growing economic activity; (iv) Rising inflation expectations
of firms and households, also boosted by yen’s depreciation and increase in international commodity
prices. By then, BOJ’ s estimates were that core CPI would stay within the range of 0% to 1% in the fiscal
year 2006, and slightly below 1% in the fiscal year 2007.
        Therefore, BOJ proposed to end QE policy at the March 2006 meeting. Instead of the outstanding
balance of current accounts at BOJ, the uncollateralized overnight call rate would be reintroduced as the
main monetary policy instrument, with the level set at zero percent. Furthermore, at this policy meeting, the
BOJ introduced a longer-run inflation outlook, named “understanding of medium-to-long-term price
stability”. This understanding was not an official inflation target, but a level of CPI inflation recognized as
price stability by BOJ Board. This long-run outlook was initially implemented in the range of 0% and 2%,
with a median of 1%, and it could be revised on an annual basis. BOJ acknowledged that this long-run
outlook was below average inflation targets in other advanced economies (2%). However, it preferred to
take into account Japan’s experience of very low inflation during the last decades, considering the inflation
range which agents would perceive prices to be stable would also be lower.
        After March 2006, BOJ voted in favor of two interest rate hikes: in July 2006 (from 0% to 0.25%)
and in February 2007 (from 0.25% to 0.5%). This policy rate was maintained until October 2008.
        The decision to exit QE policy in March 2006 was controversial, as it was the decision to lift the
Zero Interest Rate Policy in August 2000. Criticism gained strength in the middle of 2006, after the release
of a revision in CPI data. According to the Japanese Statistics Bureau, this revision resulted in an average
decline of 0.5% from January to July 2006. So the actual number for core CPI in January 2006 was -0.1%.
This meant that one of BOJ’s exit conditions - most recently published core CPI is zero percent or higher
for several months - was not satisfied. Furthermore, year-on-year changes in core-core CPI remained
negative during 2005 and 2006. Nevertheless, BOJ’s long-term inflation expectations projections remained
positive and around 1%, revealing some upward bias in the institution’s inflation expectations forecasts.
For those reasons, Shirai (2018) argued that BOJ’s decision to abandon QE in March 2006 was premature.

                                                                                                            7
        Koo (2011) considered that, once Japan had faced a prolonged balance sheet recession, it was found
in a liquidity trap with a deflationary nature. Hence, in such context indebted agents do not spend, but try to
pay off debts; banks do not lend, due to lack of demand from new borrowers; consumption and investment
are postponed and do not recover by themselves. In those situations, expansionary monetary policies are
inefficient, and what would be really needed was proactive fiscal policy. In Koo (2011) view, the collapse
was not worse because of two mitigating elements. First, despite government efforts to cut the fiscal deficit
at some occasions (i.e., 1997 and 2001, following IMF and OECD recommendations), this deficit
increased, with a parallel increase of government borrowing. In fact, fiscal deficit allowed some periods of
temporary economic growth, avoiding a deeper recession. Second, the government provided capital
injections in banking sector twice after 1997 to avoid a more broad-based financial crisis. This is in
accordance with the view that, under balance sheet recessions, liquidity injections are not enough to solve
insolvency problems.

3    The Evolution of ECB Framework since 2008
     The Euro area faced huge economic and financial challenges in recent years: in 2008, liquidity
problems after Lehman Brothers’ bankruptcy in September; in 2011, aggravation of the banking and
sovereign debt crisis, notably in periphery countries; in 2014, threat of deflation, especially after the
collapse of energy and industrial commodity prices. Due to these challenges, the ECB had to implement
numerous conventional and unconventional measures.
     Our aim in this section is not to describe in detail all the measures implemented by the ECB since
2008. Conversely, our focus is to show how the ECB framework evolved, with the institution trying to
improve more recent programs based on shortcomings of its own previous measures (i.e., seniority problem
in SMP; liquidity not being destined to the real economy in three-year LTROs), and based on other central
banks’ experiences.

3.1    The seniority problem: SMP versus OMT and PSPP
        The Securities Markets Programme (SMP) was implemented in May 2010, the same month when
the first Greek aid package was agreed, but markets priced high spreads between German’s and periphery
countries’ bonds. In order to reduce financial fragmentation in the Euro area and improve monetary policy
transmission, the ECB engaged in purchasing periphery countries’ securities in secondary markets, in an
attempt to prevent their yields from rising. The program focus was not to make monetary policy more
expansionary or to finance member countries. As a consequence, the ECB conducted weekly open market
operations to provide fixed-term deposits (with a weekly duration), to sterilize the liquidity injected
through its purchases.
        At the beginning (May 2010 to February 2011), purchases were limited to Greece, Ireland, and
Portugal bonds. After a pause between February and July 2011, the ECB resumed its purchases in August
2011, including also bonds of Spain and Italy. The program has officially ended in September 2012,
although purchases have actually occurred until February 2012. According to ECB data, the program has
acquired bonds with an average maturity of 4.3 years and a nominal amount of € 218 billion, of which
almost half belonged to Italy.
        There are several studies evaluating the effectiveness of SMP. In general, most authors agree that
interventions succeeded in reducing sovereign yields of periphery countries, but the effect was usually only
temporary: a few weeks (Pattipeilohy et al., 2013), or only one day (Doran et al., 2013). According to
Doran et al. (2013), although after an ECB intervention yields fell on the same day, with adverse
macroeconomic events and a possible lag for a new intervention, yields resumed rising up to pre-
intervention levels in the next day. From the point of view of private investors, the issue which concerned
the most was that the ECB had legal seniority over them. ECB seniority implied that private investors
would be the first to bear the losses of any default in these bonds, and the ECB could only be charged after
all private investors had been wiped out. This fact was one of the reasons why SMP interventions had only
very short-term effects, with yields soon returning to rise.
         Indeed, the great controversy both in public opinion and among ECB members themselves were
factors that led interventions to be discontinued in time and actually interrupted seven months before the
                                                                                                            8
official end of the program. The disagreement within the ECB was such that it was pointed as a reason for
the resignation of Bundesbank President Axel Weber and ECB’s German Chief Economist Jurgen Stark.
Helm (2012) noted that ECB core countries (notably Germany) considered that the program did not respect
the ECB mandate to keep price stability. According to them, SMP would have just tried to disguise
monetary financing (debt monetization) of periphery governments. Although the ECB did not purchase
government securities in primary markets under the SMP, this program would have allowed periphery
countries to delay the "necessary" fiscal adjustment.
        With periphery countries bond yields rising to unsustainable levels and sovereign contagion
threatening to reach even core countries (e.g., France), the ECB introduced a different communication
approach. From July 2012 onwards, it started a “verbal intervention” strategy, trying to contain negative
expectations on markets and aiming to increase monetary policy credibility. At a speech on July 26, 2012,
Draghi stated the ECB would do “whatever it takes to save the euro”.
        This change in the communication strategy continued in the following months. In August 2012
ECB meeting, it was mentioned the possibility of undertaking “outright open market operations”, to
address seniority concerns by investors. The main features of the Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT)
program were actually announced in September 2012. This new program intended to restore the
transmission mechanisms of monetary policy, which were notoriously disrupted. It opened the door for the
ECB to buy sovereign debt of specific countries in secondary markets, to stabilize their yields, once they
signed a Memorandum of Understanding with fiscal and reform conditionalities attached.
        ECB purchases would be of bonds with maturities between 1 to 3 years, in unlimited amounts. The
OMT focus was not on countries which were already receiving assistance from the Troika (Greece,
Portugal or Ireland). Instead, it aimed to avoid spreading contagion to countries which had their debt
trading on markets, but at high yields (e.g., Spain, Italy). Most importantly, the ECB would be treated pari
passu with other sovereign bond creditors, eliminating the problem of ECB seniority. Evidence of
significant drops in sovereign yields of Italy and Spain, related to the announcement of the pari passu
clause in OMT in September 2016, is provided by Steinkamp and Westermann (2014).
        The OMT also received a number of legal challenges in the German Constitutional Court (GCC)
and the European Court of Justice (ECJ), related to accusations such as monetary financing of government
debt. Both courts dismissed OMT’s charges and gave a final ruling of “approval with conditions”.
Nonetheless, the OMT was never activated in practice, only remaining in the lines of verbal intervention.
        In addition, the main unconventional program announced (in January 2015) and implemented (in
March 2015) by the ECB – the Public Sector Purchase Program (PSPP) – also contained important
improvements when compared with the SMP. In the PSPP, the ECB/national central banks purchased
bonds issued by governments, national agencies and EU’s supranational institutions. Differently from the
SMP, the ECB received pari passu (not senior) treatment with private creditors. Furthermore, bond
purchases were not sterilized, there was an injection of new liquidity. In addition, due to the much larger
amount of securities bought by the ECB during the PSPP (around € 2.1 trillion, according to ECB data),
there is strong evidence that it lowered borrowing costs of almost all nations in the Euro area and reduced
sovereign spreads between periphery and core countries (Altavilla et al., 2015 and Breckenfelder et al.,
2016).

3.2     Incentive to lend for the real economy: LTRO versus TLTROs
        Before 2008, the ECB usually offered Long Term Refinancing Operations (LTROs) monthly, to be
repaid in 3 months. In 2008, it also began to offer operations to be repaid in 6 months. In June 2009, it
added to its tender procedures operations with repayment in 12 months too. In November 2011, when the
ECB noticed the sovereign crisis had worsened, and the liquidity available for banks and the economy as a
whole had shrunk, the institution announced two major three-year LTROs, which were held in December
2011 and February 2012. On those occasions, the ECB lent to banks amounts to be paid over three years,
charging only the main refinancing rate (then at a level of 1.0%). The first operation amounted € 489.2
billion and the second operation € 529.5 billion, thus totaling a liquidity injection of € 1018.7 billion within
three months.

                                                                                                             9
        Despite some authors argued that three-year LTROs reduced some of the most acute liquidity
constraints in the Euro area financial markets (Darracq Paries and De Santis, 2015 and Andrade et al.,
2017), several other studies showed that due to the scenario of high uncertainty prevailing in 2011-2012 in
the Euro area, a large amount of liquidity provided by three-year LTROs had two undesired destinations: i)
Speculative operations ; ii) Bank holdings as excess reserves in ECB’s current account or deposit facility.
Furthermore, even if three-year LTROs allowed a modest increase in lending, corporations did not use
these new funds for productive purposes (Carpinelli and Crosignani, 2017; Crosignani et al., 2017, and
Daetz et al., 2017). Overall, the evidence suggested that, although three-year LTROs have avoided a
massive bank deleveraging and relaxed liquidity constraints, those operations did not achieve their goal of
restore credit market dynamics and stimulate lending to productive purposes on a broader basis.
        To address the problems above, the ECB decided to change its strategy in the following long term
refinancing operations. Between September 2014 and June 2016, the institution implemented eight
quarterly Targeted Long Term Refinancing Operations, TLTRO I. The idea was that banks could borrow
funds respecting their initial limit (7% of their loan portfolio in the first two operations), which could be
gradually expanded in the following operations if their loan portfolio directed to non-financial companies
and households (except for house purchases) increased. All operations matured in September 2018 (i.e.,
operations would last between two and four years). The fees charged over banks would be 0.15% in the
first two operations, dropping to the main refinancing rate in the following six operations (0.05% until
December 2015, and 0% in March and June 2016).
        Between June 2016 and March 2017, the ECB introduced a new series of four quarterly Targeted
Long Term Refinancing Operations, TLTRO II. Besides other differences from the TLTRO I, the main
change was the price incentive mechanism to provide credit to the real economy, by offering lower interest
rates to the banks that increased their credit operations to non-financial corporations and households
(except for house purchases). For each operation, the interest rate would be the main refinancing operation
prevailing at that time (i.e., 0%). Yet, for banks which achieved their loan benchmark to the real economy,
the interest rate could be as low as the deposit rate (-0.4%).
        Total amount of liquidity injected by the ECB on TLTRO I and TLTRO II from September 2014
until March 2017 was around € 793 billion, after deducting rollovers from previous operations (net
amount), according to ECB data. Both TLTRO I and II received several common criticisms, of not being
really “targeted” towards the real economy (Gros et al., 2016).
        One response from the ECB to these criticisms was presented at the May 2017 Economic Bulletin,
which showed several positive aspects of TLTROs. In this publication (ECB 2017), the institution shows
that TLTROs, together with other UMPs, were efficient mechanisms to ensure the transmission of lower
policy rates into better borrowing conditions for the Euro area non-financial private sector. They support
this argument based on the following information: i) The rates on loans to non-financial corporations
declined considerably right after the announcement of TLTRO I. The declines were sharper in countries
where lending rates to non-financial corporations had been more elevated, hence allowing a reduction in
cross-country dispersion of lending rates; ii) In “vulnerable” countries, banks that borrowed under TLTRO
I reduced their rates by more than banks that abstained from bidding; iii) According to ECB Bank Lending
Surveys (ECB, 2018), banks have reported that the TLTROs have contributed to an easing of the terms and
conditions on loans to enterprises and easier credit standards (albeit to a lesser extent); iv) While lending
by banks that did not participate in TLTROs appears to have remained largely unchanged afterward, the
ones which bid in TLTROs went through an important change in their lending profile. In more
“vulnerable” countries, banks have significantly reduced the pace at which they had been cutting lending to
non-financial corporations. In “less vulnerable” countries, bidders seem to have increased intermediation
volumes.
        Furthermore, one has to recognize that the price incentive in TLTRO II framework, when compared
with TLTRO I - lower rates for banks that lend more towards the real economy - was one important factor
to offset the compression of negative interest margins experienced by banks after the implementation of
negative deposit rates. In fact, credit to households and firms recovered in the period those operations were
implemented, although at modest rates. According to ECB data, loans to total private sector had declining
annual rates of growth since the end of 2011, which became negative in 2012, and only returned to positive
                                                                                                         10
territory in May 2015. This growth trend continued with some oscillation, up to 3.4% YoY in December
2018, but still below the average (4.8% YoY) in a longer period (1999-2018).

3.3   ECBs unconventional measures based on other Central Banks experiences
        When it comes to the influence of other central banks’ experiences on ECB measures, we could
mention: i) ECB TLTROs in 2014-2017 were also inspired by BOE Funding for Lending Scheme (FLS),
program that started in 2012 and had some similarities with TLTROs (allowed the central bank to offer
more funding for banks which increased their loans to the real economy); ii) ECB Corporate Sector
Purchase Program (CSPP) adopted in 2016 was inspired by Bank of Japan corporate bond purchases,
which were part of BOJ’s framework since 2010; iii) ECB forward guidance on low interest rates for an
extended period in July 2013 was a sign to markets that Euro area monetary stance clearly differed from
the USA, where the Fed had just announced in May 2013 that it intended to withdraw its monetary
stimulus, surprising financial markets and generating adverse effects (“taper tantrum”). ECB forward
guidance was also open-ended, which has proven to be a more flexible option than the date-based or the
quantitative-based forward guidance previously introduced by the Fed and the BOE on certain occasions;
iv) ECB PSPP in March 2015 followed other unsterilized public bond purchase programs implemented by
the Fed, BOE, and BOJ. However, the ECB had to create its own rules, since it was purchasing bonds from
all Euro area eligible countries, and not from a single Treasury, like other central banks.
        Summing up, the ECB undertook several modifications during UMPs implementation, adapting
measures based both on its own former programs (“learning by doing”) and on other central banks
experiences (“learning by observing”) to improve its framework. In other words, some of the main features
of ECB’s measures after the 2008 crisis were pragmatism, flexibility, and capacity to innovate, as
mentioned by Le Heron (2016).

4    Future Monetary Policy Frameworks
        There is a lively debate on how will be shaped future monetary policy frameworks after the post-
2008 UMP experience. More specifically, if central banks will broadly return to pre-2008 crisis monetary
policy standards (“normalization”), or if other measures (such as UMPs) will be incorporated into central
banks' toolkits under a new set of monetary policy practices (“new normal”).
        In 2011, Carré et al. (2013) performed a survey with 46 economists and central bankers, aiming to
identify post-crisis consensual and dissensual aspects of central banking, and aspects of central banking
that would (or would not) be able to be changed after 2008 financial crisis was over. Authors find that
respondents agree in general terms on the “broader” view of central banking extended to financial stability.
Nevertheless, several divergences emerge between economists and central bankers when it comes to
implementation details of this “broader” view (e.g., institutions, instruments, goals). Authors find that
economists are usually less conservative than central bankers when it comes to promoting changes in
central bank practices. However, the overall result would be that the conservative bias would prevail, so
respondents would prefer to remain within the pre-2008 monetary policy paradigm, instead of promoting a
significant shift in this paradigm. For instance, the following elements in the paradigm would remain
mostly unchanged: i) Price stability would continue to have priority among other policy objectives
(although complemented by financial stability goals); ii) Price stability would be achieved under an
inflation targeting framework, with an unchanged target level, despite some proposals for modification.
Hence, even if central banks incorporate changes under their future monetary policy frameworks, these
changes would not promote a complete shift in the previous monetary policy paradigm, once some core
principles of pre-2008 monetary policy framework might remain unchanged.
        In 2016, Blinder et al. (2017) organized a survey and compiled responses from 55 central bankers
and 159 academics on their views of what would be the “new normal” for central banks. The main findings
revealed by the survey are presented in sequence. On low interest rates, respondents acknowledge they
could be used again in case they are needed, but negative interest rates would be used with more caution.
On asset purchase programs, there were mixed views on their effectiveness: academics and central bankers
who implemented asset purchase programs were usually more optimistic, while central bankers from
jurisdictions that did not implement them were usually more doubtful about their results. On financial
                                                                                                        11
stability, respondents foresaw the use of macroprudential instruments on a continuous basis, to safeguard
sound financial conditions. On communication, answers showed that a more active communication from
central banks towards the public will certainly have space. There was an agreement that forward guidance
would remain in monetary authorities’ toolkit. Nevertheless, it was found a divergence in preferred type of
forward guidance: more specific (date-based) for academics, but less specific (qualitative) for central
bankers. Another divergence occurred in the view on the relationship between central banks and their
governments: while academics find that central banks have “crossed the line into politics” during the crisis
and have some concern on central bank independence in future, this opinion was not detected among
central bankers.
         Indeed, when we observe the analysis of certain academics and central bankers that have produced
reports disclosing their views on future monetary policy frameworks, they present diverging opinions.
         In academia, according to Reis (2018), the main characteristics of “the New Conventional Central
Bank” would be the following: i) Determination of interest rates by central banks not focused only on
short-term rates, but also giving room to establish long-term rate targets; ii) Balance sheet policies
remaining as an important policy option, with central banks targeting interest rates paid on reserves; iii)
Focus more on composition of central banks’ balance sheets, and less in amounts of assets/liabilities
contained in them; iv) Need for more transparency in the interaction between fiscal and monetary policies,
and a more careful approach with eventual losses in central banks’ balance sheets; v) Main central banks
offering liquidity facilities not only for domestic banks but also for global banks through swap lines; vi)
Important role of macroprudential policies to safeguard financial stability, but considering they may
generate adverse effects (e.g., financial repression) if not managed appropriately. A different view is
presented by Lombardi et al. (2018), who are more skeptical about the regular use of unconventional
measures in future monetary frameworks. For these authors, UMPs have prevented economic collapse but
were not designed to promote adequate growth and have overburdened central banks. Hence, monetary
authorities should return to their standard policies with a primary aim to ensure price stability, and thus
prevent policymakers to request (or expect) too much from them in future. Another view is provided by
Fontan et al. (2018), who predict three possible scenarios for future monetary policy frameworks: i)
“Normalization” to pre-2008 standards, in which independent central banks would focus on inflation-
targeting regimes by using short-term interest rates as main instruments; ii) Central banks as very powerful
and depoliticized institutions, equipped with both monetary and macroprudential instruments, but little
democratic accountability and strong links with financial sector interests; iii) Central banks incorporating
unconventional policies under their policy toolkit. Still, due to distributive effects of such policies, political
authorities would have increased influence on central banks’ initiatives. Dow (2017) understands that this
third scenario may happen without central banks being directly subordinated to governments’ decisions.
Under an appropriate institutional design, it would be possible for central banks to retain some degree of
independence, by setting out explicitly in their mandates areas of cooperation between central bank and
government, managing such cooperation with joint committees and adequate incentives.
          When it comes to central bankers' views, on one side we have authors as Pfister and Valla (2018),
who argued in favor of a “New Orthodox” framework for central banks. According to these authors, central
banks in future should keep short-term interest rates as main policy instruments(eventually using negative
interest rates to ensure price stability), and avoid asset purchases and large balance sheets, to keep
monetary and fiscal policies separate. Central banks would also have a financial stability role, with support
of macroprudential tools, but the lender of last resort role should be limited by strict liquidity rules (high
interest rate, high-quality collateral, limited timeframe), to avoid monetary authorities lending to insolvent
institutions. On another spectrum of central bankers’ views, we would have for instance BOJ Deputy
Governor Amamiya (2017). He argued in favor of future monetary policy frameworks in which central
banks’ balance sheets remain large, payment of interest on reserves acts as an important operational target,
and transparency in central banks’ reaction function (with clear communication and increased role for
forward guidance) is a key element for those institutions to achieve their objectives. A third and
intermediary view was presented by ECB Deputy Director-General Monetary Policy Natacha Valla (2018).
According to her, when compared with the pre-2008 crisis, the banking system has suffered significant
structural changes, which require additional liquidity needs (i.e., regulatory rules, such as liquidity
                                                                                                             12
coverage ratios) that request systematic demand for central bank reserves. Hence, the decision if central
banks should reduce their balance sheets and return to previous interest rate “corridor” system, or keep
large balance sheets and remain with interest rate “floor” system, would depend on the ability of central
banks to predict these additional liquidity needs. If these additional liquidity needs are relatively stable and
forecastable, they could be satisfied by regular liquidity operations within the “corridor” system and central
bank balance sheets could be reduced. However, if these additional liquidity needs are uncertain, remaining
in a “floor” system with excess liquidity provision and large central bank balance sheets would be more
robust, to provide a buffer against shocks in interbank markets.
        Ultimately, we have seen that the discussion in the literature related to future monetary policy
frameworks does not point to a single direction or “one size fits all” model. Nonetheless, most authors
agree that central banks in future will have certain common elements, such as a more active
communication than before 2008 crisis, broader mandates (including financial stability into their previous
narrow goal of inflation stabilization), and use of macro-prudential tools on a wider basis, although with
various differences in implementation of those elements. In particular, the inclusion of financial stability
into central banks’ mandates is recognition (especially after the 2008 crisis) that financial systems’ cyclical
behavior can lead to regular crises of endogenous nature. These crises have been previously described by
authors as Keynes (1936) and Minsky (1982). More recently, the expression which represents this idea is
the financial system works with a “financial cycle”, following researchers in IMF (Claessens et al., 2011)
and BIS (Borio, 2012). Because of these regular financial crises, central banks’ historical role of “elastic”
liquidity providers and lenders of last resort (e.g., BOE in 1825, Fed creation in 1913) will be once again
included in toolkits of future frameworks. Furthermore, this role will be supported by macroprudential
measures and other regulatory initiatives of continuous implementation, aiming to increase financial
systems’ resilience, and improve instruments to face new financial crises.
        On future use of (what was called so far) unconventional monetary policies, even if there is not yet
a broad agreement, it is likely that a significant share of them may remain in central banks’ toolkits. This
situation might occur, since central banks which have already implemented them have learned with this
experience, and could consider implementing again UMPs which they evaluate that had net positive effects
according to their objectives.

5     Conclusions
         This article analyzed important aspects related to past and recent experiences of monetary policy
accommodation, with particular attention to unconventional monetary policies. We draw lessons from these
experiences to discuss the design of future monetary policy frameworks.
     First, we have analyzed past experiences of monetary policy accommodation. By reporting several
historical experiences of BOE, Fed, and BOJ, we have observed that policies which after 2008 crisis were
considered “unconventional” (i.e., broad liquidity provision operations, asset purchase programs, yield
curve controls) were not new. Even if in some of those past experiences (e.g., BOE as lender of last resort
in 1825, Fed asset purchases in 1932), central banks took considerable time to act, they ended up
intervening to avoid broader deterioration of financial and macroeconomic conditions. Moreover, in the
case of yield caps on bonds adopted by BOE and Fed in 1940s/1950s, those policies were not considered as
“extraordinary” measures to face acute financial distress. Conversely, they were part of central banks'
toolkit at that time (to control long-term interest rates and rising public debts after World War II) and were
implemented for some years. Therefore, while measures that today are known as “unconventional” were
already adopted in past to deal with difficult situations in financial system and macroeconomic scenario,
some of them were not considered as “extraordinary” alternatives to be implemented in a huge financial
crisis, but as measures of the monetary framework prevailing at that time, as shown by yield caps on bonds
in 1940s-1950s.
         Second, on recent monetary policy accommodation experiences, we have analyzed the evolution of
ECB's framework. During UMPs implementation, one can say that ECB's measures have been gradually
enhanced, based on its own former programs and experiences from other central banks. Related to ECB’s
own former programs, we can mention the following experiences: i) Correction of previous problems in
SMP (ECB senior when compared to other investors in case of default, and sterilized bond purchases) in
                                                                                                           13
OMT (ECB pari passu with other investors in case of default) and in PSPP (ECB pari passu and
unsterilized bond purchases); ii) Correction of previous problems in LTROs (large amount of liquidity lent
to banks not generating new loans to real economy) with TLTROs (ECB liquidity operations started to
offer incentive for banks to create new loans for firms and households, except for house purchases). The
quantity incentive introduced in TLTRO I (banks which lent more than a certain threshold to real economy
could borrow more liquidity from ECB) was extended in TLTRO II for a price incentive (banks which lent
more than a certain threshold to the real economy could borrow cheaper from ECB, at the deposit rate
instead of the main refinancing rate). When it comes to the influence of other central banks’ experiences
on ECB's measures, we could mention: i) ECB TLTROs in 2014-2017 were also inspired by BOE Funding
for Lending Scheme (FLS), program that started in 2012 and had some similarities with TLTROs (allowed
BOE to offer more funding for banks which increased their loans to the real economy); ii) ECB CSPP
adopted in 2016 was inspired by Bank of Japan corporate bond purchases, which were part of BOJ’s
framework since 2010; iii) ECB forward guidance on low interest rates for an extended period in July 2013
was a sign to markets that Euro area monetary stance clearly differed from the USA, where Fed had just
announced in May 2013 that it intended to withdraw its monetary stimulus, generating adverse effects
(“taper tantrum”). ECB forward guidance was also open-ended, which has proven to be a more flexible
option than the date-based or quantitative-based forward guidance previously introduced by Fed and BOE
on certain occasions; iv) ECB PSPP in March 2015 followed other unsterilized public bond purchase
programs implemented by Fed, BOE, and BOJ. However, ECB had to create its own rules, since it was
purchasing bonds from all Euro area eligible countries, and not from a single Treasury, like other central
banks. Therefore, one can say the ECB had to do several modifications during UMPs implementation,
adapting measures according to its own former programs (“learning by doing”) and to other central banks
experiences (“learning by observing”) to improve its framework.
    Finally, we have centered our attention to the debate on future monetary policy frameworks. We have
argued that central banks should not merely promote a complete return to pre-2008 standards
(“normalization”). Instead, they need to take advantage of old and more recent experiences, to improve
their future monetary policy and financial stability frameworks (“new normal”). Based on this, measures
implemented in post-2008 crisis would have three possible destinations in new frameworks: i) Be
discarded, due to their predominantly negative effects; ii) Not be regularly implemented, but be kept as
tools if needed to achieve central banks’ goals, especially under situations of crises; iii) Be incorporated as
regular measures of monetary policy/financial stability frameworks. For instance, in the case of the Euro
area (analyzed in more detail in section 3), we would have the following examples: i) Exclude SMP, once
sterilized bond purchases during its course did not solve financial fragmentation in periphery countries,
sometimes increasing these countries sovereign yields; ii) Do not implement TLTROs on a regular basis,
but keep TLTROs (especially ones with price incentives) as alternative facilities to improve liquidity
conditions, and foster targeting credit to real economy if needed; iii) Keep forward guidance as a
permanent tool to clarify central bank’s reaction function and improve communication, and
macroprudential measures to expand the resilience of financial system against imbalances. In the case of
small advanced open economies and emerging countries, central bank balance sheet policies (e.g., yield
curve management, with monetary authorities selling/buying government bonds previously available/
placed after on their balance sheets to cope with excessive inflows/outflows and foreign exchange
appreciation/depreciation) could be added to other actions already applied to face destabilizing pressures or
excessive volatility in asset and foreign exchange markets (e.g., macroprudential measures, capital flow
management initiatives, foreign exchange interventions). In this sense, monetary and financial stability
authorities in advanced and emerging economies will need to be institutions with an increasingly evolving
profile, in a continuously adaptive and innovative process, to face challenges posed by markets that are
each day more dynamic, innovative, complex, interconnected and globalized.

6 References
Allen, W.A. (2012), “Government Debt Management and Monetary Policy in Britain Since 1919”, BIS
Paper No. 65b, May.

                                                                                                           14
Altavilla, C.A.; Carboni, G.; Motto, R. (2015), “Asset purchase programmes and financial markets: lessons
from the euro area”, ECB Working Paper Series, No. 1864, November.

Amamiya, M. (2017), “History and Theories of Yield Curve Control”, Keynote Speech at the Financial
Markets Panel Conference to Commemorate the 40th Meeting, BOJ, January 11th.

Anderson, R.G. (2010), “The first U.S. quantitative easing: the 1930s”, Economic Synopses No 17, Federal
Reserve Bank of Saint Louis.

Andrade, P; Cahn, C.; Fraisse, H.; Mésonnier, J.S. (2017), “Can the Provision of Long-Term Liquidity
Help to Avoid a Credit Crunch? Evidence from the Eurosystem’s LTRO”, version December 30, 2017
(previous version: Banque de France Working Paper No 540).

Bagehot, W. (1873), “Lombard Street: A Description of Money Markets”, Reprint by Hyperion Press Inc.
of the 1962 ed., published by R. I. Irwin, Homewood, 1979.

Bernanke, B.S. (2000), Essays on the Great Depression, Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University Press.
Blinder, A.; Ehrmann, M.; de Haan, J.; Jansen, D-J. (2017), “Necessity as the mother of invention:
monetary policy after the crisis”, Economic Policy, 32(92): 707-755.

Bordo, M. (2014), “The Federal Reserve’s Role: Actions Before, During, and After the 2008 Panic the
Historical Context of the Great Contraction”, in: Baily, M.N. and Taylor, J.B. (ed.), Across the Great
Divide: New Perspectives on the Financial Crisis, chapter 6 Hoover Institution, Stanford University.

Bordo, M. and Sinha, A. (2016), “A Lesson from the Great Depression that the Fed Might have Learned:
A Comparison of the 1932 Open Market Purchases with Quantitative Easing”, NBER Working Papers
22581, National Bureau of Economic Research, August.

Borio, C. (2012), “The financial cycle and macroeconomics: What have we learnt?”, BIS Working Papers
395, Bank for International Settlements.

Borio, C. and Zabai, A. (2016), “Unconventional monetary policies: a re-appraisal”, BIS Working Papers
No 570, Bank for International Settlements, July.

Breckenfelder, J.; Andrade, P; De Fiore, F.; Karadi, P.; Tristani, O. (2016), “The ECB’s asset purchase
programme: an early assessment”, ECB Working Paper Series No. 1956, September.

Carpinelli, L. and Crosignani, M. (2017), “The Effect of Central Bank Liquidity Injections on Bank Credit
Supply”, FEDS Working Paper No. 2017-038.

Carré, E.; Couppey-Soubeyran, J.; Plihon, D.; Pourroy, M. (2013), “Central banking after the crisis: Brave
New World or Back to the Future? Replies to a questionnaire sent to central bankers and economists”, CES
Working Paper 2013.73.

Claessens, S; Kose, M.A.; Terrones, M.E. (2011), “Financial Cycles: What? How? When?”, In: Clarida,
Richard, Giavazzi, Francesco (Eds.), NBER 2010 International Seminar on Macroeconomics, University of
Chicago Press, pp. 303 – 343.

Crosignani, M.; Faria-e-Castro, M.; Fonseca, L. (2017), “The (Unintended?) Consequences of the Largest
Liquidity Injection Ever”, FEDS Working Paper No.2017-011, version November 20th.


                                                                                                      15
Daetz, S. L.; Subrahmanyam, M. G.; Tang, D. Y.; Wang, S. Q. (2017), “Did ECB Liquidity Injections Help
The Real Economy”, Working Paper, version September 22.

Darracq-Paries, M. and De Santis, R. A. (2015), “A non-standard monetary policy shock: The ECB’s 3-
year LTROs and the shift in credit supply”, Journal of International Money and Finance, 54 (C): 1-34.

Doran, D.; Dunne, P.; Monks, A.; O’Reilly, G. (2013), “Was the Securities Markets Programme Effective
in Stabilizing Irish Yields?”, Research Technical Paper 7, Dublin: Central Bank of Ireland, October.

Dow, S. (2017), “Central banking in the twenty-first century”, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 41 (6):
1539–1557.

Ehlers, T. (2012), “The effectiveness of the Federal Reserve’s Maturity Extension Program - Operation
Twist 2: the portfolio rebalancing channel and public debt management”, in Bank for International
Settlements (eds.), Threat of fiscal dominance?, vol. 65, p. 245-255.

Eichengreen, B. J. (2008), Globalizing capital: A history of the international monetary system (second
edition), Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Epstein, G. and Ferguson, T. (1984), “Monetary Policy, Loan Liquidation, and Industrial Conflict: The
Federal Reserve and the Open Market Operations of 1932”, The Journal of Economic History, 44 (4):957-
983.

European Central Bank - ECB (2017), “The targeted longer-term refinancing operations: an overview of
the take-up and their impact on bank intermediation”, ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 3, May.
_____________________________ (2018), The Euro area Bank Lending Survey: Third quarter of 2018,
Frankfurt, October.

Fontan, C.; Carré, E.; L’Oeillet, G. (2018), “Theoretical perspectives on the new era of central banking”,
French Politics, 16 (4): 453-470.

Friedman, M. and Schwartz, A.J. (1963), A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960, Princeton:
Princeton University Press.

Gros, D.; Valiante, D.; De Groen, W.P. (2016), “The ECB’s Latest Gimmick: Cash for loans”, CEPS
Policy Brief No 341, March.

Hellwig, M. F. (2014), “Financial Stability, Monetary Policy, Banking Supervision, and Central Banking”,
MPI Collective Goods Preprint, No. 2014/9, July.

Hicks, J. R. (1939), Value and Capital: An Inquiry into Some Fundamental Principals of Economic
Theory, First edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford.

Keynes, J.M. (1936), The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money, London: Macmillan.

Koo, R. C. (2011), The Holy Grail of Macroeconomics: Lessons from Japan’s Great Recession, New York:
John Wiley & Sons.

Le Heron, E. (2016), À quoi sert la Banque centrale européenne?, 2e édition, La Documentation française,
Collection Réflexe Europe, série Débats.


                                                                                                      16
Lombardi, D.; Siklos, P.; Amand, S.S. (2018), “A Survey Of The International Evidence And Lessons
Learned About Unconventional Monetary Policies: Is A ‘New Normal’ In Our Future?”, Journal of
Economic Surveys, Wiley Blackwell, 32(5): 1229-1256, December.

Mehrling, P. (2011), The New Lombard Street: How the Fed Became the Dealer of Last Resort, Princeton
University Press.

Meltzer, A. H. (2003), A History of the Federal Reserve, volume 1: 1913-1951 and volume 2, Book 1:
1951-1969, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Minsky, H.P. (1982), Can it happen again?, Armonk, NY: ME Sharpe.

Mishkin, F. S. and White, E.N. (2016), “Unprecedented Actions: The Federal Reserve’s Response to the
Global Financial Crisis in Historical Perspective” in The Federal Reserve’s Role in the Global Economy: A
Historical Perspective, ed. Michael D. Bordo and Mark A. Wynne (New York, NY: Cambridge University
Press), 220-258.

Modigliani, F. and Sutch, R. (1966), “Innovations in Interest Rate Policy”, American Economic Review 56
(1/2): 178–97.

Morgan, D. and Narron, J. (2015), “Crisis Chronicles: The Panic of 1825 and the Most Fantastic Financial
Swindle of All Time”, Liberty Street Economics, New York Fed Blog, April 10th.
http://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2015/04/crisis-chronicles-the-panic-of-1825-and-the-most-
fantastic-financial-swindle-of-all-time-.html#.VSkSNkKBNB2.

Pattipeilohy, C.; Van den End, J. W.; Tabbae, M.; Frost, J.; de Hahn, J. (2013), “Unconventional Monetary
Policy of the ECB During the Financial Crisis: An Assessment and New Evidence”, DNB Working Paper
No 381, Amsterdam: The Netherlandsche Bank, May.

Pfister, C. and Valla, N. (2018), “‘New Normal’ or ‘New Orthodoxy’? Elements of a Central Banking
Framework for the After-Crisis”, Working papers No 680, Banque de France, May.

Reis, R. (2018), “The New Conventional Central Bank”, Phillips lecture delivered on the 25th of April
2018 (video), first draft: May 2018.

Shirai, S. (2018), Mission Incomplete: Reflating Japan Economy - Second Edition, Tokyo: Asian
Development Bank Institute, May.

Smith, C.H. (2009), “The Crash of 2008: It’s the Panic of 1825 all over again (also 1837, 1847, 1866...)”,
available at https://www.aol.com/2009/11/08/the-crash-of-2008-its-the-panic-of-1825-all-over-again-also-
1/

Steinkamp, S and Westermann, F. (2014), “The role of creditor seniority in Europe's sovereign debt crisis”,
Economic Policy 29 (79): 497-552.

Tobin, J. (1958), “Liquidity Preference as Behavior Towards Risk,” Review of Economic Studies, 25(2),
65-86.

Valla, N. (2018), “Monetary policy beyond normalisation: objectives and instruments”, Speech at Panel 3
of SUERF/Belgian Financial Forum Conference “10 Years after the start of the financial crisis: Contours of
a new normal”, Brussels, September 14th.

                                                                                                       17
