 The Relation of Devolution and Quality of Institutions with Economic Growth of
                             Brazilian Municipalities

Tatiane Almeida de Menezes (PIMES-UFPE)
José Rodolfo Pfaffmann Fiori (Msc in Local Economic Development at London School
of Economics-LSE)

Abstract
Devolution of fiscal capacity has been considered by governments all around the world
an important force behind economic dynamism of sub-national regions. Since its last
constitution in 1988, Brazil has been engaged in a controversial devolutionary. This
paper aims understanding the relation of devolution and quality of institutions with
economic, contributing to the current debate of to what extent, if any, and in which
context should the Brazilian government devolve more fiscal capacity to this lower
level of government. Using a new measure for devolution and considering institutional
differences according to the evolutionary path of each Brazilian region, this paper
applies an IV analysis and finds that, when good institutional quality is in place,
devolution is positively related to economic growth. Therefore, in order to reap the
benefits of any additional devolution, the Brazilian government should pay attention to
the institutional arrangement of municipalities.
Keywords: Regional Inequality, Devolution, Municipalities, Economic Growth
JBL: R11, R58, H6

Resumo
A devolução da capacidade fiscal do governo central para as subnacionais do país tem
sido considerada em todo o mundo como uma força importante por trás do dinamismo
econômico destas regiões. Desde a constituição de 1988, o Brasil tem se envolvido em
um controverso processo devolutivo. Este artigo visa compreender a relação entre
devolução, qualidade das instituições e crescimento econômico. Contribuindo, desta
forma, para o debate atual de até que ponto, e em que contexto o governo deveria
transferir mais capacidade fiscal para suas subunidades. Propondo uma nova medida de
desconcentração e considerando diferenças institucionais de acordo com o caminho
evolutivo de cada região brasileira, este trabalho aplica a técnica de variáveis
instrumentais e encontra que, havendo instituições fortes, a devolução está
positivamente relacionada ao crescimento econômico. Portanto, para obter os benefícios
de qualquer desconcentração adicional, o governo brasileiro deve prestar atenção ao
arranjo institucional dos municípios.
Palavras-Chave: Desigualdade Regional, Descentralização, Municípios, Crescimento
Econômico
JBL: R11, R58, H6

Introduction

        A trend towards many types of decentralization has affected the entire world over
the past 40 years (Rodríguez-Pose & Gill 2005). Despite varying drastically from one
country to another, different decentralizing processes can be categorized into three
different discourses with regards to their motivations: the identity, the good governance
and the economic efficiency discourses (Rodríguez-Pose & Sandall 2008). This study will
focus on the economic efficiency discourse that has appeared more frequently in the
recent years as a response to the effects of globalization. In a globalization process, the
capacity of regions to engage in territorial competition becomes an important feature of
the current world (Agnew 2001) as there is a common understanding that localities and
municipalities are “the most suitable places to achieve economic dynamism in a
globalized world” (Rodríguez-Pose & Sandall 2008, p.58). This discourse is closely
related to the “new regionalism” agenda and its argument that devolution is a matter of
counterbalancing the “economic and democratic deficit” of regions as sub-national
governments are better prepared to improve economic dynamism and to promote more
accountable, participatory and transparent government (Tiebout 1956; Musgrave 1959;
Oates 1972; Keating 1998; Morgan 2002).
         Devolution could be defined as the statutory delegation of powers from the central
government of a sovereign state to govern at a subnational level, such as a regional or
local level. Devolution is a broader concept than decentralization because it corresponds
to the return to municipalities not only of the revenue collected from its residents, but also
the ability of these to collect taxes and to take responsibility for the expenses that occur
in the municipalities. It is a form of administrative decentralization.
         However, some paper suggested that the devolution performances depends on the
degree of development of the country. There are studies that indicate increases in costs
and losses in efficiency resulting from devolution (Costa-Font, Moscone, 2008 Crivelli;
Leive; Stratmann, 2010). Some studies for countries with decentralized systems show
inequalities in access and use between regions, favorable to the richest regions (Jiménez-
Rubio, Smith, van Doorslaer, 2008). There are also results of positive impacts of
decentralization on equity financing, but not so clear about the use of services (Bossert et
al, 2003).
         The current discourse is that, for the case of municipalities, governments have a
certain level of responsibilities that is below the financial resources available to them,
therefore more devolution is necessary. In this scenario of an imbalance of resources and
responsibilities and a real possibility of movement towards changing these conditions,
this paper aims at contributing to the ongoing discussion of to what extent, if any, and in
which context should the Brazilian federal and state government devolve more fiscal
capacity to municipalities. For this purpose, this paper posits the following research
question: what is the relation of devolution and quality of institutions with GDP per capita
growth of Brazilian municipalities from 2005 to 2012? Based on a strand of the literature
that will be further discussed, this paper has defined the following hypothesis: devolution
and good quality of institutions together at municipal level are positively correlated to
higher rates of GDP per capita growth in the analyzed period (from 2005 to 2012).
         This research intends to be innovative and contribute to the literature on this topic
in four aspects. Firstly, it creates a new measure for devolution at the municipal level that
overcomes some of the possible caveats of other proxies used for devolution at this level
of government. Secondly, it applies a line of reasoning similar to what Acemoglu et al.
(2001) proposed, differentiating the quality of institutions across Brazilian regions
according to their process of colonization. Studies on devolution are normally conducted
at state level due to availability of data, thus the analysis of devolution itself at the
municipal level is a third contribution. Lastly, this research interacts devolution and
regional quality of institutions to better understand the relation of devolution and
municipal economic growth. This research applies fixed effect with instrumental variable
model to help us understanding some important aspects of the proposed research question.
This paper first reviews the theoretical discussion about devolution and quality of
institutions and present how these two topic have evolved in the Brazilian context. Then
it presents how the new measure for devolution was created and what are the assumptions
considered with regards to quality of institutions of Brazilian geographical regions.
Moreover, it will also discuss the strategy of analysis as well as the econometric model
for the regressions. Forth, it will present the results and discussion. Finally, some
conclusions.
       .
       Devolution, Institutions and Economic Growth

        The mechanisms that are claimed to make local governments better capable of
achieving economic development are under an overarching idea that devolution increases
the overall efficiency of regions, a factor that is likely to induce economic growth
(Martinez-Vazquez & McNab 2003). Efficiency, in turn, is defined as the ability of local
governments to maximize the allocation and production of resources (Rodríguez-Pose &
Bwire 2003). The allocative efficiency is related to the capacity of local governments to
better allocate resources across the needs of their territories while the production
efficiency is the capacity of governments to deliver services and goods at a lower unitary
cost when compared to other tiers of governments. All in all, if local governments are in
a better position to achieve these allocative and productive efficiencies, devolution makes
sense as it is likely that the efficiency gains will be reflected in positive economic results
(Rodríguez-Pose & Bwire 2003).
        Once understood that the link between devolution and economic growth is to
increase allocative and productive efficiency of governments, clarifying the mechanisms
underlying this link is the next step. Tiebout (1956) explains that local governments are
more capable of identifying the preferences of their citizens, a fact that leads to a better
allocation of resources. This supposedly better allocative capability ends up increasing
the efficiency of local governments as there is a reduction of provision of services that
are not necessary according to the local conditions. For instance, one municipality might
be in need of a more robust health system due to a peculiarity (e.g. in a region with high
incidence of “Dengue Fever”), but the federal government allocates more resources to
education due to a top-down nation-wide policy. In this case, if fiscal capacity were
devolved, the municipal government would be able to better allocate the financial
resources according to its needs. Another important mechanism is related to the
competition that is induced by devolution (Tiebout 1956). This argument relies in the
assumption that citizens are mobile and decide where to live according to a cost-benefit
analysis of their preferences and places’ living costs (Tiebout 1956). In this sense, if
municipalities can have full power on their budget, they might compete with one another
to provide the best services at the lowest cost possible with the aim of attracting citizens
to their territory, a process that increases municipal efficiency.
        Another important mechanism that increases the efficiency of municipalities
through devolution is the creation of an environment within the municipal administration
that is more prone to innovation (Breton 1983; Thiessen 2003; Rodríguez-Pose & Bwire
2003). This innovation environment is a result of two forces that are related to devolution
towards local governments. The first is that, according to what was previously mentioned,
municipalities will compete with one another in order to provide the best services at
lowest costs. This competition leads to innovation of processes, products and business
models aiming at either improving services or reducing costs. The second is that, as local
governments act in a much smaller scale than central governments, the effects and
possible failures, which are the most likely result of any attempt to innovate, are also
much smaller. Therefore, as the risk of failure is reduced, local governments are more
willing to innovate than central governments. For instance, Brazilian municipalities are
partnering with Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) in order to facilitate the
provision of some health services. As municipalities have their own legislative power,
they created the legal framework for this initiative very quickly and were also rapid to
adequate it in the case possible failures that might happen. A similar initiative coming
from the federal government would be more complex to implement as legislation would
be valid for all Brazilian municipalities, increasing the impacts of any failure, and would
have to be under scrutiny of federal legislative power, diminishing the flexibility of
adaptation of the legal framework as federal legislative power is much less responsive to
municipalities’ needs.
         The informational advantage that municipal governments are claimed to have is
also important on understanding the arguments that support the connection between
devolution and economic growth of devolved localities (Klugman 1994). The idea behind
this argument is that local agents (public leaders, politicians, public servants, and others)
are much better informed about the conditions of their municipalities when compared to
central governments. Therefore, when there is this inadequacy or asymmetry of
information, it is harder for central governments to make decisions and evaluate the
impacts of these decisions in an administrative and political position that is far from
localities (Klugman 1994). This situation might lead to losses of efficiency when power
is centralized in the hands of the central government. The last mechanism to mention is
the improvement of efficiency due to better accountability and transparency that a process
of devolution might lead (Klugman 1994; Rodríguez-Pose & Bwire 2003). Devolving
fiscal capacity puts the tier of government directly responsible for the expenditure and
provision of services much closer to the recipients of these services. This proximity, in
turn, might lead to better transparency and accountability. According to Rodríguez-Pose
& Bwire (2003, p.1910), fostering transparency and accountability “reduces bureaucratic
complexity and increases citizens' monitoring capacity, stimulating further efficiency
gains”. Transparency and accountability might also contribute to an improvement in the
institutional conditions as they enhance trust among actors within an specific context
(Putnam et al. 1994). An environment with more trust contributes positively for the
delivery of public policies “by decreasing the costs of collective action and increasing the
benefits of cooperation” (Rodríguez-Pose & Bwire 2003, p.1910).
         On the other side of the debate, there are scholars who criticize the positive effects
of devolution (Breton 1983; Prud’homme 1995; Rodden 2003; Rodríguez-Pose & Bwire
2003; Morgan 2002). Against the argument that local governments are more efficient than
central governments, Prud’homme (1995) posits that this can only be true when
economies of scale are not relevant for the service provision. By concentrating the
demand of many localities, central governments have more bargaining power, therefore
can negotiate better unitary costs and be more cost-efficient. A second argument against
devolution is that the local governments might be more subject to elite capture and
corruption than central governments are. It is argued that local politicians are more likely
to be influenced by pressing demands from local interest groups “in matters such as
taxation and authorization” and that national politicians and bureaucrats have less
discretion than their local counterparts (Prud’homme 1995, p.211). Devolution is also
criticized by the fact that it might create overlapping functions and power in the public
administrative system (Breton 1983) and this can create ambiguity of responsibilities and
increase the administrative costs of governments, two factors that reduce the overall
efficiency of the system (Rodríguez-Pose & Bwire 2003). Another important critique of
devolving fiscal capacity is that local governments might lack qualified human resources
that are able to effectively manage complex tasks and services. Prud’homme (1995)
suggests that national governments are more likely to offer better salaries, create
attractive careers, and to have scale to invest in technologies that can help on the delivery
of services.
         Along with the devolution trend that is claimed to lead to a better condition of
regions in the pursuit of higher levels economic growth, there is an emerging consensus
that institutions matter for regional development (Rodríguez-Pose 2013). In a broader
sense, institutions are for now defined as “the rules of the game in a society or, more
formally, are the humanly devised constraints that shape human interaction” (North 1990,
p.3). More recently, even within mainstream economists, institutions have gained primary
importance for economic growth (Acemoglu et al. 2005). For instance, Rodrik (2004)
recognizes that, despite the caveats on the understanding of which direction the causality
mechanism works in the case of high-quality institutions and economic growth,
institutions are crucial when assessing the determinants of growth of regions. In a study
sponsored by World Bank to clarify the importance of institutions in the quality of the
decentralization process in seven different countries, Parker & Serrano (2000, p.26) stated
that “from an operational perspective, having enough capacity to get the job done is one
of the biggest challenges confronting local institutions”. Several important reports on
development such as Barca (2009) have emphasized that the reason why traditional
development policies have failed is the constant neglection of institutional context of
underdeveloped regions.
         Despite the agreement that having the right institutions leads to more successful
strategies of economic growth, the type institutions that matters and what are the
mechanisms through which this connection works are still under development
(Rodríguez-Pose 2013). Departing from the more general definition of institutions
presented by North (1990), Rodríguez-Pose (2013, p.5) presents the concept separated
into two: formal institutions (“hard” or “society” institutions) such as rule of law and
property rights, and informal institutions (“soft” or “communities” institutions) such as
norms, traditions and social conventions. With regards to more formal aspects of
institutions, the improvement of rule of law, property rights, quality of public servants
and others can lead to more accountable and transparent governments that, in turn, are
more likely to implement quality and efficient policies (Rodríguez-Pose & Garcilazo
2015). For instance, Acemoglu et al. (2005) demonstrate that property rights are highly
related to better income levels. In relation to more informal aspects of institutions, social
capital and trust work reducing the transaction costs when there is asymmetry of
information (Fukuyama 2000). Better informal institutions such as sharing the same
culture, religion and values facilitate the cooperation between individuals and
organizations and promotes the associational life that is necessary for the success of
governments (Fukuyama 2000, p.1).

       Background of Brazil

        As devolutionary processes are normally very distinct from each other and depend
on the context of the region where it happens (Rodríguez-Pose & Gill 2003), it is
important to discuss the particular elements of this process in the case of Brazil.
        In 2012, the final year of analysis of this study, the fiscal capacity of the federal,
state and municipal governments were 57.5%, 24.4% and 18%, respectively (Afonso
2013). This data shows that, during this period, subnational governments, in special
municipalities, not only gained responsibilities as previously demonstrated, but also
financial resources to deliver public policies. Municipal governments almost tripled their
fiscal capacity from 1960 (6.4%) to 2012 (18%). However, simply understanding the
level of financial resources that are spent at local level might lead to wrong conclusions
as it is possible to have similar levels of financial resources available at local
governments, but completely different types of devolution due to the way that fiscal
capacity was devolved (Rodríguez-Pose & Gill 2003). In the case of Brazilian
municipalities, which is the focus of this study, one particularity to understand is that
devolution has been mainly implemented through transfers of resources from federal and
state governments and not through devolution of capacity to collect taxes locally. The
revenue generated locally comes from few types of revenue sources that are, in the
majority of municipalities, inexpressive when compared to the overall expenditure of
these municipal governments, especially in less developed regions of the country.
Therefore, with the fiscal gap at local level, municipalities are highly dependent on
transfers. Table 1 represents the fiscal gap in the structure of revenue and fiscal capacity
in Brazil in the year of 2000, allowing us to identify that only 5.1% of the overall revenue
is collected at municipal level, the rest of the 17% of financial resources available to
municipalities was comprised of transfers from the central and state governments.

      Table 1: Revenue and Fiscal Capacity (financial resources available) in the
      three levels of government in the year of 2000.
        Level         of                                                    % Fiscal
                           Type Tax                             % Revenue
        Government                                                          Capacity

                           Income Tax (IR)                      13.5
                           Tax on Industrialised Products
                                                                4.9
                           (IPI)
                           Tax on Financial Operations (IOF)    0.9
                           Import Tax (II)                      2.4
                           Export Tax (IE)                      0.0
                           Rural Property Tax (ITR)             0.0
        Federal            Payroll      Social      Insurance               57
                                                                15.3
                           Contribution
                           Payroll Contribution to FGTS         5.2
                           Turnover Contributions               13.5
                           Net Profit Contribution (CSLL)       2.4
                           Bank Debit Contribution (CPMF)       4.0
                           Others                               5.2
                           Total                                67.3

                           Value Added Tax (ICMS)               23.2
                           Tax on Motor Vehicles (IPVA)         1.5
                           Heritage    and     Endowment
        States                                                  0.0         26
                           (ITCMD)
                           Others                               3.0
                           Total                                27.7

                          Tax on Services (ISS)             1.8
                          Tax on Urban Property (IPTU)      1.5
       Municipalities     Tax  on Property Transfer (ITBI)  0.3             17
                          Others                            1.5
                          Total                             5.1
       Source: author’s adaptation from Mora & Varsano (2001)

       In order to understand the other specificities about the devolutionary process in
Brazil at municipal level, it is important to analyze in details how the fiscal capacity of
municipalities, the previously mentioned 17% in table 1, is comprised. This study will
make these more specific considerations for the years of 2005 and 2012 because they
       reflect the period analyzed. It is possible to see from table 2 that out of the total fiscal
       capacity of municipalities, the share that comes from taxes collected locally (Local taxes)
       in 2012 was 19%, a value that is higher than in 2005, but is still very low. The municipal
       governments at poorer regions, Northeast and North, rely even less on local taxes and
       their revenue from this source was 11% and 12%, respectively. The municipalities in
       Southeast have a much higher share of its fiscal capacity coming from local taxes: 23%
       in 2012. Another relevant aspect is the importance of the federal government in the
       transfer of financial resources to municipalities. Of the 65.9% of the transfers from other
       levels of government in 2012, the most important source is federal government with
       28.7% of the total (central government transfers are also part of the Multi-level transfers).
       In table 2 is also possible to see the non-constitutional transfers which are resources that
       are transferred on the bases of specific partnerships among levels of government to
       implement programmers. These transfers contributed with only 1% of the total fiscal
       capacity of municipalities in 2012.

       Table 2: Total revenue available to municipalities in the years of 2005 and 2012 according
       to revenue’s sources. Source: author’s creation with data from Tesouro Nacional (2016)
                                       Constitutional transfers
                                                                                       Non-
                      Fiscal   Local                                          Multi-                   Other
                                       Total Federal   State      Municipal            constitutionl
         Region       Capacity taxes                                          level                    sources
                                       %     %         %          %                    transfers
Year




                      %        %                                              %                        %
                                                                                       %
         Central-West 100      12.6    75.4   34.3     29.7       0.3         11.2     3.3             8.7
         Northeast    100      9.5     85.3   50.2     18.9       0.1         16.2     1.5             3.6
         North        100      9.4     84.1   43.4     24.6       0.1         16.1     2.1             4.4
         Southeast    100      22.9    61.8   23.7     29.8       0.2         8.1      1.0             14.4
         South        100      14.0    69.9   31.4     28.9       0.1         9.4      1.0             15.1
2005




         Total        100      17.4    69.8   31.9     27.2       0.2         10.5     1.3             11.5


         Central-West 100      14.7    70.7   31.9     26.10 0.10             12.5     1.7             12.8
         Northeast    100      10.8    81.9   44.0     16.80 0.10             21.1     1.0             6.2
         North        100      12.0    79.5   36.2     22.10 0.10             21.2     1.5             7.0
         Southeast    100      24.4    57.7   21.4     26.00 0.00             10.3     0.9             17.0
         South        100      15.5    64.8   28.6     25.30 0.00             10.9     1.2             18.5
2012




         Total        100      18.9    65.9   28.7     23.70 0.10             13.4     1.0             14.2


               The last crucial point to mention is the conditionality that are in place when
       municipalities are executing their fiscal capacity. The first conditionality is that
       municipalities must spend 25% of all their current revenue in the development of
       education (Constitution of Brazil 1988). Still related to education, the FUNDEB
       (Maintenance Fund for Development and Support of Professionals in the Education
       System), which is one of the most important line of transfers of resources from other
       levels of government to municipalities and is part of the Multi-level transfers in table 4,
       must have at least 60% of all its resources applied to salaries of professors (Constitution
       of Brazil 1988). With regards to the health system, governments of municipalities must
       invest at least 15% of their current revenue in services and programmers related to health
       (Constitutional Amendment 29 2000). With regards to expenditures in personnel, the
Fiscal Responsibility Law regulates the expenditure in all levels of government. At
municipal level, public administration cannot spend more than 60% of its current revenue
with personnel and this 60% is divided into 54% for Executive power and 6% for
Legislative power (Complementary Law Number 101 2000). The overall Legislative
expenditure is also regulated by the Constitutional Amendment number 25/2000 in which
it demands that minimum percentages of financial resources be channeled from the
Executive to Legislative power. These percentages vary from 8% in municipalities with
less than 100,000 inhabitants to 5% in municipalities with more than 500,000 inhabitants
(Constitutional Amendment 25 2000). This list of conditionalities is not exhaustive, but
are enough to demonstrate that, despite having increased the fiscal capacity at municipal
level, local governments are highly restricted and controlled on where and how to spend.
All in all, the general sense for municipalities and politicians at municipal level, despite
having gained fiscal capacity over the last years, is that municipalities should get more
power in terms of financial resources and autonomy. The Brazilian Constitutional
Transfer is call Fundo de Participação dos Minicípios- FPM and we are exploring their
exogenous in our identification strategy.

Quality of Institutions

         According to Rodríguez-Pose (2013), measuring institutions is virtually
impossible. Finding plausible measures to proxy institutions at municipal level in a
developing country is even more complex. Therefore, this research will first present
arguments that substantiate why the institutional panorama of Brazilian municipalities is
diverse and then, based on these arguments, will assign to each Brazilian region a more
general proxy for institutions that will be assumed to be the same for all the municipalities
in that region. Table 3 summarizes the assumptions of quality of institutions for each of
the 3 regions. The first argument that explains the existence of this institutional diversity
in Brazil is related to the political and legislative autonomy that municipalities acquired
after the 1988 Constitution. According to Article 30 of the 1988 Constitution, it is
responsibility of municipalities “to legislate on subjects of local interest” and “to
supplement federal and state legislation where applicable”, so localities can legislate on
various topics such as Service Taxes (ISS) and Urban Property Taxes (IPTU)
(Constitution of Brazil 1988). Article 31 states that the control of the municipality shall
be exercised by the municipal Legislative power (Constitution of Brazil 1988) and this
involves activities such as the approval of the actions and expenditures of the local
Executive power. In some cases, there is also the involvement of other levels of
government when necessary, but local Legislative powers are the first, and in many
remote areas of the country the only, instance of control of the Executive Power. The
possibility of legislating at municipal levels and this check-and-balance system under the
responsibility of Legislative power are subject to political, cultural and social conditions
of localities, a fact that leads to diverse and unique institutional arrangements across the
country. For instance, alliances among politicians and public servants from the
Legislative and Executive powers in one municipality might create an informal
institutional context prone to corruption where the law enforcement supposedly applied
by the Legislative power is ineffective. Or, without violating the law and more related to
a formal institutional aspect, local legislation can pass specific laws such as the increase
of Service Taxes (ISS) and Urban Property Taxes (IPTU) that might inhibit economic
activity. These two examples show how the legislative autonomy of local governments
might lead to a diversity of institutions across municipalities that are in the same country
and ruled by the same constitution.
         The second argument is related to the way that the 5 Brazilian regions evolved
since Brazilian colonization. According to Acemoglu et al. (2001, p: 1370), regions that
were subject to different types of colonization might have developed different institutions
“that persisted even after independence”. For instance, on the one hand, the Belgian
colonization of Congo had an exploratory focus, therefore the macro-institutions taken to
the colonized country were scarce and did not introduce important institutional aspects
such as private property; while, on the other hand, British colonization of Australia did
not have an exploratory focus and, therefore, introduced in the colonized country much
better macro-institutions (Acemoglu et al. 2001). In the case of Brazil, despite having a
single colonizer – Portugal – thus supposedly acquiring the same macro-institutions from
its colonizer, micro and geographic characteristics influenced the way institutional
arrangements were consolidated over time within the country (Naritomi et al. 2009).
         Naritomi et al. (2009, p.20) shows that for Brazilian municipalities “geography
alone explains 65, 30, and 20 percent of the variation in, respectively, ln income per
capita, governance and land Gini”. At the beginning of the Brazilian colonial period,
distance from Portugal was a very important factor in the decision of which areas to
explore first and due to this proximity, the Northeast region was the first to be explored
(Naritomi et al. 2009). First with the extraction of wood (Pau-Brasil) and then with the
plantation of sugar-cane and production of sugar, a period named the Sugar Economic
Cycle, Portugal imposed to Brazil two very extractive activities. These activities were
mainly based on slavery, large rural properties in the hands of few, a patriarchal society,
and the practice of rent-seeking activities (Naritomi et al. 2009, p.8). Thus, based on these
extractive colonial origins of the Northeast region and on the arguments presented by
Acemoglu et al. (2001), Brazilian municipalities in that region are likely have a different
institutional arrangement that is more fragile and less effective than other Brazilian
regions that had different colonization and settlement processes.
         The less populated of the Brazilian regions, the North, only started increasing its
population during XIX century. Up to this century, the region was mainly inhabited by
indigenous people in an immense geographic area within the Amazon Basin (IBGE
2016). From 1840 to 1910, the Rubber Cycle, an also very extractive economic activity
in the Amazon forest, created a migration influx to the states of this region. People from
the Northeast region and Japanese immigrants moved to municipalities of the North to
engage in the extraction of rubber. This initiative was short-lived and did not bring
institutional and sustainable economic development for that region. More recently,
aiming at increasing the population and development of this region, the Brazilian
government started two development programmes: the first was the creation of a
development agency dedicated to the North region named SUDAM and the second was
the creation of a manufacturing pole with lots of tax incentives named Zona Franca de
Manaus. These two initiatives also triggered a migratory influx to that area and
contributed to the formation of its population. However, even with all these efforts, the
North region is not yet economically developed, neither densely populated. The region
has many remote municipalities where government and formal institutions such as public
organizations are less present. Based on these facts, this research considers that the quality
of institutions in this region is similar to that of que Northeast region.
         Different from the type of colonization suffered from the North and Northeast
regions, the Southeast and South regions were not under “constant and direct
intervention” from Portugal and its extractive activities during the colonial period. In this
direction, Naritomi et al. (2009, p.5) states that “in these areas history was connected to
activities developed by settlers at the margin of the colonial enterprises supported by the
metropolis”. Corroborating to that different type of colonization that is likely to have led
to a different and better institutional arrangement, Rio de Janeiro, a municipality in the
Southeast region, was the place to where the entire Portuguese court flee during the
Napoleonic expansion towards Portugal in 1808 (Hermann 2007). The entire court
established itself in the municipality of Rio de Janeiro from 1808 to 1815, bringing with
them around 15,000 people from the Portuguese elite and also several institutions
(Venâncio 2007). This fact alone can be considered a positive institutional shock that did
not happen in any other region of Brazil during its colonial time. Along with that, the
immigration of other European nationalities to Southeast and South regions flourished
from the second half of XIX century (Gregory 2007) and many immigrants came to these
regions as part of the workforce for the coffee farms and settlements. These immigrants
were mostly artisans, business man, and professors with the intention to settle in Brazil
and begin a new life, a completely different objective and context when compared to the
other immigrants that came with the intention to engage in the extractive-related activities
in the Northeast and North regions. This set of factors is in line with what Acemoglu et
al. (2001) proposes: having colonizers and immigrants with “more noble” objectives that
settled in these parts of the Brazilian territory led to better institutional conditions of the
municipalities of these regions.
         Partially similar to what happened to Southeast and South regions, the Central-
West region was not under an exclusive extractive colonization and also had an
institutional shock similar to that of Rio de Janeiro in 1808. The expansion of the
agricultural and livestock frontiers as a result of actions of the central government to
modernize the Brazilian agricultural industry during the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s
generated migratory flows of people from South and Southeast regions to the so far
sparsely inhabited Central-West region. This fact alone was the main responsible for the
settlements in the part of the country, also a completely different process of what the
Northeast and North regions were subject in the evolution of their population. Second,
the transfer of the capital from Rio de Janeiro to Federal District, which is in the hearth
of Central-West region, in 1960, also brought structural changes for the region as many
institutions, organizations, and highly qualified people suddenly moved to the new
Brazilian capital. Understanding how the Central-West was formed and seeing its current
level of development, the highest in the country along with Southeast region as showed
in table 1, encourage us to say that institutional arrangement in the Central-West is better
than that of the Northeast and North regions and in line with that of the South and
Southeast regions.

 Table 3: Author’s assignment for the Quality of Institutions according to the historical
                           evolution of Brazilian regions
      Region                           Quality of institution
      North (NO)                       Bad
      Northeast (NE)                   Bad
      Southeast (SE)                   Good
      South (SU)                       Good
      Central-West (CW)                Good

Data Set
       This study analyzes the relation of devolution and quality of institutions with GDP
per capita growth from 2005 to 2012 of 4,7421 Brazilian municipalities. Brazilian
municipal elections took place in 2004 and 2008, therefore the period from 2005 to 2012
reflects exactly two mandates of 4 years of municipal governments. In order to better
understand this relation, this study created one new measure for devolution. It also applied
a line of reasoning similar to what Acemoglu et al. (2001) proposes with the intention to
understand how different regional institutional arrangements relate to devolution and
economic growth. As far as this research is aware, no study has to date used a similar
proxy for devolution at municipal level and an argument based on the rational presented
by Acemoglu et al. (2001) to understand the previously stated relation for the case of
Brazil.
       The most common measures in studies of fiscal decentralization are “the
subnational share in total government expenditure and the subnational share in total
government revenue” (Rodríguez-Pose & Ezcurra 2010, p.623). However, most studies
are conducted at state level due to a better availability of data. Observing the
representative scheme in figure 1, it is possible to observe that, for the case of Brazil, each
tier of government is responsible for expenditures at municipal level, therefore the sum
of A, B and C represents the overall expenditure made by all tiers of government in the
municipal territory. Thus, devolution at municipal level also needs to consider these three
variables. For the case of Brazil, there is disaggregated data available on A, meaning that
there is availability of data on what each municipal government spends or collects
(Tesouro Nacional 2016). However, there is no disaggregated data available on B and C,
meaning that IBGE (2016) and National Treasury (Tesouro Nacional 2015) only releases
what state and federal government directly spend at municipal level in an aggregated
manner. Item A consolidates the overall expenditure of municipalities, meaning
expenditure of financial resources coming from all tiers of government, but
operationalized and spent by the municipal public administration at municipal territory.
Items B and C consolidate the expenditure made by state and federal government directly
at municipalities, bypassing municipal administration. Military police, which is
operationalized and financed by the state government, but is delivered at the municipal
level, is an example of expenditure in the B category.

              Figure 1: Representation of all the expenditure2 made at
              Municipal level. Source: author’s creation


                                                        B - State expenditure at
                         A - Municipal
                                                        municipal level
                         expenditure at
                         municipal level
                                                        C - Federal expenditure
                                                        at municipal level

1
  Brazil currently has 5,569 municipalities plus the Federal District, but the availability of data on the
variables restricted the number of observations in this study to 4, 742 municipalities. State capitals, the
Federal Disctrict (Brasilia) and Former federal regions (Acre, Amapá, Rondônica e Roraima) were
intentionally dropped from the sample because they represent a specific pattern of municipality that is
inserted in conurbations and access different sources of revenue (FPM – Participation Fund of
Municipalities has different rational to distribute resources to state capitals).
2
  The sizes of the squares are just an scheme to illustrate the fact that all levels of government spend in the
municipalities.
The ideal proxy for devolution at municipal level would be to calculate the item A in
relation to the sum of A, B and C for each Brazilian municipality 𝑖 according to the
formula 1 presented below. By doing that, it would be possible to understand the level of
expenditure that is in fact devolved, meaning the expenditure made at municipal level by
the municipal
       administration in relation to the expenditure made at municipal level by all levels
of government.
                   ()
       𝐷𝑒𝑣% =                          (1)
                () * +) * ,)
      However, as there is no disaggregated data for B and C for every municipality 𝑖, the
operation in formula 1 was not possible and this research needed to create a disaggregated
measure to proxy 𝐴% + 𝐵% % + 𝐶% for each municipality 𝑖. In order to do that, this research
conducted the following steps:
   1. Gathered data for GDP in an Expenditure Perspective of every Brazilian
       municipality. For this type of GDP in Expenditure Perspective, the Brazilian
       Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE 2016) calculates the sum of private
       consumption (PC), government consumption (GC), investments (IN), and exports
       (EX) minus imports (IMP) for each municipality 𝑖 as it is stated in formula 2. By
       analyzing government consumption (GC) in each municipality 𝑖, it is possible to
       proxy the absolute size of government in the economy of that municipality 𝑖.
     𝐺𝐷𝑃 𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒% = 𝑃𝐶% + 𝐺𝐶% + 𝐼𝑁% + 𝐸𝑋% − 𝐼𝑀𝑃% ;                  (2)
   2. Summed the absolute size of government of every municipality 𝑖 in the country
      and identified the overall size of government in the economy for all the Brazilian
      municipalities as stated in formula 3.
       @,@BC
       %DE 𝐺𝐶% ;                                                        (3)
   3. Divided the absolute size of government of each municipality 𝑖 (𝐺𝐶% ) by the
      overall size of government in the Brazilian economy (formula 3). By doing that,
      this study found the relative size of government (𝐺𝑜𝑣𝑆% ) in percentage terms for
      every Brazilian municipality 𝑖 (formula 4).
                  I,)
      𝐺𝑜𝑣𝑆% =   J,JKL                                                      (4)
                )MN I,)
   4. Multiplied the relative size of government of each Brazilian municipality (𝐺𝑜𝑣𝑆% )
      by the overall expenditure made by all levels of government, which is the sum of
      A, B and C. This aggregated information (A + B + C) was organized by the
      National Treasury (Tesouro Nacional 2015). By doing that, this study was able to
      create a proxy for the overall government expenditure (all tiers of government) at
      municipal level (𝑂𝐺𝐸% ) for each municipality 𝑖 as expressed in formula 5.
      𝑂𝐺𝐸% = 𝐴% + 𝐵% + 𝐶% ≈ 𝐺𝑜𝑣𝑆% * (A + B + C)                            (5)

   5. Finally, this study resorted to formula 1 and calculated the level of devolution for
      each municipality 𝑖 as expressed below, solving the problem of disaggregated data
      on the expenditures B and C:
                    ()              ()
      𝐷𝑒𝑣% =                   =                                           (6)
                () * +) * ,)       PIQ)
      Table 4 is the summary of descriptive statistics of the new measure for devolution
created and it is possible to notice that the new variable 𝐷𝑒𝑣% reflects what is expected as
the level of devolution previously mentioned for Brazilian municipalities. The overall
level of devolution towards municipal governments is 14% in 2005, which is
approximately 4 percentage points lower than that of 2012 (18%). Capitals are relevant
as their absolute expenditures are relevant in absolute terms (much larger municipalities)
and their devolved fiscal capacity is much higher than the Brazilian average due to a
larger tax base coming from local resources. Therefore, not having them in the sample
diminishes the overall level of devolution presented in table 4.


                  Table 4: Fiscal Devolution at municipal level by region in
                                       2005 and 2012
                            2005                        2012
                            Mean      Std. Dev. Freq.   Mean     Std. Dev. Freq.

             Brazil         0.13      0.06      4,789   0.176    0.057     5118
             North          0.09      0.07      333     0.134    0.051     364
             Northeast      0.12      0.05      1,427   0.177    0.047     1556
             Southeast      0.13      0.06      1,545   0.184    0.059     1587
             South          0.14      0.06      1,165   0.172    0.056     1176
             Central-West   0.12      0.06      419     0.190    0.072     435

       Differences with regards to the devolution levels in regions are in line of what is
expected: richer regions rely on larger local tax bases such as Service Taxes (ISS) and
Urban Property Taxes (IPTU), therefore are more fiscally devolved. Considering the
differences in GPD per capita and comparing with the devolution level in figures 2 and
3, it is evident that poor regions such as North and Northeast are, on average, less
devolved while rich regions such as Southeast, South and Central-West are, on average,
more devolved.




 Figure 2: GDP per capita growth of             Figure 3: devolution of Brazilian
 Brazilian municipalities in 2012               municipalities in 2012
      Because of the lack of data at this level of government, when devolution towards
municipalities is analyzed, it is widely known that most studies use transfers from central
to sub-national governments as proxy for devolution.
      In this paper all variables are deflated by the general index price (IPCA, base =
2013) and considered in per capita terms and in Brazilian currency. Table 5 below shows
the descriptive statistics of our sample for our variables.

      Table 5: Description of control variables: 2005-2012.
Variable                          Obs     Mean     Std. Dev.   Source
GDP per capita growth             60624   0.046    0.144       IBGE (2016)
ln(GDP per capita (R$))           60624   9.156    0.727       IBGE (2016)
devolution                        65782   0.150    0.060       Brazilian National Travel (2016)
Tax of infant mortality           61802   0.129    0.209       IBGE (2016)
% agriculture                     65783   0.233    0.161       IBGE (2016)
% industry                        65782   0.155    0.128       IBGE (2016)
% government                      65783   0.265    0.143       IBGE (2016)
% service                         65783   0.553    0.143       IBGE (2016)
ln(population)                    60624   9.373    1.114       IBGE (2016)
population growth                 60624   0.007    0.047       IBGE (2016)



Empirical Strategy

      Aiming to test the research question and the hypothesis previously presented, an
econometric model is estimated using panel data, which aims to assess the connection
between government quality and regional growth and to establish whether the returns of
Brazilian Central Government financial devolution is affected by the quality of the
government of the regions receiving funds. Also controlled are a series of regional factors
deemed to affect economic performance. In this model, the growth of GDP per capita
across regions in Brazilian municipalities between 2005 and 2012 is specified by the
following equation:

      ∆𝑦%T = 𝛽C + 𝛽E 𝑙𝑛𝑦%,TWE + 𝛽X 𝑙𝑛𝐷𝑒𝑣%,TWE + 𝛽Y 𝑆𝑜𝑢𝑡ℎ ∗ 𝑙𝑛𝐷𝑒𝑣\,]WE +𝛽^ (𝑆𝑜𝑢𝑡ℎ)
       +𝚽𝑿𝒊,𝒕W𝟏 + 𝜂% + 𝜏T + 𝜁%T                                             (1)

where Δyit is the average annual growth of real GDP per capita of municipality i in time
t; yit-1 is the GDP per capita in the previous period in region i; lnDevtt-1 is the previous
period neperian logarithm of endogenous interest variable that measure the municipalities
devolution; South is a dummy variable equal 1 municipalities belongs to Central West,
Southeast and South regions and 0 un other cases; South*lnDevtt-1, represents interaction
between the previous period neperian logarithm of devolution undertaken by the central
government and our institutional measure; 𝑿𝒊,𝒕W𝟏 denotes the matrix of previous period
variables controlling for other factors assumed to influence growth respectivaly: the tax
of infant mortality; the participation of agriculture, industry, service and government in
municipalities GDP; the municipalities
population and density; and finally the municipalities fixed effect 𝜂% , time dummy 𝜏T and
stochastic term 𝜁%T .
       The model specification considers a fixed effect (FE) panel regression model, with
heteroskedasticity robust estimators and municipality (i) and time (t) controls. The sample
of 4,742 municipalities in 5 Brazilian micro regions. The time period covered in the
analysis is limited to the years between 2005 and 2012.
       The main interest lies in the coefficients are 𝛽X and 𝛽Y which intend to capture
relation of devolution and the interaction between devolution and quality of institution
respectively with economic growth.
       The equation (1) fixed effect estimation must be interpreted with caution, because
of the simultaneity causality between our outcomes and devolution variables. As
identification strategy we are using instrumental variable describe below.
       This paper use the theoretical federal constitutional transfers (or FPM theoretical),
defined in Section 3, as instrument for devolution. The FPM is around 70% of all central
government transfer to municipalities (table2). These transfers are established according
to the population size of the municipality with thresholds predetermined by law, which
provides the source of exogenous variation on the treatment status.
       The Federal Constitution of 1988 established the FPM in Art. 159 (Ib), and since
1993 the share of IR and IPI has been fixed at 22.5 percent. The total transfer amount
allocation criteria is different for each category of municipality. For inner cities, which
represents the majority of municipalities, the total amount of municipality FPM is
obtained from the followed function:

         k                             tu         tv
      FPM\,] = 0.864FPM]q]rs,] .             .                         (2)
                                       ECC       v∈x tv


where FPM]q]rs,] is the total revenue (0.225·IR+0.225·IPI) allocated to all Brazilian cities
i in year t, λs is a distinct coefficient for each Brazilian state k, and λi is the municipality
coefficient derived from the population thresholds. Smaller municipalities in terms of
population size correspond to lower coefficients. This mechanism allows different
municipalities sharing equal population size to receive the same FPM amount only if they
belong to the same state. The figure 5 below show the correlation between the average
actual and theoretical municipalities FPM from 2005 and 2012, the R2=0.63.
       Indeed, since 1991 around 1080 new municipalities have been created in Brazil.
Once, the municipalities that was divided receives a FPM proportionally larger than its
population loss it makes the FPM proposed constitutionally differ from the one actually
received by the municipalities. In addition, it is possible to identify a flaw in TCU's
oversight, allowing some municipalities to receive more than constitutionally provided.
Thus, since there is a difference between the FPM actual (or transfer) and the regulated
theoretical transfer, we use the latter as instruments on the actual constitutional transfers.

        Results and Discussion

         According to the theories of Acemoglu et al. (2001) that different types of
colonization lead to different institutional arrangements and that these differences persist
overtime, this study suggests that the geographical regions of Brazil differ with regards
to their institutional arrangements, therefore with regards to capacity to reap the benefits
of any devolutionary policy. These regions and their differences can be clustered into two
main groups according to table 3 where there is the Southern part of the country,
comprised of Central-West, Southeast and South, with institutions that are classified as
good, and the Northern part of the country, comprised of North and Northeast, with
institutions that are classified as bad. Based on this definition we had used as a proxy for
quality of institution an dummy variable equal 1 if municipalities belong to region with
good institution: Central West, South and Southeast and zero for municipalities that
belong to other three regions.
         The aim of this model is establish the link between devolution and quality of
institution with economic growth. In order to better explain devolution in a continental
country with a diverse institutional context, it is crucial to disaggregate the analysis into
a regional level. According to the theories of Acemoglu et al. (2001) that different types
of colonization lead to different institutional arrangements and that these differences
persist overtime, this study suggests that the geographical regions of Brazil differ with
regards to their institutional arrangements, therefore with regards to capacity to reap the
benefits of any devolutionary policy. These regions and their differences can be clustered
into two main groups according to table 3 where there is the Southern part of the country,
comprised of Central-West, Southeast and South, with institutions that are classified as
good, and the Northern part of the country, comprised of North and Northeast, with
institutions that are classified as bad. With this panorama presented, table 6 shows the
regional relation of devolution and quality of institutions with economic growth of
municipalities.
         Table 6 below report both strategy of estimation FE and FE-IV. As expected the
FE-IV devolution coefficient is bigger then FE regression model (table 6, columns (1)
and (4)), suggesting that endogeneity problem was controlled. The FE analysis provides
evidence that financial devolution from central government to Brazilian municipalities
and institution proxy (south) have had a positive and statistically significant link with
regional growth, (table 6 columns (1), (2) and (3)). The Both coefficients are positive and
significant, except in regression with interaction. The interaction between devolution and
institutional quality is positive and significant, pointing that in regions with better
institutional arrangements the municipalities have better economic growth. Rodríguez-
Pose and Garcilazo, 2015 have found similar results for Europian Union.
         Estimation results using IV strategy are reported in table 6, columns (4), (5), (6)
and (7). After inclusion institutional quality proxies in our model, table 6, columns 5 and
6 financial devolution coefficients lose importance to explain GDP per capita growth.
These results suggested that institution is the more important to explain economic growth
than financial devolution. Indeed, leave in regions with better institutional condition
(south) increase the GDP per capita growth in 4% on average.
         Exploring those results, we estimate the equation 1 interacting financial
devolution with each regional dummies instead of the South dummy, respectively:
North(N), Northeast(NE), Center-West(CW), Southeast(SE) and South(S). The results
show that the coefficients for all three South regions are positive and significant. Indeed,
increase financial devolution in CW, S and SE regions raise the municipalities economic
growth in respectively 0.17%, 0.2 and 0.22%. These results indicate that better
institutional arrangement of these region with devolution allowed the municipalities
located at the Southern part of Brazil to become more efficient, a fact that is likely to be
converted into economic growth. On the other hand, The North and Northeast region did
not present a significant coefficient, therefore, in this econometric model, devolution does
not show relation with economic development of municipalities in those region. This
might indicate that the bad institutional arrangement in that region does not allow
municipal governments to increase their efficiency. For instance, the average
qualification of public servants at the North and Northeast regions in the year of 2005
was lower than the country’s average (IBGE 2005) and this can be an indicative of limited
capacity to transform the autonomy and fiscal capacity into more allocative and
productive efficiency.
                  Table 6: Independent variable GDP per capita growth:
                                       2005-2012
                    (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)
   VARIABLES        FE          FE         FE         FE-IV      FE-IV      FE-IV       FE-IV

   ln(GDP pc)       -0.572**    -0.058**   -0.062**   -0.063**   -0.058**   -0.057**    -0.065**
                    (0.007)     (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.005)    (0.004)    (0.004)     (0.004)
   lnDev            0.208**     0.117**    0.008      0.684**    0.101      0.123
                    (0.023)     (0.013)    (0.021)    (0.133)    (0.088)    (0.109)
   south                        0.035**    0.000                 0.035**    0.043**
                                (0.002)    (0.006)               (0.003)    (0.015)
   lnDev *south                            0.163**                          -0.036
                                           (0.026)                          (0.070)
   lnDev *N                                                                             0.168
                                                                                        (0.111)
   lnDev *NE                                                                            0.030
                                                                                        (0.085)
   lnDev *SE                                                                            0.202**
                                                                                        (0.087)
   lnDev *S                                                                             0.219**
                                                                                        (0.094)
   lnDev *CW                                                                            0.248**
                                                                                        (0.095)

   Observations     36,260       36,260     36,260    36,259      36,259      36,259     36,259
   N of cod6        4,666        4,666      4,666     4,666       4,666       4,666      4,666
     Obs.: The Variable Devolution and FPM theoretical was used as instrument in FE-IV
     regression are in logarithm and deflected to 2013=1. The lag of dependent variable and
     variables described in table 5 (respectively: % agriculture, % industry, % government, %
     service, population and population square) were used as control variable. Cluster standard
     errors in parentheses: ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Concluions

      This paper has investigated the relation of devolution and quality of institutions at
with GDP per capita growth of Brazilian municipalities from 2005 to 2012 and its main
hypothesis was that devolution and good quality of institutions together at municipal level
are positively correlated with GDP per capita growth. The analysis using an innovative
proxy for devolution and the argument that the historical evolution of Brazilian regions
influenced the formation of institutional arrangements of municipalities confirmed our
hypothesis by showing that devolution is related to economic growth and that this relation
is particularly stronger where the institutional conditions are better. To control for
endogeneity of our interest variable we have used the FPM theoretical divided by
expenditure as a instrument for devolution in IV2SLS regression.
      When analyzed in an aggregate manner for the entire country, devolution of fiscal
capacity is strongest and significant variable. However, when analyzing devolution
disaggregated into regions, the coefficient for the devolution of the regions become
significant again just in South region in line with what was hypothesized in this research:
for regions with good quality of institutions such as South, devolution has a positive and
significant relation with economic growth. The coefficient for other regions were not
significant, indicating that the worse institutional arrangement of municipalities might
have diminished their capacity to become more efficient through devolution.
       Devolution is in the agenda of the political discussions happening in Brazil
nowadays. This research might inform these discussions by indicating that devolution,
for the case of Brazilian municipalities, is positively related to economic growth.
However, two other factors are very important to be considered when engaging in a
devolutionary process. First, it is important to have a balance between devolution through
transferring financial resources and devolution through transferring capacity to collect
taxes locally. The latter might induce local governments to be more efficient and
accountable as they need to make efforts locally to collect part of their financial resources,
indeed the better collected tax structure is found in the south region. Second, the quality
of institutions of municipalities is important when devolving fiscal capacity. So,
initiatives to improve quality local institutions are welcome and can bring positive effects
when fiscal capacity is devolved. This research suggests that further studies be conducted
using a more elaborated analysis and more disaggregated proxies for quality of
institutions at municipal level in order to confirm this research’s findings.


Bibliograthy
Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S. & Robinson, J.A., 2005. Institutions as a Fundamental Cause
       of Long-Run Growth. Handbook of Economic Growth, 1(SUPPL. PART A),
       pp.385–472.
Acemoglu, D.A., Johnson, S. & Robinson, J., 2001. The colonial origins of comparative
       development: An empirical investigation. American Economic Review, 91(5),
       pp.1369–1401.
Afonso, J.R., 2013. Nuevos Acuerdos Fiscales para Reducir la Desigualdad en América
       Latina: Brasil. In Nuevos Acuerdos Fiscales para Reducir la Desigualdad en
       América Latina: Brasil. Santiago de Chile, pp. 1–18.
Afonso, J.R.R., 2006. Novos Desafios à Decentralização Fiscal do Brasil: As Políticas
       Sociais e as Transferências de Renda. In XVIII Seminário Regional de Política
       Fiscal. Santiago do Chile, pp. 1–34.
Agnew, J., 2001. Regions in Revolt. Progress in Human Geography, 25(1), pp.103–111.
Barca, F., 2009. An agenda for a reformed cohesion policy. A place-based approach to
       meeting European Union challenges and expectations, Brussels. Available at:
       http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/archive/policy/future/barca_en.htm.
Barro, R.J., 1991. Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries. The quarterly
       Journal of Economics, (May), p.38.
Breton, A., 1983. Federalism versus Centralism in Regional Growth. In Public Finance
       and Economic Growth: Proceedings of the International Institute of Public
       Finance. Tokio: Wayne State University Press, Detroit.
Fukuyama, F., 2000. Social Capital and the Civil Society, Washington, DC.
Gregory, V., 2007. Imigração Alemã. In M. P. Coelho, ed. Povoamento, Brasil: 500
       anos de. Rio de Janeiro: Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística - IBGE,
       pp. 1–237.
Hermann, J., 2007. Cenário do encontro dos povos. In M. P. Coelho, ed. Brasil: 500
       anos de povoamento. Rio de Janeiro: Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e
       Estatística - IBGE, pp. 1–237.
IBGE, 2005. Base de Informações Básicas Municipais. Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia
       e Estatística. Available at:
       http://www.ibge.gov.br/home/estatistica/economia/perfilmunic/defaulttab1_perfi
       l.shtm.
IBGE, 2016. IBGE :: Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística. Available at:
       http://www.ibge.gov.br/home/ [Accessed April 16, 2016].
IBGE, 2013. Portal Brasil. Portal Brasil, p.1. Available at:
       http://www.brasil.gov.br/economia-e-emprego/2013/06/cresce-numero-de-
       municipios-no-brasil-em-2013 [Accessed July 27, 2016].
Keating, M., 1998. The New Regionalism in Western Europe, Cheltenham: Edward
       Elgar.
Klugman, J., 1994. Decentralisation: A survey of literature from a human development
       perspective. UNDP Human Development Report Office. Available at:
       http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2294658.
Maps of Brazil, 2016. Brazil my Country. Available at:
       http://www.brazilmycountry.com/brazil-map/ [Accessed July 1, 2016].
Martinez-Vazquez, J. & McNab, R., 2003. Fiscal decentralization and economic
       growth. World Development, 31(9), pp.1597–1616.
Mora, M. & Varsano, R., 2001. Fiscal decentralization and subnational fiscal autonomy
       in Brazil: some facts of the nineties. Texto para discussão 854, pp.1–32.
Morgan, K., 2002. English Question: Regional Perspectives on a Fractured Nation.
       Regional Studies, 36(7), pp.797–810.
Musgrave, R.A., 1959. The theory of public finance: a study in public economy, New
       York: McGraw-Hill.
Naritomi, J., Soares, R.R. & Assunção, J.J., 2009. Institutional development and
       colonial heritage within Brazil, Bonn.
North, D., 1990. Institutions, institutional change, and economic performance (Political
       economy of institutions and decisions), Cambridge, Mass: Cambridge University
       Press.
Oates, W.E., 1972. Fiscal Federalism, New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Parker, A. & Serrano, R., 2000. Promoting Good Local Governance through Social
       Funds and Decentralization,
Prud’homme, R., 1995. The Dangers of Decentralization. In M. Syrquin, ed. The World
       Bank Research Observer. Washington: World Bank, pp. 201–221.
Putnam, R., Leonardi, R. & Nanetti, 1994. Making democracy work: Civic traditions in
       modern Italy, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rodden, J., 2003. Soft Budget Constraints and German Federalism. In J. Rodden, G.
       Eskeland, & J. Litvack, eds. Fiscal Decentralization and the Challenge of Hard
       Budget Constraints. MIT Press.
Rodríguez-Pose, A., 2013. Do institutions matter for regional development? Regional
       Studies, 47(7), pp.1034–1047. Available at:
       http://www.tandfonline.com/toc/cres20/current.
Rodríguez-Pose, A. & Bwire, A., 2003. The economic ( in ) efficiency of devolution.
       Environment and Planning, p.39.
Rodríguez-Pose, A. & Ezcurra, R., 2010. Is fiscal decentralization harmful for economic
       growth? Evidence from the OECD countries. Journal of Economic Geography,
       11, pp.619–643.
Rodríguez-Pose, A. & Garcilazo, E., 2015. Quality of Government and the Returns of
       Investment: Examining the Impact of Cohesion Expenditure in European
       Regions. Regional Studies, 49(8), pp.1274–1290.
Rodríguez-Pose, A. & Gill, N., 2005. On the “Economic Dividend” of Devolution.
       Regional Studies, 39(4), pp.405–420.
Rodríguez-Pose, A. & Gill, N., 2004. Reassessing Relations between the Centre and the
       States: The Challenge for the Brazilian Administration. Regional Studies, 38(7),
       pp.833–844. Available at:
       http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/0034340042000265287.
Rodríguez-Pose, A. & Gill, N., 2003. The global trend towards devolution and its
       implications, London.
Rodríguez-Pose, A. & Sandall, R.B., 2008. From identity to the economy: Analysing
       the evolution of the decentralisation discourse. Environment and Planning C:
       Government and Policy, 26(1), pp.54–72.
Rodrik, D., 2004. Getting institutions right, Cambridge, Mass.
Skidmore, T.E., 2000. Foreword: A new test for Brazilian Democracy Democratic. P. R.
       Kingstone & T. J. Power, eds., Pittsburgh.
Temer, M., 2016. Uma nova ponte: a verdadeira Federação. Estadão. Available at:
       http://opiniao.estadao.com.br/noticias/geral,uma-nova-ponte-a-verdadeira-
       federacao,10000007243.
Tesouro Nacional, 2015. Consolidação das Contas Públicas. Available at:
       https://www.tesouro.fazenda.gov.br/documents/10180/205489/Consolidacao_Co
       ntas_Publicas.xls [Accessed July 1, 2016].
Tesouro Nacional, 2016. Contas Anuais - Artigo Prefeituras e Governos - STN.
       Available at: http://www.tesouro.fazenda.gov.br/contas-anuais [Accessed April
       16, 2016].
Thiessen, U., 2003. Fiscal Decentralization & Economic Growth in OECD High-
       Income Countries,
Tiebout, C.M., 1956. A pure theory of local expenditures. The Journal of Political
       Economy, 64(5), pp.416–424.
Varsano, R. et al., 1998. Uma análise da carga tributária do Brasil, Rio de Janeiro.
       Available at:
       http://www.en.ipea.gov.br/agencia/images/stories/PDFs/TDs/td_0583.pdf.
Venâncio, R.P., 2007. Presença Portuguesa. In M. P. Coelho, ed. Brasil: 500 anos de
       povoamento2. Rio de Janeiro: Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística -
       IBGE, pp. 1–237.
World Bank, 2016. Definition of Administrative Decentralization. Available at:
       http://www1.worldbank.org/publicsector/decentralization/admin.htm [Accessed
       July 1, 2016].
