              Pigou on War Finance and State Action

                            Rogério Arthmar and Michael McLure∗


Resumo: O artigo trata da contribuição de Arthur C. Pigou aos debates sobre política
econômica na Grã-Bretanha durante a Primeira Guerra Mundial, mostrando como
muitas de suas ideias sobre o assunto originaram-se em sua obra maior no pré-guerra,
Wealth and Welfare. Inicialmente, são apresentados os argumentos de Pigou em prol de
um aumento nos impostos, bem como sobre a forma mediante a qual as decisões
individuais afetam a distribuição dos custos de guerra através do tempo. Coloca-se em
evidência igualmente o seu entendimento da natureza da inflação no país ao longo do
conflito, complementado por suas observações a respeito da continuidade da
intervenção estatal no período de paz. A preocupação de Pigou com a dívida pública é
apresentada no contexto do debate sobre a conveniência de um confisco de capital no
pós-guerra. Por fim, consideram-se suas recomendações relativas à reconstrução política
e financeira da Europa.
Palavras-chave: orçamentos de guerra britânicos, empréstimos, tributação, confisco de
capital



Abstract: This paper reviews Arthur C. Pigou’s intellectual contribution to the debates
on economic policy during World War I in Britain, showing how many of his ideas on
the subject can be traced back to his major pre-war work, Wealth and Welfare. Initially,
we present Pigou’s arguments in favour of an increase in taxation and on how individual
choices affect the distribution of war costs over time. Attention is also drawn to his
understanding of the nature of inflation in Britain during the war, as well as to his
remarks about the efficacy of state wartime controls continuing into the post-war era.
Pigou’s concerns with Britain’s massive national debt are considered in regard to the
controversy over the convenience of a capital levy after the war. Lastly, his
recommendations on European political and financial reconstruction are addressed,
along with his specific proposals for state action in matters connected with national
defense.
Key words: Britain’s war budgets, borrowing, taxation, capital levy


Classificação JEL: B13, N44, H56


Área de Submissão ANPEC: História do Pensamento Econômico e Metodologia




∗
  Rogério Arthmar, Department of Economics, Universidade Federal do Espírito Santo, Vitória, Brazil. E-
mail: rogerio.arthmar@ufes.br; and Michael McLure, Business School, University of Western Australia,
Australia. E-mail: michael.mclure@uwa.edu.au. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support
from CAPES and CNPq, grant numbers 10972-13-7 and 307080/2012-9.
                                                                                                           2


               Pigou on War Finance and State Action

       The economic wreckage now going forward, immense and unprecedented though it be, is to my
       mind trivial and insignificant in comparison with the human and moral wreckage – the mangled
       bodies of men and the shattered fabric if ideas, with which it is so fatally accompanied. It is not
       the business of this conference to discuss these things, and I do not propose to discuss them. But it
       is not right that we should come to debate our lesser economic problems without a memory and a
       word for their terrible setting in blood.
                                A. C. Pigou, 27 July 1916, Conference on the Reorganisation of    Industry


    1. Introduction
Speaking at the annual meeting of the British Association, on 8 September 1815, the
president of the Economic Science and Statistics Section, William R. Scott, expressed
his regret at the lack of a full treatise on the economic theory of war. British liberal
economists, he complained, had invariably emphasized the beneficial effects of free
trade in bringing nations together, forgetting, however, to develop and elaborate upon a
serious theoretical explanation of the workings of an economy under extreme
belligerent duress (Scott, 1915, pp. 495-496). Scott's worries, though, were a bit
overstated.1 Some voices in Parliament, albeit few, had questioned indeed the first two
fast-tracked war budgets, introduced by the Chancellor of the Exchequer David Lloyd
George, that privileged a borrowing policy, supplemented by the issue of Treasury notes
and the depletion of the sinking fund (Mallet and George, 1929, pp. 19-65; Hirst and
Allen, 1926, pp. 21-72). At the same time, a number of public intellectuals had already
come out in the press debating the nation’s financial strategy.2 The main topic of dispute
revolved around how much of the war costs should be covered by taxes instead of by
the indiscriminate resort to loans.
       A. C. Pigou was perhaps the academic and public figure who was most active in
investigating, ‒ through a series of papers, books and testimonies, ‒ the long-term
implications of World War I for the British economy. Reviewing his expressive work
on the financial and monetary dilemmas of the time is relevant for four reasons,. Firstly
Firstly, in contrast to other scholars and contemporary politicians, he approached the
matter wielding the theoretical arsenal he had just developed in Wealth and Welfare
(1912), a work that brought him fame as the leader of the Marshallian school of

1
 Earlier that year, the editor of The Economist, Francis W. Hirst, had published The Political Economy of
War (1915), containing a good deal of historical information on Britain’s past international conflicts
mixed up with some old-fashioned financial prescriptions from Adam Smith, William E. Gladstone and
Robert Hamilton’s 1814 tract about Britain’s national debt (Hirst, 1915, pp. 18-71, 136-149, 175-206; see
Hamilton, 1814, pp. 7-11).
2
  John E. Allen (1914) advocated an immediate program of heavy taxation since he believed people
would be more willing to pay additional taxes at the beginning of the war than later. Sir Charles
Hobhouse (1914) called for a retrenchment in the government’s regular expenditures as an example of
economy to civil society. Frederick Pethick-Lawrence (1915) condemned the loan policy for its granting
the richer classes a share in the nation’s future prosperity disproportionate to their true sacrifice. W.M.J.
Williams (1915) deemed the government’s borrowing strategy as essentially correct in view of his
prediction of an imminent victory on the battlefield, as would boldly assert as well Sir George Paish
(1916) in a round table at the Royal Statistical Society the following year. Paish’s undisguised optimism,
though, was harshly contested by his peers (Flux and others, 1916).
                                                                                                          3


economics at Cambridge (McLure, 2012). Secondly, Pigou’s prescriptions on war
finance can be taken as a conspicuous example of his lifelong commitment to practical
issues, a feature of his academic career often neglected in the literature.3 Thirdly, as the
war reached an unprecedented scale, it is possible to track down how Pigou’s original
stance toward its economic repercussions, as elaborated in The Economy and Finance of
the War (1916), evolved over time to reach its final form in The Political Economy of
War (1921). Lastly, by examining his thoughts on war issues, new insights can be
unveiled into Pigou’s position as regards not only Britain’s post-war economic
performance, but also toward that momentous decision of economic policy during the
interwar years, the return to the gold standard in 1925.4
       In the light of these introductory remarks, this paper is structured as follows.
Section 2 focuses on Pigou’s initial writings, from 1915 and 1916, on the economics
and finance of war, especially his reflections on the best way to finance the escalating
war budgets. Section 3 covers his papers published during the late phase of the war,
1917 and 1918, dealing with the nature of the British current inflation and the role of the
state in the economy. Section 5 examines the main arguments summoned by Pigou in
favour of a capital levy, along with the key arguments against the levy raised by a
number of scholars after the war, showing also Pigou’s late change of mind on this
issue. Section 6 reviews the Professor’s thoughts on the lasting consequences of the war
and the required steps toward the political and monetary reconstruction of Europe. The
paper concludes with a summary of the main traits of Pigou’s contribution on the
economic consequences of World War I.

    2. The first phase of the war: real and monetary finance
    2.1. First reflections: Pigou on war, taxes and loans

Pigou’s preliminary inroad into war finance came with the paper "Sources and Methods
of Paying for the War", in the 1915 July issue of the Contemporary Review. According
to him, the actual costs of the military engagement, that is, the real resources directed to
the war effort, could be drawn either from the future or the present. In that regard, future
production is affected when inventories are used up; the capital stock is run without
proper maintenance or replacement; people refrain from new investments; property
owned abroad is sold to foreigners, and, lastly, when debt is funded from loans obtained
overseas.5 With respect to resources drawn from the present, Pigou lists two ways of

3
  David G. Champernowne (1959, p. 264) has asserted that Pigou had no concern for "practical and
human problems" and Harry Johnson (1960, p. 152) has claimed that the Professor’s intellectual drift to
formalism drove him toward scientific inquiries bearing far more light than fruit. While this may have
been the case when Champernowne and Johnson were at Cambridge, it most certainly was not the case
during the first two decades of Pigou’s professorship.
4
  William Barber (1991) has indicated that Pigou was an unlikely figure to write about the economics of
war considering his lack of expertise on administrative issues. Pigou’s rather academic approach to
wartime economic policy, sometimes disdained as too speculative, was nonetheless unavoidable for a
series of reasons, namely: the almost total inexistence of statistics on Britain’s main economic aggregates;
the distortionary effects of inflation on public accounts; the unreliability of war budget estimates (see
footnote 6); the absolute lack of supervision over the war ministries; the secrecy about the figures on the
actual state of public finances, and, lastly, the absence of written records of cabinet meetings, at least
under the premiership of Herbert H. Asquith’s (1908-1916) (Burk, 1982, pp. 33-107; Hazlehurt, 1970;
Mallet and George, 1929, pp. 130-143, 162-174; Lawson, 1915, pp. 151-220).
5
 Pigou forgets to deduct the concession of loans to allied countries. As for Britain, in the fiscal year
1919-1920, this sum amounted to £1.712 million, much of it admitted as unrecoverable by British
                                                                                                        4


getting access to them, either by increasing the overall level of production, which would
involve longer working hours and less strikes, or by reducing the share of production
dedicated to private consumption, which would require voluntary abstinence by private
individuals. As for the monetary and fiscal instruments that can be used to pay for the
war, Pigou highlighted four channels, namely: foreign loans; extra taxation; domestic
loans, and an increased fiduciary issue of currency notes (in modern terminology,
"quantitave easing" or "an increase in fiat money"). In relation to the last point, the
increase in the supply of fiat money had the potential to contract real consumption but
not nominal consumption spending, owing to the consequent inflation, and release real
resources that can be appropriated by the government6 (Pigou, 1915b).
       A critical notion in Pigou’s argument is that there might not be a direct
correspondence between how the government finances its budget and the way real
resources are put at its disposal by the people. Some individuals might pay taxes out of
their savings while others might subscribe to loans by cutting on personal consumption
or by borrowing from the banks.7 The particular method chosen by the government to
pay for its expenditures has, however, a distributive effect that can influence how the
burden of the war is parceled out over time. Although war loans tend to make the
resources for private capital accumulation more scarce, Pigou notes that an excess of
fiduciary inflation or of indirect taxes could be far more damaging to the economy by
deteriorating the living standard of poor families and, therefore, putting them at greater
risk of reduced productive capacity in the long run. This proposition, which had been
raised in different parts of Wealth and Welfare8, is worded by Pigou as follows:
          This point is of very great importance. It shows that methods of financing the war which mean
          large contributions by the poor, though they are likely to diminish the material capital of the

authorities themselves, of which Russia answered for £568 million, France for £514.8 million, Italy for
£457.4 million, and other allies for £180.8 million. The United Kingdom debt to the United States
reached £1.038 million in that same period (Morgan, 1952, pp. 107, 317-321).
6
  Here, Pigou does not include cuts in the government’s ordinary spending, a point scarcely brought up
during the early phase of the war. The notable exceptions were Hobhouse (1914, see note 3), and Lord
Middleton, who, on 6 July 1915, at the House of the Lords, called for the utmost economy in peace
services (Hirst and Allen, 1926, pp. 76-79). Two years later, on 6 July 1917, the uncontrolled growth of
national expenditure was finally questioned at the Commons by Colonel Godfrey Collins, and a Special
Committee was set up to review the matter (Mallet and George, 1929, pp. 133-134). The Committee’s
final report, issued in 1918, identified "excessively liberal" payments being made, the existence of
redundant staff in several departments and bad accounting practices as a rule, so it strongly advised a
more active scrutiny of government’s expenditures by the Commons thereafter (Committee on National
Expenditure, 1918, pp. 108-149).
7
  Interestingly, analogous to the issue of whether individuals respond to an increase in their taxation
obligation with increased debt or reduced consumption, is the government’s own decisions to fund war
expenditure through increased tax or additional debt. That, of course, raises issues associated with the
Ricardian equivalence, a subject that Italian public finance economists had raised before and during the
war (see De Marco (1992) [1893] and Griziotti (1992) [1917]). Pigou though take it as self-evident that,
in the presence of increased fiduciary issue of currency, there is no such equivalence and, in that
circumstance, he endeavors to consider the combination of domestic debt, foreign debt and taxes that will
prove least disruptive in transferring resources to the government by reducing real private consumption,
either from current or future generations.
8
  Pigou made use of the this proposition extensively in Wealth and Welfare when arguing in favor of
transferences to the poor in order to improve their health, education and housing, resulting thus in
stronger bodies and trained minds that would bring about an increase in productivity (Pigou, 1912, pp.
54-65, 343-345, 355-364, 393-398). Alfred Marshall, Pigou’s mentor, had already maintained that a well-
fed and educated population was the best investment a nation could undertake to promote the growth of
wealth (Marshall, 1920, pp. 220-236).
                                                                                                            5


           country less than other methods, may, nevertheless, be more hurtful than other methods to the
           accumulation of capital in the widest sense, and, therefore, to the productivity of the country in
           future years (Pigou, 1915b, p. 717).
The same line of reasoning was further explored by Pigou in the paper “The
Distribution of the Burden of the War Charges”, in the 1916 July issue of the
Contemporary Review. This time, though, he put forth a case for a heavier taxation of
the well-to-do people using the assumptions of diminishing marginal utility and its
comparability among individuals, on which he based his plea for income redistribution
in Wealth and Welfare (Pigou, 1912, pp. 2-31, Part II, Part III, chap. IX)9. Pigou holds
that the suggestion for increasing taxes in equal proportion for everybody would be
intrinsically unfair, since a shilling taken from the poor occasions a loss of utility
greater than the one experienced by a rich person deprived of that same shilling. Still,
the decision of conferring priority on domestic loans benefits mostly affluent investors,
given that the interest rate on public bonds has to be higher than the existing alternatives
to the private sector, while a significant portion of the loans is taken up by rich
individuals out of funds borrowed from the banks. The inflation resulting from the
government’s extraordinary demand built upon private credit, observes Pigou, hits
harder the working people, who is thus forced to reduce their regular consumption.
Besides that, they are bound to face further adversity after the war due to the lessened
supply of capital caused by the higher taxes required to servicing the national debt
(Pigou, 1916a).

       2.2. A more comprehensive approach to war finance

      From the above papers and two lectures delivered that same year, Pigou
composed in 1916 the book “The Economy and Finance of the War”, whose overall
content can be placed under four heads: (i) the temporal incidence of war costs, (ii) the
foreign exchanges, (iii) the distributive effects of the financial policy, and (iv) the post-
war economic reconstruction. On the first issue, Pigou observes that since people have a
marked preference for present vis-à-vis future enjoyments, direct interference by the
government to coordinate private choices is inevitable in time of war to preserve a
minimum level of capital formation and to discourage luxury spending.10 Restrictions
on the importation of consumable goods, the adoption of food rationing and the
introduction of duties on consumption goods would go a long way toward inducing
society to draw upon the present in meeting the war necessities. Restrictions on
investment, on the other hand, as the prohibition of placing capital abroad or on certain




9
  Based on those assumptions, Pigou maintained that economic welfare could be increased in three
different ways, namely: (1) by an expansion in the national dividend, for a given distribution of income;
(2) by a more even distribution of income, provided the national dividend is not diminished and (3) by
attenuating the intensity of business cycles, since for the representative man more utility is lost during the
depression than is gained in the prosperity phase for commensurate variations of income (Pigou, 1912,
pp. 14-32, 401-407).
10
   The idea received further elaboration in The Economics of Welfare, published in 1920, where Pigou
pins down the deficiency in telescopic faculty, that is, the circumstance that people see future pleasures in
a diminished scale as compared with pleasures of the same intensity at the present, as limiting
investments and pressing for the overuse of the available capital stock. In view of this particularity of the
human nature, the government should intervene in the economy to stimulate savings and preserve existing
resources for future generations (Pigou, 1920a, Part I, chap. II).
                                                                                                          6


kinds of activities, set up by the Treasury early in the war, would have a contrary effect
(Pigou, 1916b, pp. 48-52).11
       In regard to "the exchanges", that is, foreign trade, Pigou identifies Britain’s large
trade deficit as one of the crucial economic problems in prosecuting the war. British
imports of food, munitions and raw materials had grown considerably to attend war
needs and her exports had fallen heavily as a result of the shortage of labor and capital.
The terms of trade consequently moved against the country, a fact that had the potential
to undermine the whole war effort unless adequate means of paying for extraordinary
purchases from overseas were found. That was the root cause behind the depreciation of
the pound against neutral currencies, notices Pigou. The first solution to this problem
would comprise cutting back ordinary imports to a minimum while diverting labor and
capital to produce more exportable goods. The second one would require the
transference of gold and the selling of assets held abroad. Here, however, Pigou makes
it clear that the first of the above options is the best as it would keep stocks of gold and
foreign securities intact for longer, ready as a trump card to be pulled out only when the
decisive circumstance arrived.
              If they [authorities] have the fortitude to do this, they will have at their command, when the
              critical moment comes, a powerful strategical reserve. By conserving it till then, and then
              throwing it into the scale, they may, if fortunate and wise, bring about the end of the war
              (Pigou, 1916b, pp. 63-64).
But again, Pigou became preoccupied with the distributive aspects of the government’s
financial policy. In addition to replicating the arguments on distribution that he outlined
in his previous papers on the subject, he added four new reasons for taxing the more
well-off of society. First, he alerts readers to the existence of a limit on taxing the poor,
and, since such limit had presumably been reached, no major additional revenue could
be reaped from this particular source. Second, a strict loan policy alone would mainly
benefit wealthy creditors of the government, since they would earn a higher real interest
rate on their bonds when deflation comes about after the war. Third, paying off the
national debt, built by indiscriminate borrowing, would necessitate heavier taxes most
likely to be weight, to a large extent, on the shoulders of the poorest segments of the
nation.12 Lastly, explains Pigou, although taxing the rich actually reduces the funds
available to capital accumulation, this measure would be just temporary, lasting only
until the war ends and having, therefore, no permanent effect on savings afterwards
(Pigou, 1916c, pp. 66-83).13

11
   The London Stock Exchange had been closed on 31 July 1914 and reopened only in 4 January 1915.
On the following 19 January, the Treasury determined that new issues of capital would be conditioned on
its previous authorization based on considerations of ‘national interest’. Empire issues would be approved
only in cases of urgency and special circumstances, while foreign issues would normally be not allowed
(Burk, 1984, p. 86-89; Morgan, 1952, p. 261-266).
12
  In a letter to the editor of The Economist by the end of 1916, Pigou suggested that everyone not
engaged in combatant service should be subjected to an extra tax. In addition, he pressed again for a
heavier taxation of the rich on the grounds that as the stronger man faces the most perilous missions in
battle, the economically stronger has to be subjected to similar treatment at home (Pigou, 1916d, pp.
1003-1004).
13
   Alfred Marshall wrote to The Economist in 1916 in support of Pigou’s taxing proposals for fear that the
heavy tax burden needed to service the debt would encroach upon the supply of the badly needed capital
after the war (The Economist, 30 December 1916, p. 1228). Earlier that month, a certain Graham Bower
had called the Professor unpatriotic for advocating socialistic proposals without taking into consideration
that excessive taxes on the rich would destroy industry and thrift, pushing capital out the country and
making the government goes bankrupt (The Economist, 16 December 1916, p. 1128-1129). The following
                                                                                                           7


       Reflecting a combination of stoic realism and guarded optimism for the future at
the time, Pigou dedicated the book’s last section to the aftermath of the war. The
transition to peace, in his estimation, was bound to be seriously complicated by the
demobilization of large contingents of men from military service and the deficiency of
savings to attend domestic and, especially, foreign demands for capital from war torn
countries in Europe. The resulting imbalance, between the demand and the respective
supplies of capital and labor, would put pressure on interest rates to rise and wages to
fall, thereby further worsening the distribution of income. Nevertheless, Pigou foresaw
an industrial boom on the horizon, powered by the unrestrained enthusiasm of producers
and merchants with the peacetime recovery of civilian demand. That prosperity, though,
cautioned him, inspired by his depiction of expectations-fueled business cycles in
Wealth and Welfare (Pigou, 1912, pp. 453-466)14, should be moderated by the
authorities through some kind of credit restriction in order to attenuate the pessimism to
be triggered by the subsequent slowdown in sales.
        “It is practically certain that, to make good the havoc and the waste of war, there will be a strong
        industrial boom. This boom, if history is any guide, will generate in many minds an unreasoning
        sense of optimism leading to much wild investment. The result, some years afterwards, will be
        failures, crisis and depression. If this danger is to be obviated or mitigated, it is imperative that
        the Government and the banks should so act as to restrain and keep within reasonable limits the
        initial peace boom.” (Pigou, 1916c, p. 88).
At the end of 1916, Pigou published "Interest after the War and the Export of Capital"
in The Economic Journal. From the conjectures that the supply of fresh capital would be
close to its pre-war level, while the corresponding demand would be larger due to the
reconstruction process in Europe, he projected a higher real interest in peacetime.
Continuity of the prohibition on sending capital abroad would immediately hurt savers
as the interest rate received on saving would be lower, but that same restriction would
benefit workers, in the medium term at least, owing to their increased productivity as a
result of a greater availability of capital equipment. In the long run, however, capital
accumulation would be slowed down due to the loss of a higher income inflow from
property owned abroad. On balance, the best policy on this issue would, according to
Pigou, be to leave capital free to seek the most rewarding return overseas, but to
prohibit funds from going into the buildup of armaments, while also ensuring that,
through bounties or grants-in-aid, some minimum value of domestic investment in
social infrastructure, as in housing, for instance, were maintained (Pigou, 1916).

     3. The final phase of the war: Pigou on inflation and state intervention
As the war dragged on into 1917, Pigou’s confidence on a near end to the conflict must
have worn away very quickly. Reginald McKenna, Chancellor of the Exchequer (1915-
1916), who had attempted to fund by taxes a more substantial part of the ever growing
government spending, was replaced by Andrew Bonar Law (1917-1919), and the new
Chancellor quickly went back to Lloyd George’s former loan strategy (Peden, 2000, pp.

year, in a letter to the editor of The Times, Pigou explained again how a policy of taxes was supposed to
work as against loans: “The difference is that on the borrowing plan these persons [bondholders] are, and
under the tax plan they are not, promised a high rate of interest at the expenses of the tax-payers in the
future” (The Times, 23 April 1917, p. 9).
14
  As stated in Wealth and Welfare: “Experience suggests that, apart altogether from the financial ties, by
which different business men are bound together, there exists among them a certain measure of
psychological interdependence. A change of tone in one part of the business world diffuses itself, in a
quite unreasoning manner, over other and wholly disconnected parts.” (Pigou, 1912, p. 460).
                                                                                                       8


73-127; Mallet and George, 1929, pp. 68-174). Inflation, as Pigou had feared, continued
in a crescendo during the war years. The Ministry of Labour Cost of Living Index, taken
as 100 in July 1914, reached 165 in January 1917 and 220 in December 1918, similar
variations registered for The Economist index over the same period (Morgan, 1952, pp.
267-285).
      In December 1917, a paper by Pigou entitled "Inflation" came out once again in
The Economic Journal, analyzing the sources of the ongoing rise in prices in Britain.15
In general terms, says Pigou, any typical country within the international gold standard
could be considered small when set against the remaining others taken as a whole. More
specifically, what happens in a single country has a small effect over the world, while
world scale events have a large influence on the economic state of any single country.
Considering the gold standard system with fixed exchange rates, says Pigou, if a
government issues too much money, prices go up and gold flows out of the country,
while commodities move in the opposite direction until a new equilibrium is reached
with slightly higher prices all around. Britain was being successful in evading this
mechanism during the war due, first, to the selling of foreign securities abroad to pay
for her excess imports and, second, to the difficulties of moving gold around. This last
factor particularly meant that her domestic inflation had had a negligible impact in the
world at large, while the worldwide rise in shipping and insurance charges had hit the
country hard. By comparing retail food prices in the US, Canada and Britain, Pigou
asserts that much of the increase in British prices was actually due to external causes.
This conclusion would be important in his future analysis of Britain’s return to gold at
the pre-war parity, as will be seen ahead. In his words:
             On the whole, therefore, it would seem fair to conclude that perhaps four-fifths of the rise
             that has taken place in this country has been, in a loose sense, ‘inevitable’; and that
             responsibility cannot properly be thrown upon our monetary and banking arrangements for
             more than the remaining one-fifth (Pigou, 1917b, p. 464).
Right after the Armistice, in December 1918, Pigou had one important paper,
"Government Control in War in Peace", published once again by The Economic
Journal. The reason for its relevance lies in the fact that it allows a glimpse of how
Pigou weighed the impact of the war on the role of the state under normal conditions. A
strong case for public intervention in the economy had indeed been set out in Wealth
and Welfare in three different circumstances. First, when social costs happened to be
distinct from private costs, this situation might require the control of monopolies, the
regulation of unbalanced contracts or even the taxation of certain activities with harmful
effects on third parties. A second instance of state intervention conceived by Pigou
comprised the redistribution of income by means of progressive taxation and the
provision of public goods to the poor, as well by the establishment of a basic income at
a national level. Lastly, industrial fluctuations could be mitigated by a mandatory
insurance for wage earners and by the undertaking of public works for the unemployed


15
  The month before, in The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Pigou had published his famous paper “The
Value of Money”, which introduced explicitly the well-known Cambridge equation               = ( )⁄ ,
defining the demand for money as a rectangular hyperbole on prices when total resources and the
proportion of those resources kept as legal tender are assumed constant. In the case of a freely coined
metallic legal tender, as in a pure gold standard regime, Pigou held that international gold movements
would tend to equalize price levels in the countries sharing a similar monetary regime (Pigou, 1917a, pp.
61-63).
                                                                                                           9


in times of economic distress (Pigou, 1912, pp. 246-289; 346-398; 408-422; 476-488;
see also footnote 3 above).16
      Despite the unprecedented scale of state command over the economy during the
war, it did not substantially change Pigou’s convictions about the matter, at least until
that moment. Apart from the cases aforementioned, he believed, as expressed in Wealth
and Welfare, that the government interference in the economy, at least in principle,
would reduce the national dividend and, consequently, economic welfare (Pigou, 1912,
p. 104-108). In his 1918 paper, though, Pigou attacks the issue from three different
perspectives. From a purely administrative standpoint, he observes that the government
was forced to take full control of some strategic industries to speed up the manufacture
and delivery of munitions and all sorts of goods to the troops. The relative success of
this kind of intervention resulted, however, from the very unique situation of almost all
resources being directed to one well-defined and single end. Once the war was over,
though, such restriction would no longer apply and the effectiveness of this kind of
action would become extremely dubious (Pigou, 1918).17
      The second form of government wartime intervention contemplated by Pigou was
the rationing of food among people and of raw materials among industries. To preserve
these wartime practices in peace conditions would be unfeasible, according to him,
owing to the complexity of the enterprise and the political resistance to any type of
intervention of that nature in normal times. In point of fact, writes Pigou, any pre-
determined scheme of rationing used during the war would be unsuited to a market
economy because there would no longer be a single end to be achieved, but instead
many concurring ends which are not only varied but also extremely volatile.
         Those things ought to be made, which are most wanted and will yield the greatest sum of
         satisfaction. But the Government cannot possibly decide what these things are; and, even if it
         could decide what they are at one moment, before its decision had been put into effect conditions
         would very probably be changed and they would have become something entirely different
         (Pigou, 1918, p. 369).
As for the third type of government intervention, price control, its usefulness had long
been established in cases of monopolies in order to avoid excess profits and limited
supplies. The situation is totally different, says Pigou, for the case of competitive
industries subject to a fluctuating demand. Times of good sales are commonly followed
by a retraction in spending so that, over a period of years, each firm reckons just
average profits. Price regulation, in such context, would deprive entrepreneurs of their
abnormal profits in prosperity without helping them anyway when bad times come
around. Price caps would drive capital away from regulated activities, which could have
actually prospered if the restriction was not in place. Productive resources would thus
end up misdirected by continued state intervention in prices, diminishing total output
and, therefore, economic welfare (Pigou, 1918).

16
  For a broader approach to the relation between the state and the economy, as formulated by Pigou in a
lecture to the London School of Economics in 1934, see "State Action and Laissez-Faire" (Pigou, 1935,
pp. 107-128).
17
   This same argument had been advanced by Pigou the previous year in the paper "The Economics of the
War Loan", out in The Economic Journal, which dealt with the government’s borrowing policy in the
terms already presented here, but which, at some point, reflected on the convenience of a state controlled
economy in the following terms: “To compel people to do things involves a great deal of organisation,
and it is very difficult to make sure that one is compelling the people best suited to different things to do
those things. Therefore, a Government naturally likes to do very little compelling and to make its
arrangements, so far as possible, in other ways.” (Pigou, 1917a, p. 16).
                                                                                                    10


   4. The capital levy debate
   4.1. The need of the levy

By the end of the war, Britain’s domestic debt had soared from £649.7 million in 1913
to £6,552.9 million in 1919, a tenfold increase, while interest charges reached £320
million in 1920, absorbing almost one third of the whole central government revenue, as
shown in Table 1. Wartime calls for heavier taxation were commonly accompanied by
the suggestion of some type of wealth confiscation, most frequently during the debates
over the war budgets. That was the case on 22 April 1918, when after the financial
statement by Bonar Law, Mr. Sydney Arnold proposed a levy to be charged in two
instalments, one right after the war and the other one two years later, each of them of 12
per cent on private owned capital, idea that aroused immediate and fierce opposition.
The controversy continued well into the 1920s, the taxation of capital being
incorporated into the Labour platform for the 1924 election (on the Parliamentary
debates, see Hirst and Allen, 1926, pp. 28, 224-233, 265-275; for the broader discussion
of this topic by the British society, see Dauton, 1996).
      The idea soon became one of Pigou’s key recommendations for handling Britain’s
post-war economy, the other involving the resumption of the gold-standard, as will be
presented in the next section. Such was the cry for some kind of resolute action to tackle
the massive national debt that in the second half of 1818 The Economic Journal
dedicated two consecutive issues to the theme of the capital levy. The July edition, with
contributions in favour of the proposal, had Pigou leading the group with the paper "A
Special Levy to Discharge the War Debt". From the proposition that paying off the debt
means only transferring purchasing power from one to another group of citizens within
the country, irrespective of this payment taking place in present or future, Pigou goes on
explaining the main reasons for adopting the levy instead of facing the prospect of
decades of heavy taxation. First, the income-tax in its current form was discriminating
against saving, given that spent income paid tax once, while income invested paid tax
twice, once in itself and the other round on the yield of the investment. Second, each
additional increase in the tax burden is more likely to make people indulge in extra
consumption or to divert their savings to investments abroad. Third, high taxes hurt the
competitiveness of domestic industry, lowering its productivity. Lastly, in view of the
probable outlook of a post-war deflation, nominal incomes would fall while interest
charges on the debt would stay unaltered, generating the necessity of further duties and
increased rates on existing taxes.
           With money incomes probably less than they are now (in consequence of a lower level of
           prices) what taxes relatively innocuous to production is it possible to devise to raise this
           enormous sum? Except in so far as other duties are imposed, and, broadly speaking, other
           duties hamper and interfere with production more than the income-tax does, it would seem
           inevitable that income tax and super-tax, which yielded £239 millions in 1917-18, will have
           to be raised permanently to double the rates which then ruled (Pigou, 1918, p. 142).
Although Pigou does accept the possibility that the levy could raise fears of similar
exactions in future, he is just too optimistic when it comes to evaluating the practical
aspects of the proposal. He quickly dismisses the need of assessing immaterial capital
owned by individuals due to its alleged small proportional value when set against other
forms of capital, while he also recommends leaving the miscellaneous forms of personal
wealth to be taxed as death duties when they came to be handed down to others (Pigou,
1918).
                                                                                                      11


                             (1)           (2)             (3)      (4)         (5)
                           Receipts    Expenditures       Debt    (3)÷(1)     National
                Year
                                                         Interest              Debt
                   1913         167           168              23    13.7          649
                   1914         170           299              24    14.1       1,105
                   1915         245         1,051              52    21.2       2,072
                   1916         429         1,403            107     24.9       3,644
                   1917         658         1,849            167     25.3       4,877
                   1918         829         2,160            248     29.9       6,143
                   1919         981         1,408            310     31.6       6,553
                   1920       1,039           990            320     30.7       6,273
                  Table 1. UK Budget and National Debt 1913-1920 (£ millions)
               Source: (1)-(3) Feinstein (1972, Table 12, T31); (5) Mallet and George,
               1929, Table XIX, p. 411 (National Debt values on 31 March of each
               year).
Another proponent of the levy in The Economic Journal, A. Hook, argues that since the
war had been prosecuted not only for the benefit of present and future generations, but
also to preserve the existing wealth of the community, at least a fraction of the debt
should be redeemed through some type of "capital conscription" (Hook, 1918). Sydney
Arnold, for his turn, remarks that since capital is usually evaluated for the sake of
paying death duties, what is done to the dead could also be done to the living. In order
to achieve that, he proposed the self-evaluation of each one’s assets, with the
corresponding amount to be paid immediately, as a way of speeding up the process.
After that, government officials would double-check each individual evaluation and,
whenever necessary, process the corresponding extra collections or refunds (Arnold,
1918).18

      4.2. The case against the levy and Pigou's turnabout

       The following issue of The Economic Journal, from September 1918, brought a
series of papers against the levy. The most articulated one was authored by W. R. Scott,
who contends that the sums to be gathered from the owners of immaterial capital, as
well as from small business and holdings, would most likely have to be received in
installments, being equivalent therefore to an increase in the income-tax. In addition,
instead of talking about a levy, the government better look into ways of cutting its own
expenditures. Otherwise, paying off the whole war debt would just make room for a
new round of reckless spending. Further negative effects of the levy lie in the fact that it
rewards spending and punishes savings, while sparing future generations from paying
for a war which benefited them as well. The levy would also damage London’s
reputation as a financial centre, preventing foreign capital from coming to the City and
raising therefore interest rates, hurting in that way industry in general. Lastly, Scott
stresses the importance of high taxes in raising people’s awareness to the true costs of
the war, making thus future conflicts more difficult to be accepted (Scott, 1918).
18
  An editorial in The Economist (27 July 1918, pp. 102-103) went as far as to contend that the ordinary
redemption of the domestic debt would actually reduce income inequality, for the outstanding loans
would be paid anyway by taxes leveled on the rich while many of the poor had their fair share of
government bonds. A few pages ahead, a letter to the editor held that the levy should be considered a
serious proposition, given the unfairness of the prevailing income-tax rates, while another reader simply
called the idea a ‘confiscation’ that would be well received only in Lenin’s Russia (The Economist, 27
July 1918, p. 112).
                                                                                                           12


     A. A. Mitchell, for his turn, attacks the practical aspects of the capital levy. Before
going all the way for that, he advises, the government should instead raise indirect taxes
on common luxuries such as drink, tobacco and entertainment. Still, the main difficulty
to work out the levy lies in the gigantic task of assessing the totality of the nation’s net
wealth, including immaterial capital, dwelling-houses, plant, inventories, and all sorts of
personal items, not forgetting to subtract private outstanding debts from this grand total
(Mitchell, 1918). In a note in the same issue of The Economic Journal, George B. Shaw
slammed Pigou’s suggestion of a capital levy as a "crazy delusion" after a war that had
devoured so many of the nation’s sons and so much of her wealth. Since the capital
goods left over in the country could not be consumed, the government could only get
ahold of current income. Even if the capital levy were made effective, claimed Shaw, it
was hard to believe that taxes would be actually cut down, particularly under a future
Labour government (Shaw, 1918). Pigou, in his brief reply, agreed with these
observations, but lamented that Shaw seemed not to have read his paper (Pigou, 1918d).
      In 1920, Pigou published the book A Capital Levy and a Levy on War Wealth as
an attempt at heading off many of the criticisms leveled against the proposal. The
novelties this time are, first, the argument that additional taxes have an increasing
negative effect on savings and productivity. Besides that, he offers a more forceful
presentation of the consequences of a deflation process, engineered to restore the gold
standard, on the real burden of the national debt:
              Hence, while the prices of things in terms of gold may fall through currency causes [credit
              restriction], the price of gold in terms of sterling will almost certainly fall. This means that
              the prices of things in terms of sterling will probably fall before long to some extent, and
              may fall to a considerable extent. If, however, a fall of prices due to currency causes comes
              about, the money representation of any given amount of real income must fall
              correspondingly. Hence, in order to raise a given money revenue to meet debt charges, the
              Government will have to impose rates of taxation higher—perhaps much higher than are
              required now (Pigou, 1920b, p. 21).
In relation to the fear of the levy, Pigou observed that it already existed, adding that
after it were implemented, people would feel that things have been definitely settled
and, therefore, would be less fearful of a future riddled by high taxes. With regard to a
possible raise in government’s expenditures after the debt ceased to cripple the budget,
Pigou, in accordance with his views on state intervention, replies that such assumption
does not take into account that many types of public spending may be worth taking and
that they could have just been avoided until then due to the lack of sufficient revenue
(Pigou, 1920, pp. 24-26).19 In the remainder of the book, Pigou recognizes the problems
raised by the critics about the practical aspects of the levy proposal, but he
systematically downplays all of them for having supposedly little impact on revenue, as
in the case of immaterial capital, or for its being less prejudicial than the existing tax
load (Pigou, 1920b, Part II, chaps. III-V).
      As mentioned, the taxation of capital kept being debated regularly in Parliament
during the post-war years. On 20 March 1924, the Labour Chancellor of the Exchequer
Phillip Snowden (22 Jan-3 Nov 1924) appointed a Committee to assess the national debt
19
   It is worth noticing here that David Ricardo, over a hundred years later, had advocated a tax on
property to pay off the public debt at once exactly for the opposite reason advanced by Pigou, that is, the
fear that a sinking fund would most likely be squandered away by irresponsible ministers: "It is, we think,
sufficiently proved, that no securities can be given by ministers that the sinking fund shall be faithfully
devoted to the payment of debt, and without such securities we should be much better without such a
fund. To pay off the whole, or a great portion of our debt, is, in our estimation, a most desirable object"
(Ricardo, 2004 [1820], p. 196).
                                                                                                      13


and the tax system, with Lord Colwyn as the chairman. Pigou gave testimony to that
Committee on 3 March 1925. This time around, though, he had completely changed his
mind about the convenience of the capital levy, for he explicitly declared his preference
for the orthodox sinking fund policy, although with a more pronounced rate of debt
redemption. Pigou explained that he had fought for the levy right after the war due to
the negative impact of the prevailing high taxes on industry, personal exertion and
savings, but never as a mechanism to redistribute wealth.20 After saying that, he invoked
the strong opposition which had grown to the idea of a levy; the fright of it being
repeated in future; its negative impact on business expectations in a depressed
conjuncture and, last of all, the effect of the levy in reducing the revenue of the income-
tax as sufficient reasons to set the whole idea aside (Pigou, 1925, pp. 436-437).
      The Committee’s final report, released in 1927, concluded that there was no
commanding evidence of the alleged benefits to come from the capital levy. The
presumed economy in income-tax, a factor generally overestimated by the levy
proponents, would not compensate most enterprises for the values paid on their capital
and not even the gigantic effort involved in collecting those sums. In addition, such
proposal had been more attractive during the post-war boom inflation years, when a
future deflation was somehow foreseeable, than under conditions of price stability, as
happened to be the case at the time.
             Certainly, whether regarded as a means of lightening the annual burden of industry, or as a
             means of reducing indirect taxes and increasing expenditure on social objects, it [the levy]
             would, in our opinion, yield physical results quite disproportionate to the magnitude of the
             operation (Committee on National Debt, 1927, p. 293).

     5. Post-war reconstruction: The Political Economy of War
All of Pigou’s previous works on war related issues were brought together into a 1921
volume entitled The Political Economy of War, with almost three hundred pages and
twenty-nine chapters. Since most of the book’s contents have already been covered in
the previous pages, this section deals just with the new ideas put forward by Pigou at the
occasion, particularly on the causes of the war, its long term effects in peacetime and
the fundamental steps toward the political and economic reconstruction of Europe.
      Whatever the occasional event that actually sets off a war, explains Pigou, it
always ignites a pile of material that had been accumulating on account of two main
psychological reasons: first, the desire for domination, and second, the desire for gain.
Be that a boy bullying his colleague at school or a European nation colonizing other
peoples, both cases display the same longing for the exercise of raw power over
individuals or nationalities. The domination that ensues from this deep-rooted
propensity is at the very origin of the wars of independence and liberty conducted by
oppressed peoples. The trap into which modern ruling powers had fallen, lamented
Pigou, was that none of them wanted to slacken its grip over the subjugated territories
for fear of losing the supply of colonial soldiers feeding their armies or yet of having



20
  In a paper published the year before in The Quarterly Journal of Economics, ‘The Burden of War and
Future Generations’, Pigou recalled though that the loan policy had been mostly financed by savings,
hurting thus future generations by reducing the capital stock available to them, and also that the poor
would be taxed to pay for the service the national debt, held mostly by rich people, worsening thus
income distribution and future welfare (Pigou, 1919).
                                                                                                          14


those areas overtaken by rival powers which could use them as basis for future attacks
(Pigou, 1921, pp. 16-19).21
      The second factor fueling wars stressed by Pigou, that is, the desire for gain,
drives the governments to set up areas of protective tariffs under its control in order to
counterbalance similar initiatives by other governments. At the same time, exporters,
traders and importers of raw materials from the colonies form a coalition of interests
that pushes the government toward political imperialism. In this quest for domination,
these individuals are helped by financiers seeking profitable concessions in
undeveloped regions of the world, either by granting loans to suspect rulers or by
exploiting natural resources through disguised types of forced labour. Governments are
then dragged into a ferocious contest for spheres of influence or the direct annexation of
weaker countries in order to reap undue gains for some of their nationals. In the
background, armament makers bribe governments and disseminate war scares with a
view of promoting a widespread military race. Pigou is most emphatic when talking
about this whole process.
        Thus, the rivalry of the traders and financiers of different nations leads to a contest among their
        governments for "places in the sun". In this contest allies and associates are helpful, and so the
        area of contest is extended. In the background of it all stands military power. No government
        wants to fight for a sphere of influence or a concession for its nationals, but every government
        knows that, unless there is some point at which people believe that it will fight, its diplomacy
        will be relatively ineffective; and it knows too that, once it enters upon a game of bluff, the bluff
        may unexpectedly be called (Pigou, 1921, p. 22).
The only effective way to build an international environment less inoculated by tensions
and disputes, as conceived by Pigou, would require, first, the suppression of all
protective policies toward the "mother country" in undeveloped regions, opening those
economies to trade with the community of nations. Second, there had to be a permanent
dissociation between diplomacy and the special interests of traders and financiers, who
would have to fend for themselves in their dealings with foreign governments.
Moreover, advises Pigou, European powers have the moral obligation of actively
preventing their own nationals from freely exploiting the most fragile regions of the
globe. Besides that, whenever possible, some control over the armaments industry
would contribute in large measure to preserving world peace. Lastly, free trade and
international cooperation under the auspices of the League of Nations could bring about
a substantial mitigation in the state of rivalry among nations (Pigou, 1921, pp. 22-27).
     The second key area of improvement in the international sphere contemplated by
Pigou involved the reconstruction of the international gold standard system, which had
been shattered by the war and the subsequent remapping of Europe.22 In the beginning

21
   Pigou also deprecates wars for looting or indemnities as senseless, since after computing all human
misery and material costs involved in the whole operation, the final result is most commonly a huge net
loss for the aggressor (Pigou, 1921, pp. 18-19). Being an active pacifist during the war, he advocated an
early and honorable peace with Germany, through the setting out of moderate terms by the Allies, as a
way to avoid a protracted and tragic resolution through a crushing victory which would only cost more
lives and stir resentment among the Germans, sowing in this way the seeds of a future war (Pigou, 1915;
on Pigou’s pacifism, see Wallace, 1986, pp. 144-147).
22
   In his Memorandum on Credit, Currency and Exchange Fluctuations, prepared for the 1920 Brussels
International Financial Conference, Pigou devised a scheme of short term relief to distressed occupied
regions through the issue of bonds by the responsible authorities of each country. The funds thus obtained
were to finance only food, agricultural implements, material for factories and equipment, on condition of
the benefited governments centralizing the exchanges, incurring in no military spending and forbidding
the import of luxuries and the sending of capital abroad (Pigou, 1920, pp. 4-7).
                                                                                                       15


of 1918, Pigou was appointed a member of the Committee on Currency and Foreign
Exchanges After the War, the so-called Cunliffe Committee, after its chairman, Lord
Cunliffe, then Governor of the Bank of England. The Committee indicated the
immediate cessation of any further borrowing by the British government, the reduction
of its indebtedness and the limitation of the note issue as necessary conditions for
getting sterling back to its $4.86 pre-war parity with the dollar. Otherwise, said the
Committee, Britain would lose her prominence as an international financial centre,
jeopardizing in the wake of that disaster its industry and foreign trade (Cunliffe
Committee, 1918, pp. 5-7).
     In The Political Economy of War, Pigou elaborates additional thoughts on this
particular issue. He points out the volatility of the exchanges and the wide range of their
fluctuations as the major obstacle to the revival of trade in Europe. He does admit that
stable exchanges could be achieved through central bank manipulation of the currency
and the interest rate, but he explains also that governments as a rule were still too feeble
to be trusted on this momentous task. Such risk would be eliminated, however, by the
adoption of free gold convertibility by the international community. That agreed,
though, the question about the most appropriate level of the rate of exchange for each
country comes to the forefront. In a realistic scenario, says Pigou, in which America
neutralizes her gold inflow and maintains her price level stable, the resumption of the
pre-war parity with the dollar by any currency would demand an active police of price
deflation. In the case of Britain, that could be implemented by a progressive contraction
in the note issue and higher interest rates. Such rigorous policy, however, would not
come about without huge economic distress or, more exactly, lower profits, increased
unemployment and heavier taxation to service the debt.
        The process to be gone through on the return journey to pre-war parity is not a smooth one either
        for employers, whose dividends will fall, or for wage-earners, whose employment will be
        threatened. Moreover, the successful accomplishment of it involves afterwards the payment of
        interest on war loans in a currency much more valuable than that in which a large part of them
        was subscribed. This is, prima facie, unfair. It is also, on the fiscal side, exceedingly
        inconvenient. For, money incomes being reduced in proportion as currency is appreciated,
        appreciation will make necessary much higher rates of tax for the service of the debt, and this
        will make more difficult the problem of balancing the budget (Pigou, 1921, p. 176-177).
Having thus identified the hardships associated with a deliberate policy of currency
deflation, Pigou surprisingly calls for the resumption of gold payments at the old parity
as the proper course to be followed by Britain in view of the proximity of the pound,
then at $4.20, to its pre-war value. One possible reason for this call by Pigou might be
his belief, as seen, that a significant portion of British wartime inflation had its origin in
world events, so that domestic and international prices were assumed by him as not in
substantial discrepancy. He must have also been somehow impressed by the then
current deep recession which hit the former Allied countries after the United States cut
short the supply of dollars to Europe (see Eichengreen, 1992, pp. 100-107; Samuelson
and Hagen, 1943). That particular conjuncture might have induced him into thinking
that a small further fall in prices would not bring about that much additional harm in
view of the magnitude of what had already happened.23

23
  In the paper "Unemployment", published in 1921 in The Contemporary Review, Pigou attributes the
unemployment of the time to the dislocations in world trade caused by the war, as well as to the excessive
optimism with the prospective demand from European countries in peacetime, which pushed British
merchants and bankers to pile up large inventories of commodities at increased prices. As wages finally
caught up with inflation and banks raised interest rates, sales receded, prices fell, and a wave of
pessimism settled in. In his Aspects of British Economic History (1947), Pigou describes the trajectory of
                                                                                                      16


       Be that as it may, in 1924 Pigou was appointed a member of the Committee on the
Currency and Bank Note Issues, or the Chamberlain-Bradbury Committee, which in its
final report, released early the following year, advised Britain’s immediate return to the
gold standard, decision formally announced by the then Chancellor of the Exchequer,
Winston Churchill, in his budget speech on 28 April 1925. Along with some warnings
voiced by a few witnesses with regard to the dangers of further monetary stringency, the
worries about the perverse effects of receding prices which Pigou had put forth in his
1921 book must have crossed his mind at the occasion. He actually was responsible for
one of the drafts of the Committee’s report, eventually discarded, suggesting that the
decision of getting back to gold should be postponed for some time since the immediate
resumption of free gold exports, then still legally blocked, would require an active
deflationary policy (Moggridge, 1969, pp. 32-35).
      Pigou’s position with respect to government intervention in the economy has
already been presented, but on his final reflections on the war we have him broadening
the scope of state action for the sake of national defense. In Britain, as he points out, a
large fleet proved to be fundamental, not because of its easy conversion to military
needs, as happened in the past, but by its capacity to move large volumes of essential
supplies during the war. If the shipping industry ever comes to a condition of stress,
says Pigou, the government should come to its rescue through some special bounties
and other stimulus in order to assure the readiness of a large merchant marine. Also, a
system of national granaries should be built to keep a large store of grain capable to
attend the society’s needs for at least one whole year. Protection and artificial
encouragement must be provided also to industries producing crucial materials and
substances for armaments, the same applying for key industries like magneto-making
and optical glasses. Although these measures, according to Pigou, involve the sacrifice
of some opulence and welfare, they are all indispensable in a world where the menace
of a new conflagration is permanently casting its shadow over the life of the nations.
Finally, for activities under government control during the war period, as the railways
and coal mining, effective economies were actually achieved by unified management,
and a respectable case could be made for its nationalization in order to avoid collusion
and the formation of private monopolies in peacetime.24
     6. Concluding remarks
Although scattered through a number of sources, Pigou’s economic analyses during
World War I may be deemed extremely consistent, especially by his systematic use of
the concepts previously outlined in Wealth and Welfare in regard to the growth of the
national dividend, the importance of preventing the worsening of income inequality and
the mitigation of business cycles. With reference to the financing of the war, the

Britain’s post-war economy as follows: first, a period of ‘breathing space’, from the Armistice until the
end of April 1919, followed by a monetary "boom", marked by price and wage inflation, which lasted
until late April 1920. After that, came a "slump", with a huge price decline and high unemployment,
which continued until the beginning of 1923. Eventually, the British economy entered the "doldrums", a
state of semi-stagnation, and remained that way until the Wall Street Crash in 1929 (Pigou, 1999 [1947],
Parts II, III and V).
24
   On 23 April 1919 Pigou gave evidence to the Coal Industry Comission, offering some alternatives on
how to manage the whole sector. Under private ownership, he told the commissioners, the industry would
have innovation, but some firms would lag behind. Under state control, all mines would work at the same
technical level, but with no innovation whatsoever. Questioned about the possibility of the Ministry of
Mines running three thousand concerns at once, Pigou replied that it would be indeed extremely difficult,
but not impossible (The Times, 24 April 1919, p. 16).
                                                                                         17


authorities should seek the necessary funds, to the maximum extent possible, in the
current income of the nation, that is, through the taxation of the people most able to pay,
without any further sacrifice of the poor. Contrariwise, a loan strategy would not only
sacrifice economic growth but also place an undeserved burden on future generations at
the cost of additional concentration of income through the taxing of the more vulnerable
segments of society.
       Since Pigou believed that the higher taxes needed to service the national debt
crippled savings and investments, that is, the long run expansion of the national
dividend, the capital levy would be the best option to get rid of the the war debt at once
in order to allow a reduction in taxes, the strengthening of economic growth and the
introduction of new social expenditures. Some kind of credit control by authorities
would also be required to dampen the intensity of economic fluctuations after the war.
Although Pigou remained loyal to the basic principles of a market economy, he
admitted that the range of state intervention should be extended to encompass national
defense and, arguably, even the nationalization of the railway system and the coal
mines. At the international level, he envisioned European economic recovery as
conditioned on the cessation of both political imperialism and protectionism,
complemented by the reconstruction of the international gold standard system, both
initiatives concurring to the reinvigoration of free trade among sovereign nations.


References
Allen, J. E. 1914, “How to Pay for the War”, The Contemporary Review, n. 106, July, pp. 759-
   765.
Arnold, S. 1918, ‘A Capital Levy: The Problems of Realisation and Valuation’, The Economic
  Journal, Vol. 28, No. 11o, June, pp. 157-166.
Barber, William J. 1991, ‘From the Economics of Welfare to the Economics of Warfare (and
   back) in the Thought of A.C. Pigou’, in C. D Goodwin (Ed.), Economics and National
   Security. A History of Their Interaction, Durham: Duke University Press, pp. 131-142.
Bower, Graham. 1916, ‘The Need for More Taxation’, Letter to the Editor, The Economist, 16
  December, p. 1128-1129
Burk, Kathleen. 1982, ‘The Treasury: from Impotence to Power’, in K. Burk (Ed.), War and the
  State. The Transformation of the British Government, London: George Allen and Unwin, pp.
  84-107.
Champernowne, David G. 1959, “Arthur Cecil Pigou 1877-1959”, Journal of the Royal
  Statistical Society, Series A (General), Vol. 122, No. 2, pp. 263-265.
Committee on National Debt and Taxation. 1927, Report of the Committee on National Debt
  and Taxation, House of Commons Parliamentary Papers, Reports of Comissioners, Session
  1927, Paper No. Cmd. 2800.
Committee on National Expenditure. 1918, Reports from the Select Committee on National
  Expenditure, House of Commons Parliamentary Papers, Reports of the Committees, Session
  1918, Vol. IV.95.
Currency and Foreign Exchanges. 1918, First Interim Report of the Committee on Currency and
  Foreign Exchanges after the War, House of Commons Parliamentary Papers, Reports of
  Commissioners, Session 1918, Paper No. Cd. 9182.
Dauton, Martin J. 1996, ‘How To Pay For The War: State, Society and Taxation in Britain,
  1917-24’, English Historical Review, Vol. CXI, No. 443, pp. 882-919.
                                                                                           18


De Viti de Marco, A. 1992 [1893], ‘Fiscal Burden arising from Taxation and Public Debt’. In
  L.L Pasinetti (ed.), Italian Economic Papers, Oxford: il Mulino/Oxford University Press, pp.
  55-79.
Eichengreen, B. 1992, Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919–
   1939, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Feinstein, Charles. 1972, National Income, Expenditure and Output of the United Kindgom,
   1855-1965, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Flux, A. W. et al., ‘Comments on Sir George Paish’s Paper’, Journal of the Royal Statistical
   Society,Vol. 79, No. 3, May, pp. 285-299.
Griziotti, B. 1992 [1917]. 'The Different Fiscal Burden of Public Debt and Extraordinary
   Taxation'. In L. L. Pasinetti (ed.), Italian Economic Papers, Oxford: Il Mulino and Oxford
   University Press: 81-97.
Hamilton, Robert. 1814, An Inquiry Concerning the Rise and Progress, the Redemption, the
  Present State, and Management of the National Debt of Great Britain, Edinburgh: Oliphant,
  Waugh and Innes, 2nd ed.
Hazlehurst, Cameron. 1970, ‘Asquith as Prime Minister’, The English Historical Review, Vol.
  85, No. 336 , Jul., pp. 502-531.
Hirst, F. W. 1915, The Political Economy of War, London: J. M. Dent.
Hirst, F. W. and Allen, J. E. 1926, British War Budgets, London: Humprey Millford, Carnegie
   Endowment for International Peace.
Hobhouse, C. 1915, “The Financial Situation”, The Contemporary Review, No. 108, Jan., pp.
  137-145.
Hook, A. 1918, ‘A Tax on Capital and Redemption of the Debt’, The Economic Journal, Vol.
  28, No. 110, June, pp. 167-175.
Johnson, Harry G. 1960, “Arthur Cecil Pigou, 1877-1959”, The Canadian Journal of Economics
   and Political Science, Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 150-155.
Lawson, W. R. 1915, British War Finance 1914-15, London: Constable.
Mallet, Bernard and George, Oswald. 1929, British Budgets, Second Series, 1913-14 to 1920-
  21, London: Macmillan.
Marshall, Alfred. 1916, ‘The Need for More Taxation’, Letter to the Editor, The Economist, 30
  December, p. 1228.
Marshall, Alfred. 1920 [1890], Principles of Economics, London: Macmillan, 8th ed.
McLure, Michael. 2012, ‘A.C. Pigou’s Wealth and Welfare’, History of Economics Review, No.
  56, Summer, pp. 101-116.
Mitchell, A. A., 1918, ‘A Levy on Capital’, The Economic Journal, Vol. 28, No. 111, Sep., pp.
  268-275.
Moggridge, D. E. 1969. The Return to Gold: the formation of Economic Policy and its Critics,
  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Morgan, V. E. 1952, Studies in British Financial Policy 1914-25, London: Macmillan.
Paish, George. 1916, “War Finance”, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Vol. 79, No. 3,
   May, pp. 267-284.
Peden, G.C. 2000, The Treasury and British Public Policy 1906-1959, Oxford: Oxford
   University Press.
                                                                                             19


Pethick-Lawrence, Frederick W.. 1915, “War Economics”, The Economic Journal, Vol. 25, No.
   100, pp. 512-520.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1912, Wealth and Welfare, London: Macmillan.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1915a, ‘A Plea for the Statement of the Allies Plan’, The Nation, 6 February,
   pp. 590-591.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1915b, ‘Sources and Methods of Paying for the War’, The Contemporary
   Review, Vol. 108, No. 2, July, pp. 706-717.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1916a, ‘The Distribution of the Burden of the War Charges’, The
   Contemporary Review, Vol. 109, No. 1, Jan., pp. 429-436.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1916b, The Economy and Finance of the War, Being a Discussion of the Real
   Costs of the War and the Way in which they should be Met, London: J. M. Dent & Sons.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1916c, ‘Interest after the War and the Export of Capital’, The Economic
   Journal, Vol. 26, No. 104, Dec., pp. 413-424.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1916d, ‘The Need for More Taxation’, Letter to the Editor, The Economist, 9
   December, pp. 1003-1004.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1917a, ‘The Economics of the War Loan’, The Economic Journal, Vol. 27,
   No. 105, Mar., pp. 16-25.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1917b. ‘The Income-Tax’, Letter to the Editor, The Times, 23 April, p. 9.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1917c, ‘The Value of Money’, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 32,
   No. 1, Nov., pp. 38-65.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1918a, ‘A Special Levy to Discharge the War Debt’, The Economic Journal,
   Vol. 28, No. 111, June, pp. 135-156.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1918b, ‘Government Control in War and Peace’, The Economic Journal, Vol.
   28, No. 112, Dec., pp. 363-373.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1918c, ‘Comment on Shaw’s Note’, The Economic Journal, Vol. 28, No. 111,
   Sep., pp. 347-348.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1919, ‘The Burden of War and Future Generations’, The Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, Vol. 33, No. 2, Feb., pp. 242-255.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1920a, The Economics of Welfare, London: Macmillan.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1920b, A Levy on Capital and Levy on War Wealth, London: Humphrey
   Milford.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1920c, Memorandum on Credit, Currency and Exchange Fluctuations,
   Brussels: International Financial Conference, Paper No. XIII.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1921, The Political Economy of War, London: Macmillan.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1921b, ‘Unemployment’, The Contemporary Review, No. 1, July, pp. 737-742.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1925, ‘Evidence to the Colwyn Committee, 23 March 1925’, in Minutes of
   Evidence of the Committee on National Debt and Taxation, London: HM Stationary Office,
   pp. 436-448.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1935, Economics in Practice. Six Lectures on Current Issues, London:
   Macmillan.
Pigou, Arthur C.1999 [1947], Aspects of British Economic History, in D. Collard (Ed.) A.C.
   Pigou Collected Economic Writings, Vol. 12, London: Macmillan.
                                                                                           20


Ricardo, David. 2004 [1820]. Funding System. In Sraffa, P. (ed.) The Works and
   Correspondence of David Ricardo, Vol. 4, Pamphlets and Papers, 1815-1823, Indianapolis:
   Liberty Fund, pp. 143-200.
Samuelson, Paul A. and Hagen, Everett E. 1943, After the War 1918-1920, Washington D.C.:
  National Resources Planning Board.
Scott, W.R. 1915, “Economics of Peace in Time of War”, Report of the Eighty-Fifth Meeting of
   the British Association for the Advancement of Science, Manchester: Transactions of Section
   F-Economic Sciences and Statistics, Presidential Address, pp. 495-503.
Scott, W.R. 1918, ‘Some Aspects of the Proposed Capital Levy’, The Economic Journal, Vol.
   28, No. 111, Sep., pp. 247-267.
Shaw, George B. 1918, ‘Taxation of Capital’, The Economic Journal, Vol. 28, No. 111, Sep.,
   pp. 345-349.
The Times. 1919, ‘State Coalmines. The Prof. Pigou’s Criticisms”, 24 April, p. 16.
Wallace, Stuart. 1986, War and the Image of Germany. British Academics 1914-1918,
  Edinburgh, John Donald,
Williams, W.M. J. 1915. “British Finance and the European War”. Annals of the American
  Academy of Political and Social Science, v. 58, Readjustments in Taxation, Mar, pp. 44-58.
