                              Predicting Amazon fires for policy making

Thiago Fonseca Morello1, Rossano Marchetti Ramos2, Liana O. Anderson3, Thaís Michele Rosan4,
Lara Steil2
1
    CECS/UFABC, 2Prevfogo/Ibama, 3 Cemaden, 4 DSR/INPE

Resumo
Os incêndios florestais são uma das principais ameaças à conservação e desenvolvimento da Amazônia
brasileira. Para contê-los, um dos principais instrumentos de política pública que têm sido adotados é o de
brigadas de combate a incêndios, cuja eficácia depende crucialmente do posicionamento geográfico.
Buscando contribuir para um melhor planejamento deste posicionamento, o trabalho se concentra na
identificação, na escala municipal, das principais variáveis previsoras de ocorrências de fogo. Um painel
de dados inédito na literatura é construído a partir de imagens de satélite e dados socioeconômicos,
abrangendo os anos de 2008, 2010 e 2012. São feitas contribuições metodológicas propondo-se
procedimentos simples de seleção de modelos econométricos e de avaliação de robustez. Dos 41
potenciais previsores avaliados, apenas 9 mostraram-se significativos a um nível de incerteza tolerável,
compreendendo áreas desmatadas, áreas de pastagens e de floresta, terras indígenas, temperatura e textura
do solo.
Palavras-chave: Amazônia, fogo, dados em painel.
Abstract

Wildfires are one of the main threats to the conservation and development of Brazilian Amazon. To
address them, policy has relied mainly on fire brigades whose effectiveness crucially depends on correct
geographical positioning. Seeking to contribute for better policy planning, the paper focuses on
identifying the main predictors of fires at municipal level. An unparalleled panel dataset is built from
satellite imagery and socioeconomic data covering the years of 2008, 2010 and 2012. Methodological
contributions are made with simple procedures for model selection and robustness assessment. Of the 41
potential predictors, only 9 were significant with tolerable uncertainty, comprising deforestation,
pastureland, forest, indigenous lands, temperature and soil texture.

Keywords: Amazon, fire, panel data.

JEL Codes: C23, D62, Q58
Área ANPEC: 11 - Economia Agrícola e do Meio Ambiente.




                                                                                                         0
1      Introduction

Much attention has been dedicated to the subject of Amazon deforestation. However, in the past four
years deforestation has stabilized in around 5 thousand kilometres, a level 80% below that of 2004 (Godar
et al., 2014). Of course it is wrong to conclude from this that deforestation has ceased to be a threat. But it
is also wrong to conclude that deforestation is by orders of magnitude more important than any other
threat to Amazon conservation. The recent paper by Barlow et al (2016) makes clear that deforestation
control is only the first frontier of progress towards conservation. The second frontier encompasses forest
degradation and fragmentation, which are driven by deforestation, but also largely by logging and
wildfires.

Wildfires have as one of their main causes the fires commonly set by farmers to manage land (Cano-
Crespo et al., 2015). The widespread practice of burning land cover gives support to deforestation of all
scales and also to the subsistence of poor households (Nepstad et al., 1999). Due to cost-effectiveness and
ancillary benefits as fertilization, weeding and elimination of poisonous animals, fire is the tool of choice.
But there are also costs. They comprise the emission of greenhouse gases (GHGs) and pollutants,
uncontrolled fires that damage human assets and biodiversity-rich ecosystems and disastrous fires favored
by extreme weather conditions, as the 1998 Roraima episode in which over 5 million hectares of forest
were burned (Cochrane, 2009, section 1.3).

The three levels of government operating in Brazilian Amazon allocate most of fire policy budget to the
suppression of uncontrolled (or accidental) fires. One of the main issues faced is that of planning the
position of fire brigades. A highly difficult task due to the scarce budget and the giant size of the region (5
million km2, 20% deforested). The identification of hotspots for brigade intervention is repeated every
year by federal government, and the main variables considered are fires and deforestation in the previous
year and also the existence of state or municipal brigades. In a first stage, priority municipalities are
identified and then a refinement allows for defining sub-municipal priority areas.

This paper aims to contribute for improving fire policy planning, especially brigade positioning, by
identifying the main predictors of fires at municipal level. It is the first try, as far as we know, to build a
comprehensive panel dataset merging high-resolution land use data, institutional and socioeconomic
information and also biophysical and climate satellite observations. Three years are covered, 2008, 2010
and 2012, and 85% of Legal Amazon municipalities.

Next section reviews previous studies aiming to define the potential predictors, being followed by
methods and a brief description of data. Results are the object of the fifth section and a short conclusion
closes the paper.

2      Literature review on the predictors of fires

This section synthesizes the relevant literature on the potential predictors of fire with focus on selecting
the covariates of the empirical model. These are indicated by “[P]”.

2.1    Land use and land cover change (LUCC)

Amazon fires can be classified in the following classes according with finality or impact (and based on
Nepstad et al., 1999, Kato et al., 1999 and Cochrane, 2009, chap.14):

1. Agricultural fires
                                                                                                             1
      a. Deforestation fires: aimed at removing debris resulting from the opening of new fields for
          agriculture;
      b. Pasture fires: aimed at managing and restoring pasture;
      c. Fallow fires: part of slash and burn system, are aimed at fertilizing, weeding and shifting
          secondary forest cover into cropland;
2. Accidental fires: non-intended fires escaping from agricultural fires or careless human activities
   (smoking)
      a. Wildfires: accidental fires that penetrates standing forest and degrade it;
      b. Accidental fires on farmland: penetrates farms harming or extirpating fixed capital assets
          (fences, crops, pasture, facilities, etc);
3. Arson fires: purely destructive and generally intended, include conflict-motivated (vendetta fires) and
   vandalism fires.

Only fire classes “1.a” to “1.c” are related with LUCC, more precisely, with deforestation [P], pasture [P]
and fallow-based crop growing [P]. Disentangling these three classes from observed fires is, however, out
the scope of the paper as it requires specific remote sensing methodologies (eg., Cano-Crespo et al.,
2015). It is assumed that a non-negligible part of fires detected in Amazon are agricultural fires, which is
reasonable according with results from detailed remote-sensing studies (Cano-Crespo et al., 2015,
Anderson et al., 2015).

The extents of primary [P] and secondary [P] vegetation are also relevant predictors. The former is still
used by farmers as natural barrier to contain fires (see, for instance, Carmenta et al., 2013) and the latter
may in part capture long fallows of slash and burn system and also abandoned land.

2.2    Agriculture

If detected fires are related with LUCC, then predictors of the latter also predict the former. Multiple
papers attest the influence of agro-commodities’ prices on Amazon’s LUCC (eg, Hargrave and Kis-Katos,
2013). Medium to large scale soybean [P] growers deforest or buy deforested land (Morton et al., 2006).
Smallholders rely on slash-and-burn mainly to grow staple crops i.e., cassava, maize, cowpea and rice
(Kato et al., 1999). Space and time variation of the prices of the mentioned crops [P] should affect
detected fires. This is also the case for the products of cattle ranching, especially the price of calves, milk
and beef [P] whose relation with deforestation are clearly stablished by previous studies (Hargrave and
Kis-Katos, 2013).

The productivity of staple crops [P] tends to be related with reliance on fire which is generally a part of a
production system with low usage of agrochemicals and high labor intensity. Systematic use of fire
accompanied by shortening of fallow duration tends to lead to decrease in productivity through soil
degradation (Kato et al., 1999). In complement, productivity may also be positively related with the
propensity to deforest and, thus, to conduct deforestation fires (Marchand et al., 2012). The degree of
adoption of fire-free agriculture is a “counter-predictor” of fires by definition and should also be
accounted for. It may be well proxied by soybean growing [P], the main modality of fire-free agriculture
in the region [P].

2.3    Municipal economy and demography

The size of local economy [P] influences both the capacity to finance investment in fire-free technologies
and the demand for agricultural products, two effects on fires with opposite direction. Municipal level of
                                                                                                             2
human development [P] is a proxy for the social and human capital that basis LUCC and technology
choices from which fires emerge. In addition, poverty [P] may be a cause and, possibly, a consequence of
fires.

In what regards to demographic predictors, two are suggested by literature. First, population density,
which, according with the classical Boserupian reasoning, should be negatively correlated with reliance
on fire. Second, the degree of urbanization [P] is also expected to reduce fires, as biomass burning and
accidental fires tend to cause larger damage on urban centres.

Several papers attest the propensity of farmers to burn closer to roads [P], where land is most profitable
(Arima et al. 2011, Cardoso et al., 2003).

2.4    Institutions

The degree of monitoring of environmental offenses should be negatively related with fire use as the right
to burn is conditional on costly licensing, licence holders become accountable through monitoring and
punishment for violations is harsh (Carmenta et al., 2015). Intuitively, monitoring ability should be
positively related with the number of employees of local monitoring agencies [P].

There are three types of federal lands in which fires may exhibit peculiar behaviours, protected areas [P],
agrarian settlements [P] and indigenous lands [P]. In protected areas, fire and related land use changes are
restricted but in a degree that varies with the type of protected area and local enforcement. Nevertheless,
previous studies had found non-negligible evidence that fires are less probable in protected areas
(Nepstad et al., 2006, Arima et al., 2011).

In indigenous lands and agrarian settlements, specific patterns of fire use may be observed. Agrarian
settlements are inhabited by smallholders that face multiple constraints to accumulate capital and access
financial services. Main constraints include remoteness and its negative effect on profitability and access
to public services (mainly electricity, education, health, sanitation and rural extension) and low levels of
human and social capital. These constraints are also binding in indigenous lands. The dwellers of such
lands rely on fire not only for subsistence agriculture based on slash-and-burn, but also for hunting game
and for cultural and religious activities (Leonel, 2000). Nepstad et al. (2006) and Arima et al. (2011)
found a significantly lower number of fire detections within indigenous lands.

2.5    Natural environment

In addition to the attributes of the social environment already discussed, literature shows that natural
environment also plays a relevant role in predicting fires. This seems to be true especially for climate
variables such as temperature [P] and precipitation [P] which are to become progressively more influent
on fires due to ongoing climate change. Climate forecasts for Amazon point to an increase in average
temperature and a decrease in total annual precipitation (Betts et al., 2008). In consistency, fires are also
forecasted to increase. In the short-term, the two predictors mentioned seem to be correlated with fires not
only across time but also across space (Vasconcelos et al., 2013, Cano-Crespo et al. 2015). Vasconcelos et
al. (2013), found a negative and strong correlation of fire detections and rainfall at the state of Amazonas.

Biophysical factors related with soil also merit attention due to their effect on the cost-benefit of fire use
(Kato et al., 1999, Arima et al., 2011). Slope of the terrain [P] and soil texture [P] drive the agricultural


                                                                                                            3
profitability of land and also its suitability for mechanization. This is accordance with the technological
channel of section 2.2.

3      Method

3.1    Multicriteria selection of models

3.1.1 Main principles

The main goal of the multicriteria method of model selection here proposed is to force researchers to be
clear and explicit about (i) criteria adopted and (ii) weights assigned to criteria. The approach is applied to
the paper’s research problem by focusing on three criteria, precision, prediction accuracy and credibility
of hypothesis that assure inference power.

Two additional desirable criteria would be identification power and credibility of hypothesis adopted for
identification (see Manski 2003), but they are out of scope. In this respect, we highlight that the paper is
oriented to inference and not to identification, as the state of knowledge regarding the paper’s object is
not yet sufficient to support detailed identification strategies.

Two questions emerge from a brief consideration of which models and estimators are suitable for pursing
the empirical objective. First, how to value combinations of models and estimators, or “model-estimator
pairs (MEPs)” in terms of each criteria? Second, how to weight criteria in order to proceed from single
criterion to multicriteria valuation? A formal presentation may help. The v-th criterion may be conceived
as an attribute with level avz for the z-th MEP and, thus, avz is exactly the value of the z-th MEP according
with the v-th criterion. Now the value of the z-th MEP according with all V criteria is u({avz} ). To
assume a linear form for u(.) is equivalent to assume that MEP’s total value is a weighted average of
MEPs attributes. As there is no basis for attaching quantitative weights to criteria, we opt for a simpler
approach of (i) classifying MEPs in “high”, “medium” and “low” levels according with each single
criterion (“within classification”) and (ii) assigning priority to each criterion in order to end with a final
classification encompassing all criteria (“overall classification”).

3.1.2 Attributes of MEPs considered

Two are the measures of prediction accuracy considered. First, the chi-square statistic for the global
significance test. Second, a pseudo R2 calculated as the squared correlation of predicted and observed
values of the dependent variable, a measure for overall fit commonly employed for panel data (Cameron
and Trivedi, 2009, chapter 8). Ordinary R2 is unreasonable for most models as the dependent variable is a
count and only four of the thirteen models estimated incorporate such characteristic. This means that most
of the models may (and do) deliver negative predictions (see Wooldridge, 2002, chap.19).

Precision is measured by the trace of the variance-covariance matrix of estimators, which is equivalent to
the sum of the estimators’ variance, divided by the number of estimated parameters (as ordinary and
Poisson FE models only estimate coefficients for time-varying covariates). The credibility of hypothesis
is approached qualitatively by (i) identifying the main hypothesis that assure accuracy (unbiasedness and
consistency) and efficiency (precision), (ii) classifying them as refutable and non-refutable under the data
and knowledge available, and (iii) providing tests for the former class and discussion for the latter class.

3.1.3 Classification principles

                                                                                                             4
Criteria-specific principles for MEP classification (within classification)

Three criteria are measured quantitatively, with statistics, the average variance of estimators, the chi-
square for global significance and a pseudo R2. For these, a quartile-based convention was used for
classification. MEPs (i) below the first quartile (25th percentile) were classified as “low”, (ii) in between
the first and third (75th percentile) quartile as “medium” and, (iii) above the third quartile as “high”.

Some of the attributes of MEPs are not directly comparable across all MEPs. This is the case for trace and
chi-square statistics which are vary with MEP specification. In such cases, classification was pursued only
within families of models without attempt to harmonize family-specific classifications. Classification by
the other two criteria, R2 and hypothesis credibility, considered all MEPs. It was not possible to classify
two MEPs, ordinary FE and HT, in terms, respectively, of chi-square and trace. The former case is due to
the fact that FE is estimated as an OLS model and, therefore, global significance is tested with a F-
distributed statistic. The HT model has a trace with a standalone order of magnitude as it is the only IV
non-spatial model estimated.

Classification on prediction accuracy is based on two individual classifications, one in terms of the chi-
square statistic of global significance and the other based on a pseudo R2 obtained as the squared
correlation between predicted and observed fires. This aggregated classification was built because
prediction has not to be accounted for as twice as important as the other criteria. In fact, the chi-square
statistic and R2 are measures for the same criterion. The conventions adopted for the integrated prediction
accuracy classification are omitted due to space limitations.

To classify for hypothesis credibility the state of practice on econometrics literature is taken as basis. This
source provides guidance both on factors undermining credibility and on the relevance of incredibility
(table 1).

Principles for overall classification

Three alternative (mutually exclusive) principles for overall classification were applied and had their
results compared. The “only credibility matters” principle considers only the criteria of hypothesis
credibility. The second principle is self-explained by its name which is “credibility and precision are
equally important and prediction is irrelevant”. The third principle is “ladderwise” and establishes that
“credibility matters most, followed by precision and then prediction”. The particular conventions adopted
to operationalize the last two principles are omitted due to space limitations.

3.2     Models and estimator

3.2.1 General approach

The lack of knowledge regarding the predictors of Amazon fires requires an empirical approach which is
both cautious and comprehensive. The process through which potentially relevant social and
environmental attributes drive, or influence, the observed fire levels, has temporal and spatial dimensions,
as previous sections suggest. It is also necessary to account for specific characteristics of the observation
units, which are immutable at least within the period of analysis. A general and very simplistic model
would be:

Yit = f(Xit1,…,XitK;Y-it) + uit (1.a)

                                                                                                             5
uit = μi + vit (1.b)

With Yit ≡ fires detected at the i-th locality at the t-th time period, f(.) a functional form approximating the
true form of E[Yit|Xit1,…,XitK; Y-it] and uit capturing unobservable fire predictors. The spatial dimension
is introduced by the predictor Y-it, the fire level on other, presumably proximate, localities. The term μi
captures time-invariant unobservables potentially correlated with covariates; it is also referred to as “non-
observable heterogeneity”.

To account for spatial dependency of unobservables equation (1.b) has to be replaced by u =
  ∑          + μ + v (1.b’), with W being the spatial weights matrix and ρ the parameter that
measures the strength of neighborhood (or spill-over) effects.

3.2.2 Panel data models

Three classes of models are estimated, fixed-effects (within), random effects and a Hausman-Taylor
instrumental-variable model (HT). Estimation of the first two reveals that some of the covariates are
correlated with the unobserved heterogeneity and, therefore, RE results are unreliable due to
inconsistency. The HT model is used to perform consistent estimation of coefficients of both time-variant
and time-invariant covariates (Baltagi, 2001, chap.2, Hausman and Taylor, 1981).

The HT model is consistent only if based in the knowledge of which covariates are and are not correlated
with the unobserved heterogeneity. This is the main weakness of HT model as the knowledge required is
unavailable. Nevertheless, a tentative estimation is pursued by conjecturing that the unobserved
heterogeneity captures how municipalities idiossincratically estimate the expected damage caused by
accidental (unintended/scaped) fires, one of the main externalities of agricultural (intended) fires
(Bowman et al., 2008). The rationale is simple. The probability of accidental fires is a function of
socioeconomic observables and also of biophysical-climate factors whose variation is not completely
observable due to limitations of spatial and temporal resolution (Cano-Crespo et al., 2015). This non-
observed variation may be relevant across municipalities. In complement, the size of damage depends on
the spatial distribution of tangibles within municipalities, which is not observed and may also vary across
them.

With this reasoning, endogenous covariates are those related with the subjective expectations of
accidental fire damage, what is, however, not completely clear. Seeking to perform a tentative estimation,
the endogenous covariates were selected as detailed below.

   Soybean and pasture areas: proxy for tangibles with a relevant degree of vulnerability to fire;
   GDP, HDI: proxy for the capacity to finance fire protection (Bowman et al., 2008);
   Rural settlements, protected areas (federal land): proxy for the size of damage bore by federal
    government, which, therefore, does not falls upon municipalities;
   Precipitation: proxy for the contribution of climate to extinguish fires.

The previous discussion does not exclude the possibility that the unobservable and heterogeneous
expected damage of accidental fires be time-variant. But it makes sense to believe that municipalities
expectations are in some degree backward looking as the model behind tropical accidental fires remains
obscure even for science, preventing full forward-looking behavior. Thus, municipal records of accidental
fires may play a relevant role in defining the unobserved heterogeneity (Bowman et al., 2008). Of course
the assumption that such records were not relevantly updated within the time horizon considered (2008-
                                                                                                              6
2012) may be untrue as 2010 was a record year in fire detections (Marengo et al., 2011). Another reason
why reliability of HT may be limited.

3.2.3 Count data models

The dependent variable is the count of fire detections, a natural number. However, linear models may
return non-natural numbers as predictions. Results not subjected to this issue were generated by
estimating Poisson and negative binomial models, which account for the binomial nature of the dependent
variable (Cameron and Trivedi, 2009, Wooldridge, 2002).

3.2.4 Spatial panel models

Two families of spatial panels are estimated (econometric details are found in Millo and Piras, 2012). The
first, hereafter referred as Baltagi-Elhorst (BE), assumes that the unobserved heterogeneity (μ) is not
subjected to spatial dependence, i.e., the time-invariant relevant unobserved explanatories are not
spatially correlated in a significant magnitude. The second family, Kapoor-Mutl-Pffafermayr (KMP)
relaxes this assumption and therefore allows μ to be correlated within neighborhoods. Such extension
adds larger generality to estimation as, a priori, there is no reason to believe that unobserved predictors of
a spatially-dependent regressand are spatially independent. Spatial panel estimation is pursued with
maximum likelihood (ML) and generalized method of moments (GMM) by relying on the R package
“splm” by Millo and Piras (2012). The random-effects spatial panel could not be estimated with ML and
only GMM estimation is reported.




                                                                                                            7
                                           Table 1        Conventions for classifying hypothesis credibility

 Hypothesis               Models       Benefit       Refutable (Y/N)?   Reasons for incredibility (if any)                       Relevance of the issue   Sources
                                                                        Time-variant unobservables potentially correlated
                                                                        with covariates: measurement errors on TI
                                                                        covariates. It would be refutable by means of a
                                                                        Hausman test whether there were prior information
                                                                        to know (i) which covariates are endogenous and (ii)
                                                                        which potential instrumental variables are available.
                                                                        But the current state of knowledge provides no basis
 Strict exogeneity        All models   Accuracy      N                  for both (i) and (ii).                                   High                     W, B
 Absence of                                                             Hausmann test comparing FE and RE refuted
 heterogeneity bias       RE models    Accuracy      Y                  consistency of RE                                        High                     W, B
                                                                                                                                 Null [as a robust or
                                                                        Disturbances are commonly heteroskedastic and            boostrap estimation is
 Spherical disturbances   None         Precision     Y                  serially correlated                                      pursued in all models]   W, B
                          All non-
                          spatial                                                                                                                         A&B,
 Spatial independence     models       Accuracy      Y                  Moran's I test refutes spatial dependence                High                     L&P
 It is known which
 covariates are
 correlated with the
 unobserved               HT panel                                      Current state of knowledge is insufficient to basis an
 heterogeneity            model        Accuracy      N                  informed selection                                       High                     W, B
                          Poisson                                       Dependent variable is clearly overdispersed with
 Equidispersion           panel        Efficiency    Y                  variance / mean = 721                                    Moderate                 W, C&T
                                       Results of
                                       statistical
 Known structure of      Spatial       tests and                          Current state of knowlegde is insufficient to know
 spatial dependence      models        efficiency     N                   the proper structure                               Moderate                   S&B
Note: W ≡ Wooldridge (2002), B ≡ Baltagi (2005), A&B ≡ Anselin and Bera (1998), L&P ≡ Lesage and Pace (2009), C&T ≡ Cameron and Trivedi (2009) and S&B ≡
Stakhovych and Bijmolt (2008).




                                                                                                                                                                 8
4          Data 1

4.1        Price index

A crop price index was calculated as the weighted average of crop prices with weights given by crop’s
share in total value of crop production. It were considered only the main crops in total harvested area of
Legal Amazon, being them soy, rice, cassava, beans and maize. These crops corresponded to 87-88% of
the regional total harvested area in 2008 and 2012. As the data is annually available, the index was
calculated for the three years and then converted to the purchasing power of money of 2008. This was
done for all monetary variables in the model (the remaining being municipal GDP and the value added by
agriculture).

4.2        Temperature data

Land surface temperature, observed by satellite, was converted into intra-subannual statistics. The exam
of the seasonal monthly pattern of temperature from 2003 to 2012 reveals the existence of two subannual
periods which are most distinct in terms of temperature levels, being them January-June (wet season,
Carmenta et al., 2013) and August-October (part of the dry season). Whole year averages would clearly
eliminate subannual differences and thus destroy data variability. They are avoided in favour of two
averages for each of the periods identified. It is based on these two intra-year averages that inter-year
averages and standard deviations are calculated for the biannual periods of 2007-2008, 2009-2010 and
2011-2012. Each one represents, respectively, the state of temperature in 2008, 2010 and 2012.
Additionally, the slope (or coefficient) of the deterministic trend for 2003-2012 was estimated by
regressing the subannual averages against a regressor informing the years.

4.3        Soil

A soil map from IBGE for 2012 is used. Four main textures of soil were considered, loamy, clayey, high
clayey and sandy. The municipal area with soils of non-identified texture and minor textures (organic and
silty) are not considered for calculating the areal share of the four main textures. In fact, the shares reflect
participation in the aggregated area of the four textures and, thus, one of the shares has to be left out of
the models due to perfect collinearity. Loamy texture share was selected to be excluded.

4.4        Proxy for agricultural variables

Data on cattle prices is unavailable for most municipalities of Amazon, except for the ones belonging to
Mato Grosso state. To fill this gap, two proxies are incorporated. The number of employment in beef
processing industry, i.e., slaughterhouses and related meat activities, captures the part of demand cattle
unrelated with dairy production. In complement, the size of the herd is a measure for cattle supply but
also for productivity in ranching as the whole pasture areas of municipalities are controlled for. Value
added by agriculture is also used as a proxy for productivity of the whole agricultural industry, i.e., crops
and pasture.

4.5        Institutional variables



1
    The detailed description of data sources is omitted due to data limitations.




                                                                                                              9
As a proxy for environmental monitoring and control, the number of personnel working in local
environmental department is used. The remaining institutional variables capture the extent of three
modalities of federal lands, environmental protected areas, agrarian settlements of smallholders and
indigenous lands. The three proxy the degree in which municipalities are monitored and control by
federal government which is more financially able to develop such actions.

4.6      Economy and demography

Municipal GDP is a measure for the size of local economies and, together with population, introduces in
the model the effect of per capital GDP. But also population also captures anthropic pressure especially
because area of municipalities is controlled for, introducing the effect of population density. Head-count
measures for poverty are also included, consisting in the share of households which, in the last census (of
2010), had income bellow one minimum wage2. What is introduced in the mode is the brake down of the
share into four income levels, being them zero income, income of at most ¼ minimum wage /
household/month, between ¼ and 1/2, and between ½ and 1 wage.

5        Results and discussion

5.1      MEP classification

In terms of credibility of hypothesis, the main difference is between spatial and non-spatial models (table
3). However, in what regards to statistical performance, what matters most is whether MPEs belong to FE
or RE families (table 4). In the latter aspect, high precision and high prediction accuracy are more
recurrent among RE models. It makes sense to expect a worse prediction performance among FE as two
of them (out of 6) do not estimate 15 (out of 49) coefficients of time-invariant covariates.

Of the three possible final classifications for MEPs (table 5), the one with higher level of discordance
compared with others, “credibility and precision are equally important and prediction is irrelevant”, is
supressed from analysis. Of the two remaining, it is opted for “credibility matters most, followed by
precision and then prediction”, as it weights the three criteria more equally3.

In all three multicriteria classifications, only spatial models were high-ranked, mainly by not assuming
incredible spatial independence (table 6). Even with a higher fraction of RE models exhibiting high
precision and prediction accuracy, all RE models were low-ranked. This was mainly due to incredibility
of the hypothesis of absence of correlation between covariates and the unobserved heterogeneity (see
table 7). In contrast, only two of the six FE models were low-ranked, while the others were equally
distributed in the medium and high ranks.

The HT model was low-ranked mainly due to the uncertainty regarding the definition of the set of
endogenous covariates. It is important to notice that the non-acknowledgment of such reason for
incredibility would not promote HT to the top level of the final rank due to the spatial independence
assumption.



2Approximately U$300/household/month in values of 2010.
3
 This seems subjective but it has a small effect as only 4 MPEs are differently classified in the two remaining final ranks
(OFE, PFE, SFEGK, SREGM, table 5).




                                                                                                                              10
It is clear that among credibility, precision and prediction classifications, the first had more influence on
the final classification, nearly by definition of the inter-criteria classification. In fact, only four MEPs
differ between the credibility and the final classification selected (table 5), and all of them obtained a
worse position in the latter.

5.2    Significance and sign of predictors

To determine which covariates predict and which do not predict Amazon fires, the individual significance,
assessed with t-test, is the criterion chosen. Consistency with MEP classification requires attaching
priority one to individual significance results delivered by high-ranked models. But this does not mean
that results of other MEPs should be discarded as they are useful for assessing robustness. To reconcile
these two principles, results from non-high-ranked MEPs are used as uncertainty indicators. More
precisely, a high percent of discordance between the two classes of MEPs is taken as an indication that
results from high-ranked MEPs are inconclusive at a tolerable uncertainty level.

This approach avoids taking high-ranked models as the definitive or true representation of data generating
process, which is imprudent owing both to the incipient knowledge on the subject and to the relevant
uncertainty in individual significance found in the data analysed (table 8). A percent of discordance above
the median for the discordance class is taken as intolerable. Three discordance classes are possible.
Regarding significance, estimates may be significant in high-ranked models and non-significant in other
models. Of course, the reverse possibility should be also accounted for, and, thus, there are two classes for
significance (second and fourth columns of table 8). Additionally, estimates with tolerable discordance in
significance may exhibit discordance in sign (third column of table 8).

A total of 20 of the 41 covariates, not accounting for state dummies (whose effects are unclear a priori),
could not have their contribution for the prediction of fires assessed due to high uncertainty in results
(they are highlighted in grey in table 8).

5.2.1 LUCC

Deforestation is a predictor with positive influence on fires, while pasture and primary forest had a
negative influence. Fallow had no influence. The significant predictors are intuitive. Deforestation is
conducted in virtually all cases with fire. Even being that some anecdotal evidence suggests that Amazon
ranchers of medium to small size keep relying on fire, there are reasons to believe that the activity repeals
the practice. First due to high flammability of pasture through which fire spreads rapidly, exposing
ranchers to a high risk of asset loss. Second, previous research reveals that the shift of ranchers to less
fire-dependent systems, based on agrochemicals, was already a relevant trend back in 2008-2012
(Pacheco and Pocchard-Chapuis, 2012). It must be highlighted that pasture had a significant and negative
estimate in all models. Primary forest is still seen by many farmers as a natural protection against fires as
its humidity is effectively able to extinguish fires depending on the degree of degradation and
fragmentation.

5.2.2 Institutions

Municipalities with larger extents of their territory occupied by indigenous lands registered a significantly
higher number of fire detections. A result found for 11 of the 13 models, with the two exceptional cases
being low-ranked models. But this cannot be understood as a proof that fire is more frequently used by
indigenous communities. In fact, considering only municipalities with indigenous lands, the number of



                                                                                                          11
fire detections is significantly higher in the outside of such lands compared with the inside, for the three
years (p-value < 0.001%). Additionally, the relationship between share of indigenous lands in municipal
area and fires in the outside of such lands seems to follow a curve with an “inverted-U” shape.
Municipalities with a share above zero but below 50% register significantly (p-value < 5%) more fires
than municipalities without indigenous lands. However, municipalities with an indigenous share of area
above 50% do not significantly differ, in “outside fires”, from those without indigenous lands.

Indigenous lands function, in practice, as protected areas as they cannot be used by non-indigenous
people and, thus, large scale deforesters are excluded (Nepstad et al., 2006). Considering this, the result
found is perhaps an imprecise indication that indigenous lands may crowd-out fire use pushing fire
density upward (fire/hectare) on the remaining area of municipalities4.

The fire crowd-out conjecture finds support in results of previous research, particularly those of Arima et
al. (2011) and Nepstad et al. (2006). But specific cases and field evidence suggest a rather complex
reality. In 2010, a drought year, a large scale fire occurred within the Xingú indigenous land at Mato
Grosso state (Anderson et al., 2015). The same was observed during the 2005 drought in many locations
of Acre state inhabited by traditional population5. The causes of fires remain unclear. One of the
hypotheses on the table is that indigenous communities are facing challenges to adapt their fire use
practices to the changing climate.

Anyhow, the result here found only shows that the municipal extent of indigenous lands predict fires. It
supports no conclusion regarding underlying causalities. This is left for future research with proper causal
inference methods.

5.2.3 Biophysical

Precipitation was not significantly correlated with fire, which may be due to imprecisions on the variables
which only capture annual totalizations in the whole area of municipalities. Temperature had a significant
role in predicting fires. Biannual standard deviations for one of the two subannual periods considered, the
months of January-June, was significant in all models. The trend in temperature from 2003-2012, a crude
proxy for the effect of climate change on temperature, was significant for the two subannual periods
considered. Results thus indicate that both the increase in the level and uncertainty (volatility) of
temperature may increase fires in Amazon, in line with recent climatologic and ecologic research
(Vasconcelos et al., 2013).

The share of highly clayey soils, which are more fertile (Farella et al., 2007), were negatively correlated
with fires. The reason for this result is unclear. Theoretically, land with higher potential profitability is
more favourable to the accumulation of capital which is the means to finance shift to fire-free agriculture.
But correlations of high clayey soils with fire-free soycrops and fallow-based agriculture are, respectively,
negative and positive, refuting the potential explanation.

6          Conclusion


4
 A precise indication would require a causal inference study for the impact of indigenous lands on fire detections but this is out
of the scope of the paper.
5
    Brown, Foster (University of Acre and Woods Hole Institute), personal communication.




                                                                                                                               12
Fire is one of the main threats for the conservation and development of Brazilian Amazon. Effective and
efficient policy needs precise information and the paper provided a first step by building a dataset which
is unparalleled in its geographical and temporal coverage.

The simple model selection procedure proposed is mainly targeted at forcing researchers to be clear about
(i) actual small sample performance of models, (ii) the credibility of hypothesis assuring the desired small
and large sample properties of estimators and (iii) the weight of the criteria (i) and (ii) in final decision.

Spatial fixed effects model proved best mainly for not relying on two assumptions refuted by the dataset,
being them (i) spatial independence and (ii) lack of correlation between covariates and the unobserved
heterogeneity.

Robustness was assessed with the discordance of models on significance and sign of coefficients. The
result revealed intolerable uncertainty for 20 of 41 covariates. Of the remaining potential predictors, 12
were non-significant and 9 significant. Among the latter, three capture LUCC, one captures institutions,
and the five remaining include temperature, soil texture and municipal area.

It was found evidence of indigenous lands crowding out fire as municipalities with larger extents of such
lands also had higher fire counts. And, additionally, in most municipalities with indigenous lands, fire was
concentrated in the outside of such lands. Both the level and volatility of temperature during January-June
had positive influence on fire counts, in accordance with multiple studies predicting intensification of
fires with climate change.

Multiple improvements of empirical analysis are possible and will be pursued in the near future. They
comprise addition of (i) more precise precipitation metrics that capture inter-annual variability and also
water deficit, (ii) cattle price, (iii) realistic transport cost metrics with intra-municipal variability, (iv)
updated maps of indigenous land with precise dates of creation and ratification, (v) the year of 2014, for
which LUCC data has become available during the final stage of paper preparation.




                                                                                                            13
                                   Table 2            Variables and their attributes

         Category                  Description          Short name            Unit        Mean      Std. Dev.        Range
                                  Number of fire
   Dependent variable                                       fires            Count         166.2      346.16       [0 : 7896]
                                   detections
          LUCC                    Deforestation             defor             km2          10.87       32.6        [0 : 730.7]
                                                                                   2
          LUCC                     Crops: soy                soy              km           57.19      274.08      [0 : 3619.9]
                               Crops: fallow (crops
          LUCC                     mixed with              fallow             km2          24.44      60.71        [0 : 924.7]
                                   ranching)
          LUCC                       Pasture               pasture            km2         460.93      854.43      [0 : 12949.2]
                                                                                   2
          LUCC                  Primary vegetation        pri_forest          km         4730.27    13359.99     [0 : 147943.4]
                                    Secondary
          LUCC                                            sec_forest          km2         307.72      434.36      [0 : 4399.8]
                                    vegetation
        Agriculture              Crop price index           prices          R$2008         0.53        0.24         [0 : 2.5]
                                 Value added by                             R$2008,
        Agriculture                                    v_added_prisec                      48.6       72.21       [0.9 : 829.6]
                                  primary sector                             million
                                                                              count
        Agriculture                 Cattle herd             herd           (thousand      110.33      157.72     [0.1 : 2143.8]
                                                                             heads)
                               Employment in beef
        Agriculture                                       emp_beef           count         47.75      191.47       [0 : 2032]
                                   industry
Economy and demography               GDP                     gpd            R$2008        309.28     1702.51     [6.8 : 43843.5]
                                                                              count
Economy and demography              Population               pop           (thousand       27.53      80.65       [1 : 1861.8]
                                                                             people)
                                                                         adimensional
Economy and demography               HDI 2010                hdi                           0.62        0.06        [0.4 : 0.8]
                                                                          (fractional)
                               Share of households
Economy and demography                                    pov_zero          percent        0.12        0.09         [0 : 0.6]
                                  without income
                                   Share of rural
                                households (RHH)
Economy and demography                                    povm025           percent        0.05        0.04         [0 : 0.2]
                                with income < 1/4
                                  minimum wage
                               Share of RHH with
Economy and demography         1/4MW <income <=         povM025m05          percent        0.08        0.05         [0 : 0.2]
                                      1/2MW
                               Share of RHH with
Economy and demography         1/2MW <income <=          povM05m1           percent        0.24        0.06         [0 : 0.4]
                                       1 MW
Economy and demography              Urban area              urban             km2          3.72       14.27        [0 : 317.3]
                                  Length of roads
        Transport                                           roads             km          119.96      138.52      [0 : 1069.6]
                               (paved or unpaved)
                                 Employees of the
                                    municipal
        Institutions                                    environment          count         8.51       28.64         [0 : 491]
                                  environmental
                                    department
        Institutions              Protected areas         protected           km2          9.32       41.03        [0 : 562.9]
                                                                                   2
        Institutions           Agrarian settlements      settlements          km           5.37       13.26        [0 : 166.4]
        Institutions           Indigenous lands        indigenous              ha         1333.12 5492.79          [0 : 77100.8]
Note: the sample contains 1977 observations capturing 659 municipalities of Legal Brazilian Amazon for three years, 2008,
2010 and 2012. Most of the 112 municipalities excluded were at least partially outside the reach of land use data.




                                                                                                                                14
                          Table 2           Variables and their attributes (cont.)

    Category                  Description              Short name      Unit     Mean      Std. Dev.       Range
                      Average annual precipitation:
   Biophysical                                           av_ppt       m/year     1.97       0.44         [0.9 : 3.5]
                        2005-2008 and 2009-2012
                         SD annual precipitation:
   Biophysical                                           sd_ppt       m/year     0.27       0.18          [0 : 1.2]
                        2005-2008 and 2009-2012
                          Precipitation: slope of
   Biophysical          deterministic trend, 2003-        td_ppt      m/year2     0         0.01        [-0.04:0.04]
                                   2012
                          Average temperature,
   Biophysical        january-june (JJ), current and   av_temp_JJ       K       301.85      2.81       [296.5 : 310]
                           previous year (CP)
   Biophysical            SD temperature, JJ, CP       sd_temp_JJ       K        3.05       2.28          [0 : 9.2]
                       Slope of deterministic trend
   Biophysical                                         td_temp_JJ     K/year     0.01       0.06         [0.3 : 0.2]
                      of temperature, 2003-2012, JJ
                      Average temperature, august-
   Biophysical          october (AO), current and      av_temp_AO       K       305.41      4.18      [298.5 : 317.6]
                            previous year (CP)
   Biophysical           SD temperature, AO, CP        sd_temp_AO       K        2.98        2.2          [0 : 8.8]
                       Slope of deterministic trend
   Biophysical          of temperature, 2003-2012,     td_temp_AO     K/year     0.15       0.08         [0.2 : 0.4]
                                     AO
                         Slope of the terrain, first
   Biophysical                                          slope_p25     percent    0.01       0.01        [0.002;0.04]
                                   quartile
                        Slope of the terrain, second
   Biophysical                                          slope_p50     percent    0.02       0.01          [0 : 0.1]
                                   quartile
                         Slope of the terrain, third
   Biophysical                                          slope_p75     percent    0.04       0.02          [0 : 0.2]
                                   quartile
                        Soil quality: share of sandy
   Biophysical        texture in municipal area with    soil_sandy    binary     0.17       0.21           [0,1]
                           identified soil texture
                         Soil quality: share of area
   Biophysical                                         soil_clayey    percent    0.25       0.23           [0 : 1]
                             with clayey texture
                         Soil quality: share of area
   Biophysical                                         soil_hclayey   percent    0.07       0.16           [0 : 1]
                         with high clayey texture
Additional controls            Municipal area             area         km2      7271.11   14448.02    [148 : 159533.3]
Additional controls             2010 dummy               d_2010       binary     0.33       0.47            [0,1]
Additional controls             2012 dummy               d_2012       binary     0.33       0.47            [0,1]
Additional controls     State dummies (nine states)       d_uf        binary     0.08       0.27            [0,1]




                                                                                                                       15
      Table 3              Classification of MEPs regarding credibility of hypothesis assuring statistical
                                                    performance

                                                          Known                       Known
Model/        Strict        No hetero.      Spatial                                                                           Position on
                                                          endog.        Equidisp.     spatial           #High    #Moder.
Hypothesis    exog.         bias            indepen.                                                                          rank
                                                          covar.                      struct.

OFE           Incredible    Not adopted     Incredible    Not adopted   Not adopted   Not adopted            2           0    Medium
OREC          Incredible    Incredible      Incredible    Not adopted   Not adopted   Not adopted            3           0    Low
ORE           Incredible    Incredible      Incredible    Not adopted   Not adopted   Not adopted            3           0    Low
OREM          Incredible    Incredible      Incredible    Not adopted   Not adopted   Not adopted            3           0    Low
HT            Incredible    Not adopted     Incredible    Incredible    Not adopted   Not adopted            3           0    Low
PFE           Incredible    Not adopted     Incredible    Not adopted   Moderate      Not adopted            2           1    Medium
PRE           Incredible    Incredible      Incredible    Not adopted   Moderate      Not adopted            3           1    Low
NFE           Incredible    Not adopted     Incredible    Not adopted   Not adopted   Not adopted            2           0    Medium
NRE           Incredible    Incredible      Incredible    Not adopted   Not adopted   Not adopted            3           0    Low
SFEMB         Incredible    Not adopted     Not adopted   Not adopted   Not adopted   Moderate               1           1    High
SFEMK         Incredible    Not adopted     Not adopted   Not adopted   Not adopted   Moderate               1           1    High
SFEGK         Incredible    Not adopted     Not adopted   Not adopted   Not adopted   Moderate               1           1    High
SREGM         Incredible    Incredible      Not adopted   Not adopted   Not adopted   Moderate               2           1    Medium



                    Table 4               Classification of MEPs regarding statistical performance

                                   Precision                                        Prediction
                                                  -3
             Model /        Average trace x 10                  Chi-square                       R2
             statistic                                                                                           Prediction
                              Value            Rank         Value            Rank      Value          Rank         rank

              OFE           8,369.46           Low           NA              NA         0.09          Low           NA
             OREC           3,734.02        Medium          732.30           Low        0.60          High        Medium
              ORE           2,346.51        Medium          845.86        Medium        0.60          High         High
             OREM           2,336.73           High       71,094.98          High       0.59          High         High
               HT           21,980.37          NA         26,721.64       Medium        0.26          Low         Medium
              PFE              0.13            Low         1,549.23          Low        0.07          Low          Low
              PRE              0.09         Medium        80,029.79          High       0.28      Medium           High
              NFE              0.09         Medium        39,494.89          High       0.09          Low         Medium
              NRE              0.04            High       28,757.73       Medium        0.35      Medium          Medium
             SFEMB          1,822.94        Medium         3,450.66          High       0.58      Medium           High
             SFEMK          1,822.94        Medium         3,450.66          High       0.58      Medium           High
             SFEGK          2,781.55           Low         2,305.15       Medium        0.53      Medium          Medium
           SREGM          1,724.14         High         3,288.63      Medium       0.55      Medium        Medium
Note: Only the classification on trace is decreasing in magnitude as the higher the trace, the lower the precision. “NA” stands
for “not applicable”.




                                                                                                                                       16
                          Table 5           From criteria-specific to overall classification

                         Intra-classification                         Final classification (after inter-classification)
                                                                                 Credibility and
                                                                                                           Credibility matters
    Model                                                        Only         precision are equally
                                                                                                           most, followed by
              Credibility      Precision     Prediction       credibility        important and
                                                                                                           precision and then
                                                               matters             prediction is
                                                                                                                prediction
                                                                                    irrelevant
      OFE       Medium          Low              NA            Medium                Medium                        Low
     OREC        Low           Medium           Medium           Low                 Medium                        Low
      ORE        Low           Medium            High            Low                 Medium                        Low
     OREM        Low            High             High            Low                 Medium                        Low
      HT         Low            NA              Medium           Low                   Low                         Low
      PFE       Medium          Low              Low           Medium                Medium                        Low
      PRE        Low           Medium            High            Low                 Medium                        Low
      NFE       Medium         Medium           Medium         Medium                Medium                      Medium
      NRE        Low            High            Medium           Low                 Medium                        Low
    SFEMB        High          Medium            High            High                  High                        High
    SFEMK        High          Medium            High            High                  High                        High
    SFEGK        High           Low             Medium           High                Medium                      Medium
    SREGM       Medium          High            Medium         Medium                  High                        Low
                            Table 6          Tests for the spatial independence hypothesis

                                      Test                        Statistic     P-value
                                      Moran's I: 2008a                     0 <0.01%
                                                          a
                                      Moran's I: 2010                      0 <0.01%
                                                          a
                                      Moran's I: 2012                      0 <0.01%
                                                  b
                                      λ: SFEMB                     -2.5999            0.9%
                                                   b
                                      λ: SFEMK                     -2.5999            0.9%
                                                  b
                                      λ: SFEGK                     -1.7986            7.2%
                                                   b
                                      λ: SREGM                     -0.8124           41.7%
a
  Moran’s I test from package spatgsa command (Pisati, 2001, p.21). It was applied to the dependent variable separately for
each year, based on the same spatial weights matrix used by spatial models (queen contiguity). b The parameter λ is the
coefficient of the spatial lagged dependent variable on spatial models and, thus, captures the effect of spatial autocorrelation on
fires.

      Table 7           Hausman tests for the hypothesis of absence of heterogeneity bias (RE vs FE)

                                                                  Chi-
                                      Models compared             squared          P-value
                                                                                   <0.001
                                      Ordinary RE vs FE                 465.89     %
                                      HT vs ordinary FE                  35.63        0.045
                                                                                   <0.001
                                      Poisson RE vs FE                      514    %
                                      Negative bin. RE vs                          <0.001
                                      FE                                324.05     %
Note: function “hausman” of STATA ® was employed in models ran without any correction for non-spherical disturbances,
except for the case of ordinary models for which efficient estimators were used (with the command option “sigmamore”).




                                                                                                                                17
  Table 8            Models (%) in which estimate status differ from high-ranked models and status of
                         covariates as predictors after accounting for uncertainty

                              High-ranked: sig,         High-ranked: sig +/-,   High-ranked: non-sig,    Is predictor
  Covariate / Status
                               others: non-sig             others: sig -/+           others: sig        (Y/N)? [sign]

          defor                      45%                        0%                      NA                 Y[+]
           soy                       73%                        NA                      NA               Unknown
         fallow                       NA                        NA                      0%                  N
         pasture                      9%                        0%                      NA                 Y[-]
       pri_forest                     9%                        0%                      NA                 Y[-]
       sec_forest                    55%                        NA                      NA               Unknown
          prices                      NA                        NA                      45%              Unknown
   v_added_prisec                    73%                        NA                      NA               Unknown
           herd                      36%                        27%                     NA               Unknown
       emp_beef                      55%                        NA                      NA               Unknown
           gpd                        NA                        NA                      18%                 N
           pop                        NA                        NA                      18%                 N
           hdi                        NA                        NA                      0%                  N
        pov_zero                     82%                        NA                      NA               Unknown
        povm025                       NA                        NA                      18%                 N
    povM025m05                        NA                        NA                      9%                  N
      povM05m1                       73%                        NA                      NA               Unknown
          urban                      73%                        NA                      NA               Unknown
          roads                      64%                        NA                      NA               Unknown
     environment                      NA                        NA                      9%                  N
        protected                     NA                        NA                      27%              Unknown
      settlements                     NA                        NA                      27%              Unknown
      indigenous                     18%                        0%                      NA                 Y[+]
         av_ppt                       NA                        NA                      0%                  N
         sd_ppt                       NA                        NA                      18%                 N
         td_ppt                       NA                        NA                      0%                  N
      av_temp_JJ                      NA                        NA                      36%              Unknown
      sd_temp_JJ                      0%                        0%                      NA                 Y[+]
      td_temp_JJ                     36%                        0%                      NA                 Y[+]
    av_temp_AO                        NA                        NA                      45%              Unknown
     sd_temp_AO                       NA                        NA                      73%              Unknown
     td_temp_AO                      36%                        0%                      NA                 Y[+]
       slope_p25                     73%                        NA                      NA               Unknown
       slope_p50                     64%                        NA                      NA               Unknown
       slope_p75                     73%                        NA                      NA               Unknown
       soil_sandy                     NA                        NA                      9%                  N
      soil_clayey                     NA                        NA                      0%                  N
     soil_hclayey                    36%                        0%                      NA                 Y[-]
           area                      27%                        0%                      NA                 Y[+]
         d_2010                       NA                        NA                      64%              Unknown
         d_2012                      27%                        9%                      NA               Unknown
Note: detailed results are omitted due to space limitations.




                                                                                                                    18
7      References

Anderson, L. O., Aragão, L. E., Gloor, M., Arai, E., Adami, M., Saatchi, S. S., ... & Duarte, V. (2015).
Disentangling the contribution of multiple land covers to fire-mediated carbon emissions in Amazonia
during the 2010 drought. Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 29(10), 1739-1753.
Anselin, L., & Bera, A. K. (1998). Spatial dependence in linear regression models with an introduction to
spatial econometrics. Statistics Textbooks and Monographs, 155, 237-290.
Arima, E. Y., Richards, P., Walker, R., Caldas, M. M., 2011. Statistical confirmation of indirect land use
change in the Brazilian Amazon. Environmental Research Letters, 6(2), 024010.

Baltagi, B. (2008). Econometric analysis of panel data. John Wiley & Sons.
Barlow, J., Lennox, G. D., Ferreira, J., Berenguer, E., Lees, A. C., Mac Nally, R., ... & Parry, L. (2016).
Anthropogenic disturbance in tropical forests can double biodiversity loss from deforestation. Nature,
535(7610), 144-147.
Betts, R. A., Malhi, Y., & Roberts, J. T. (2008). The future of the Amazon: new perspectives from climate,
ecosystem and social sciences. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B: Biological
Sciences, 363(1498), 1729-1735.
Bowman, M. S., Amacher, G. S.,Merry, F. D., 2008. Fire use and prevention by traditional households in
the Brazilian Amazon. Ecological Economics 67 (2008) 117 – 130.
Cameron, A. C., & Trivedi, P. K. (2009). Microeconometrics using stata (Vol. 5). College Station, TX:
Stata press.

Cano-Crespo, A., Oliveira, P. J., Boit, A., Cardoso, M., & Thonicke, K. (2015). Forest edge burning in the
Brazilian Amazon promoted by escaping fires from managed pastures. Journal of Geophysical Research:
Biogeosciences, 120(10), 2095-2107.
Cardoso, M. F., Hurtt, G. C.,Moore, B., Nobre, C. A., & Prins, E. M. (2003). Projecting future fire activity
in Amazonia. Global Change Biology, 9(5), 656-669.
Carmenta, R., Vermeylen, S., Parry, L., & Barlow, J. (2013). Shifting cultivation and fire policy: insights
from the Brazilian Amazon. Human ecology, 41(4), 603-614.
Farella, N., Davidson, R., Lucotte, M., & Daigle, S. (2007). Nutrient and mercury variations in soils from
family farms of the Tapajós region (Brazilian Amazon): recommendations for better farming. Agriculture,
ecosystems & environment, 120(2), 449-462.
Godar, J., Gardner, T. A., Tizado, E. J., & Pacheco, P., 2014. Actor-specific contributions to the
deforestation slowdown in the Brazilian Amazon. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
111.43 (2014): 15591-15596.
Hargrave, J., & Kis-Katos, K. (2013). Economic causes of deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon: a panel
data analysis for the 2000s. Environmental and Resource Economics, 54(4), 471-494.
Hausman, J. A., & Taylor, W. E. (1981). Panel data and unobservable individual effects. Econometrica:
Journal of the Econometric Society, 1377-1398.

Kato, M. D. S., Kato, O. R., Denich, M., & Vlek, P. L. (1999). Fire-free alternatives to slash-and-burn for
shifting cultivation in the eastern Amazon region: the role of fertilizers. Field crops research, 62(2), 225-
237.




                                                                                                          19
Leonel, M. (2000). O uso do fogo: o manejo indígena e a piromania da monocultura. Estudos Avançados,
14(40), 231-250.
LeSage,J., Pace, R. K., 2009. Introduction to Spatial Econometrics. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Manski, C. F. (2003). Partial identification of probability distributions. Springer Science & Business
Media.
Marchand, S. (2012). The relationship between technical efficiency in agriculture and deforestation in the
Brazilian Amazon. Ecological Economics, 77, 166-175.#
Marengo, J. A., Tomasella, J., Alves, L. M., Soares, W. R., & Rodriguez, D. A. (2011). The drought of
2010 in the context of historical droughts in the Amazon region. Geophysical Research Letters, 38(12).
Millo, G., & Piras, G. (2012). splm: Spatial panel data models in R. Journal of Statistical Software, 47(1),
1-38.
Nepstad, D., Schwartzman, S., Bamberger, B., Santilli, M., Ray, D., Schlesinger, P., ... & Rolla, A. (2006).
Inhibition of Amazon deforestation and fire by parks and indigenous lands. Conservation Biology, 20(1),
65-73.
Nepstad, D. C., AG Alencar, A. A., Schwartzman, S. C., J Nepstad, D. C., Schwartzman, S.P. (1999).
Flames in the rain forest: origins, impacts and alternatives to Amazonian fires (No. 634.9618 N442). Pilot
Program to Conserve the Brazilian Rain Forest, Brasilia (Brasil).
Pacheco, P., & Poccard-Chapuis, R. (2012). The complex evolution of cattle ranching development amid
market integration and policy shifts in the Brazilian Amazon. Annals of the Association of American
Geographers, 102(6), 1366-1390.
Pisati, M. (2001). sg162: tools for spatial data analysis. Stata Technical Bulletin, 60, 21-37.
Stakhovych, S., & Bijmolt, T. H. (2009). Specification of spatial models: A simulation study on weights
matrices. Papers in Regional Science, 88(2), 389-408.
Vasconcelos, S. S., Fearnside, P. M., de Alencastro Graça, P. M. L., Dias, D. V., & Correia, F. W. S., 2013.
Variability of vegetation fires with rain and deforestation in Brazil's state of Amazonas. Remote Sensing
of Environment, 136, 199-209.
Wooldridge Jeffrey, M. (2002). Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. Cambridge, MA:
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.




                                                                                                         20
