                                   Prestige Clubs

                               Richard C. Cornes
         Research School of Economics, The Australian National University
         Canberra, ACT 0200, Australia. E-mail: richard.cornes@anu.edu.au

                                         and

                              Emilson C. D. Silva
    Department of Marketing, Business Economics & Law, University of Alberta
         Edmonton, AB, T6G 2R6, Canada. E-mail: emilson@ualberta.ca

                                    July 11, 2013

                                     ABSTRACT
Numerous non-profit organizations that contribute to collective goods also provide
prestige to their members. Some of these institutions function as prestige clubs, with
prestige levels and member contributions working as club goods and membership
fees, respectively. We investigate the endogenous formation of prestige clubs. We
show that the competitive equilibrium features prestige clubs and that competing club
managers engage in a futile race for institutional aggrandizement. The competition,
however, yields coordination benefits produced by internalization of positive and
negative externalities within clubs. The competitive equilibrium is inefficient because
clubs neglect external benefits and costs associated with their members’ contributions.

                                      RESUMO
Numerosas organizações que produzem bens coletivos também geram prestigio aos
seus associados. Algumas destas organizações funcionam como clubes de prestigio,
com os níveis de prestigio e contribuições de seus associados funcionando como bens
de clube e taxas de associados, respectivamente. Investigamos a formação endógena
de clubes de prestigio. Demonstramos que o equilíbrio competitivo apresenta clubes
de prestigio e que os gerentes destes clubes se engajam em uma competição fútil para
aumentar o status da instituição. A competição, entretanto, gera benefícios de
coordenação produzidos por internalização de externalidades positivas e negativas
dentro dos clubes. A ineficiência do equilíbrio competitivo se deve ao fato de que os
clubes ignoram os benefícios e custos externos relacionados as contribuições de seus
associados.

JEL: D02, D62, D64, D71, H41

Keywords: Prestige; clubs; non-profit organizations; charities; public goods.

Palavras-chave: Prestigio, clubes; organizações sem fins lucrativos; instituições de
caridade; bens públicos.

Area 8: Microeconomia, Métodos Quantitativos e Finanças.
I.       Introduction
Numerous non-profit organizations that contribute to one or more collective goods
also provide prestige to their members or affiliates. Several charities group their
members into multiple prestige categories and publicize their members’ contributions.
Other good examples are orchestras, public radios, schools, universities and various
religious organizations.
         The prestige level enjoyed by a contributor may be a function of personal and
institutional components. At the personal level, an individual may obtain prestige
when her contribution is compared with other individual contributions; namely, it may
depend on how important her contribution is relative to the contribution of others. At
the institutional level, an individual may derive prestige by associating with a
prestigious organization. Members of the same organization may obtain equivalent
prestige levels if they are grouped in the same category of contributors or belong to
the same team of contributors (e.g., a department in a given university) or may obtain
different prestige levels if they are grouped in different categories or teams. The
prestige level enjoyed by the institution may also depend on how important it is its
overall contribution to the collective good relative to the contributions of peer
organizations. A student enjoys prestige for his own accomplishments in exams and
also from the status enjoyed by his school, and the school’s ranking may in part be
determined by its relative importance in producing collective goods such as
knowledge and civil skills. A scholar earns prestige for her distinguished research
output but also for her affiliation with a reputable university, and the latter’s
reputation is in part a function of its relative contribution to the production and
dissemination of scientific knowledge. A philanthropist enjoys prestige for the
importance of his contribution relative to the contribution of others to a charitable
cause, such as poverty alleviation, but also because of the relative standing of the
charity of which he is a member, and the prestige enjoyed by the charity is partly due
to its relative contribution to the charitable cause.
         Organizations that promote prestige for their members seem to function as
competitive prestige clubs. They compete for members who demand prestige services
and they compete among themselves to advance their own prestige levels. The
prestige levels offered to members of such institutions have, in many instances, the
key characteristics of club goods, since members are often grouped into excludable
prestige categories of limited size. The contributions of members who enjoy identical
prestige levels also tend to be identical. Charities that supply multiple prestige
categories provide a good example. Charity members who belong to a particular
prestige category often contribute identical amounts and enjoy the same prestige level.
         In this paper, we build a simple model to investigate the incentives for the
formation of competitive prestige clubs and examine their key behavioral features. In
our economy, there are two types of consumers who enjoy the benefits of the
provision of a collective good and the consumption of a composite private good, the
economy’s numeraire good. One type of consumer also derives utility from prestige,
and prestige can be produced from individual and institutional contributions to the
collective good. The individual component of prestige produced by one’s contribution
is modeled as the difference between the individual contribution and the economy’s
average of individual contributions. Similarly, the institutional component of prestige




                                          1
produced by one’s club is modeled as the difference between the club’s contribution
amount and the economy’s average of club contributions.
         As in a standard public good’s model, an individual’s contribution to the
collective good benefits every other individual in the economy because everyone
derives positive utility from consumption of the collective good. Unlike a standard
public good’s model, the contribution made by an individual or a club increases the
individual or institutional average contribution level and this results in a loss of
prestige for each prestige lover. In our model, therefore, there are positive and
negative effects associated with expansions in one’s contribution to the collective
good.
         Prestige clubs are formed in an attempt to promote the collective good and
prestige levels for their members by internalizing positive and negative externalities
associated with expansions in contributions and by supplying prestige lovers with an
institutional prestige component. Prestige clubs compete for members and among
themselves. As a result, each club attempts to maximize the utility of its
representative member.
         We show that prestige clubs emerge in the competitive equilibrium. Each club
internalizes positive and negative externalities associated with its members’
contributions to the collective good, but neglects the positive and negative effects of
its members’ contributions on other individuals in the economy. The internalization of
externalities within clubs generate coordination benefits and such benefits produce an
increase in the overall provision level of the collective good relative to the level one
would observe in an economy without prestige clubs. Each club’s membership size is
limited by increasing crowding costs. The optimal membership size is the level that
maximizes a club’s contribution to the collective good, given the individual
contribution made by each of its members. We also show that the race for institutional
aggrandizement is futile because clubs are identical in equilibrium. They make
identical contributions to the collective good and thus enjoy no institutional prestige.
         We also show that the competitive equilibrium is inefficient because prestige
clubs do not fully internalize positive and negative externalities associated with their
members’ contributions to the collective good and because prestige clubs are of
inefficient size. The efficient size is either zero, in which case the economy should not
have any prestige club at all, or the entire population of prestige lovers, in which case
the economy should feature one prestige club only.
         This paper contributes to two strands of the literature, the literature on
voluntary contributions to impure public goods and the literature on clubs. Starting
with the seminal contribution by Cornes and Sandler (1984), the literature on
voluntary contributions to impure public goods has grown enormously. Noteworthy
contributions have examined the comparative static properties of such models (see,
e.g., Cornes and Sandler (1994)), the roles played by warm glow in alleviating free
riding incentives and the crowding out between public and private contributions to a
collective good (see, e.g., Andreoni (1989), Andreoni (1990) and Andreoni and Payne
(2003)), the effects of prestige incentives on contributions to charities or other
prestigious organizations (see, e.g., Harbaugh (1998a), Harbaugh (1998b) and Glazer
and Konrad (1996)) and the effects of leadership giving in charitable funding (see,




                                           2
e.g., Andreoni (2006a)).1 Our paper contributes to this literature in that it models
prestige production as a function of relative individual and group contributions to the
collective good, prestigious organizations as clubs, and examines the endogenous
formation of such prestige clubs and some of their key features,
        The literature on clubs is also voluminous. The seminal contribution is
Buchanan (1965). Of the many issues addressed by this literature, some noteworthy
ones are those related to the benefits of forming small groups (see, e.g. Buchanan
(1965) and Berglas (1976)), those related to the existence of a competitive
equilibrium and the efficiency of such an equilibrium whenever it is shown to exist
(see, e.g., Ellickson et al (1999), Ellickson et al (2001), Hammond, Kaneko and
Wooders (1989), Page and Wooders (2008), Scotchmer (1985a), Scotchmer (1985b),
Scotchmer (2005), Scotchmer and Wooders (1987), Wooders (1978), Wooders (1980)
and Wooders (1994)), those related to the efficiency of heterogeneous vis-à-vis
homogeneous clubs (see, e.g., Brueckner and Lee (1989) and Sandler and Tschirhart
(1984)) and those related to the degree of exclusion implemented by clubs (see, e.g.
Hesley and Strange (1991), Oakland (1972), Silva and Kahn (1993) and Silva
(1997)).2 Our main contributions to this literature are that: (i) we model clubs as
providers of both club goods and contributions to a nonexcludable and nonrivalrous
collective good; (ii) we consider the potential interactions between clubs and
individual contributors; and (iii) we examine the role that interclub externalities play
on the efficiency of the competitive equilibrium.
        This paper is organized as follows. The next section introduces the basic
model. Section III derives the competitive equilibrium for the economy. Section IV
describes the relevant Pareto efficient allocations and compares them with the
competitive equilibrium in order to illustrate the sources of inefficiency of the latter.
Section V concludes.

II.     Basic Model
Consider an economy with two types of individuals, whom we shall refer as “purists”
and “prestige lovers”. There are N consumers of each type, where N is large. Purists
are consumers of type a and prestige lovers are consumers of type l . The populations
of purists and prestige lovers are indexed by i , i = 1,..., N .
        There are three goods, a numeraire good, a collective good and prestige. Each
type of consumer is endowed with w > 0 units of a numeraire good. Purists do not
derive utility from prestige. If a purist i consumes xia units of the numeraire good and
enjoys Q units of the collective good, his utility is U ( xia , Q ) . If a prestige lover i
consumes xil units of the numeraire good and enjoys Q units of the collective good
and pil units of prestige, his utility is U ( xil , Q ) + Bpil , where B > 0 .3 We assume that U


1
  See Andreoni (2006b) for a survey of works related to philanthropy and Cornes and Sandler (1986)
for references on the broader theme of voluntary contributions to impure public goods.
2
    See Scotchmer (2008) for a recent survey of the literature on clubs.
3
 Note that these individuals have purist incentives to contribute to the collective good, but are called
prestige lovers in order to distinguish them from the population of purists.




                                                      3
is increasing in each argument, twice continuously differentiable, strictly
quasiconcave and homothetic.4 The collective good is nonexcludable and
nonrivalrous.
            The prestige level enjoyed by prestige lover i depends on whether he
contributes to the collective good directly or channels his contribution through an
intermediary institution, a prestige club. If he is an independent contributor, the
prestige level he enjoys by contributing an amount zil to the collective good is
 pil = zil − Q 2 N . If he contributes the same amount through a prestige club j , his
prestige level is pil = zil + I j − Q 2N , where I j is the institutional component of the
prestige production function. To keep things simple and focus our attention on the
incentives promoted by the prestige function to the formation of clubs, we assume that
there is common knowledge about individual and institutional contributions to the
collective good and that the information transmission mechanism is without any cost.5
                                                                                     nj
          An active prestige club j contains n j > 1 members. Let Y j ≡ ∑ zτl − C ( n j ) denote
                                                                                     τ =1

the contribution to the collective good made by club j , where C ( n j ) is the cost of
running the club, which includes costs of operation and exclusion. We assume that C
satisfies the following properties: C (1) = 0 , Cn ( n ) > 0 and Cnn ( n) > 0 for n j ∈ [1, N ] . We
also assume that the average cost function, C ( n ) n , increases at a nondecreasing rate
in n j for n j ∈ [1, N ] .6 We define the institutional prestige level enjoyed by every
                                                                      ⎛   J
                                                                               ⎞
individual who joins club j as I j ≡ Yj − Yˆ , where Yˆ ≡ ⎜ ∑ Yk ⎟ J is the average of
                                                                      ⎝ k =1   ⎠
contribution levels made by prestige clubs. Thus, in an economy with prestige clubs,
the prestige level enjoyed by a club member is a function of how large his
contribution is relative to the average of individual contributions and how large the
contribution made by his club is relative to the average of institutional contributions.

III.   Competitive Equilibrium
We start by considering a setting in which the economy does not feature prestige
clubs. The equilibrium in this hypothetical setting is a candidate for the competitive
4
  These properties are sufficient for the existence and uniqueness of equilibrium in a voluntary
contributions game (see, e.g., Bergstrom et al (1986), Cornes and Hartley (2005) and Cornes and
Hartley (2007)). An implication of the general analysis of Cornes and Hartley (2005) is that the
standard assumed properties of the component of preferences represented by the function U are
sufficient to ensure the existence of a unique equilibrium in a voluntary contributions game without
prestige clubs, even though prestige lovers have the extra linear term in their utility function.
5
  If we assumed that individuals and organization incurred costs of advertising their contributions, as it
may seem natural, one could generate an additional motivation for the formation of clubs if one
assumed that the advertising cost function were sub-additive on the number of individual contribution
levels advertised. We decided to neglect advertising costs in order to demonstrate that the key
characteristics of the prestige function, per se, provide incentives for the formation of clubs.

6
                                                                                   ( )      (   )
    An example of a cost function that satisfies all the assumptions is C n j = n j n j − 1 2 . The
requirement that the average cost function increases at a nondecreasing rate rules out functions such as
    ( ) (       )
C n j = n2j − 1 2 .




                                                    4
equilibrium. Purists and prestige lovers play a standard voluntary contributions game,
                          N
where Q = ∑ ( zia + zil ) . A purist i
                          i =1
                                                                 chooses nonnegative         {x , z }
                                                                                               a
                                                                                               i
                                                                                                   a
                                                                                                   i
                                                                                                            to maximize
                                                                               N                        N

   (
U xia , zia + Z −ai + Z l        )   subject to xia + zia = w , taking Z −ai ≡ ∑ zαa and Z l ≡ ∑ zil as given.
                                                                              α ≠i                      i =1

Letting x = w − z and assuming that z < w , the Kuhn-Tucker conditions are
                  a
                  i
                                 a
                                 i
                                                             a
                                                             i




       ( (                       )      (               ))               (           )   (
  zia −U x w − zia , Q + U Q w − zia , Q = 0, zia ≥ 0, − U x w − zia , Q + U Q w − zia , Q ≤ 0 .        )           (1)

Close inspection of these conditions reveals that zia = z a , ∀i in the population of
purists. This implies that Z a = Nz a .
        A prestige lover i chooses nonnegative {xil , pil , zil } to maximize U ( xil , Q ) + Bpil
                                                                                                            N
subject to xil + zil = w and pil = zil − ( zil + Z a + Z −l i ) 2N , taking Z a and Z −l i ≡ ∑ zαl as given.
                                                                                                        α ≠i

Letting xil = w − zil and assuming that 0 < zil < w in the candidate equilibrium, the first
order condition is

              (                  )      (           )
  2 N ⎡U Q w − zil , Q − U x w − zil , Q ⎤ + ( 2 N − 1) B = 0 .
      ⎣                                  ⎦
                                                                                                                    (2)

Since equation (2) holds for each i in the population of prestige lovers, zil = z l for
each i in this population. This implies that Z l = Nz l . Note that prestige lovers may be
the sole providers of the collective good if the benefit from prestige, B , is sufficiently
large.
        In order to focus our attention on contribution incentives produced by the
prestige function, we shall consider situations in which it is optimal for purists to free
ride. Note that if UQ ( w, Nz l ) − U x ( w, Nz l ) < 0 in the equilibrium candidate, we obtain
za = 0       from conditions (1). Under these circumstances, the first order condition for
each i       in the population of prestige lovers can be written as follows:

       (
  U Q x l , Nz l) + ⎛ 2 N − 1 ⎞ B = 1.                                                                              (3)
  Ux   ( x , Nz ) ⎜⎝ 2 N ⎟⎠ U ( x , Nz )
         l            l
                                            x
                                                l       l




Equation (3) informs us that each prestige lover accounts for the contribution’s pure
and impure benefits when he decides how much to contribute. The first fraction on the
left hand side is the pure marginal benefit. This benefit is the prestige lover’s marginal
rate of substitution between the collective good and the numeraire good. The second
fraction is the impure marginal benefit. It is his marginal rate of substitution between
prestige and the numeraire good. Each prestige lover ignores the negative prestige
externality that he imposes on every other prestige lover when he contributes to the
collective good. Holding all other contributions constant, his contribution raises the
average level of individual contributions, reducing prestige for each other individual




                                                                   5
at a rate of 1 2N . In the equilibrium candidate, each prestige lover enjoys z l 2 units of
prestige, the average level of individual contributions.7
         To illustrate that purists find it optimal to free ride if prestige lovers derive a
sufficiently large benefit from prestige, we consider an example. Let U ( xia , Q ) ≡ xia Q ,
                                                                                 N
                                                                 Q
    (    )
U xil , Q + Bpil ≡ xil Q + Bpil ,    Nw ≥ B ≥ w , pil = zil −
                                                                2N
                                                                   ,      Q = ∑ zia + zil ,
                                                                                 i =1
                                                                                        (          )       N ≥ 2.     Letting
xia = w − zia and assuming that zia < w , the Kuhn-Tucker conditions for the problem
faced by a purist i are zia ( w − Q − zia ) = 0, zia ≥ 0, w − Q − zia ≤ 0 , i = 1,..., N . Note that
 zia = z a ∀i in the population of purists in the candidate equilibrium. It also follows that
if Q ≥ w in the candidate equilibrium, z a = 0 . We demonstrate below that this is the
case.
           Letting xil = w − zil and assuming that 0 < zil < w in the candidate equilibrium, we
obtain 2Nzil = 2N ( w − Q) + ( 2N −1) B from the first order condition for the problem
solved by prestige lover i , i = 1,..., N . Since this first order condition holds for each
prestige lover i , zil = z l ∀i in the population of prestige lovers. Thus, Nz l = Z l . Since
                                     { (          )                }
Q = Z a + Z l , we have Z l = 2 N w − Z a + ( 2 N − 1) B 2 ( N + 1) . If z a = 0 , we have Z a = 0
and Q = Z l = {2 Nw + ( 2 N − 1) B} 2 ( N + 1) .
        We need to show that Q ≥ w and that w > z l . If Q ≥ w , we have ( 2N −1) B ≥ 2w .
Now note that ( 2N −1) B ≥ ( 2N −1) w because B ≥ w and that ( 2N −1) w > 2w because
N ≥ 2 . Hence, Q > w and z a = 0 , as we have assumed. Note that w > z l if w > Q N or
Nw > Q . This holds because
                                     2 Nw + ( 2 N − 1) Nw       2 Nw + ( 2 N − 1) B
                              Nw >                          ≥                               = Q.
                                           2 ( N + 1)               2 ( N + 1)
            Since the prestige function informs us that the amount of prestige received by
any prestige lover may increase if this individual associates with others, prestige clubs
may form to attract prestige lovers. We assume that the population of prestige lovers
is sufficiently large and that marginal crowding costs rise sufficiently quickly so that
in the equilibrium candidate the club industry features multiple clubs.
            Let J be the number of potential prestige clubs. These clubs are indexed by j ,
 j = 1,..., J . Each club competes for members. Assuming potential entry in the club
industry, every active club must attempt to maximize the utility of a representative
member subject to feasibility and sustainability constraints. The feasibility constraint
is the requirement that the total contribution amount raised by the club is at least as
large as the total cost of running the club.
            A club is sustainable if it induces individuals to join and provides individual
and group incentives for club members to stay. Since an individual’s decision of
whether or not to join a club is a participation decision and the decision of a club

7
  It is straightforward to show that prestige lovers enjoy positive prestige levels in an equilibrium
candidate in which each purist contributes a positive amount to the collective good because the extra
prestige benefit derived by prestige lovers provide them with an incentive to make a larger
contribution. The prestige level enjoyed by each prestige lover in such a case is z l − z a            (     )   2.




                                                        6
member of whether or not to exit the club is a defecting decision, the offer made by a
feasible and sustainable club must satisfy both participation and no-defection
constraints. Prestige clubs emerge in the competitive equilibrium if and only if they
are feasible and sustainable.
          In general, the participation and no-defection constraints differ because the
utility level one gets from not joining a club is typically not the same as the utility
level one obtains from defecting. The utility of not joining is the payoff an
independent contributor obtains in a voluntary contributions game in which the other
players may be independent contributors or members of clubs. The independent
contributor makes his contribution taking as given the other players’ choices of
whether or not to join clubs and their subsequent contributions.
          To formally derive the utility of not joining a club, let Q−i ≡ Q − zil denote the
total amount contributed to the collective good in the economy excluding the
contribution made by an independent contributor i . Let Vi (Q−i ) be the (indirect) utility
level obtained by an independent contributor i . This utility level is defined as
          {                                       (                    )}
Vi (Q−i ) ≡ Max z ∈[0, w]U ( w − zil , zil + Q−i ) + B zil − ( zil + Q−i ) 2 N .
                  l
                  i


        We now examine an individual’s utility level associated with exiting a club.
Let us suppose that each defector becomes an independent contributor. Among other
things, the utility of defection depends on whether or not the individual is the first
defector. For the first defector, the utility of defection is the payoff such an individual
obtains from leaving his club and making an independent contribution, given the
actions of his ex-club members and other contributors, who may be members of other
clubs or independent contributors. For every other member of a club which has
already experienced defection, the utility of defection is the payoff the individual
obtains from leaving the club and making an independent contribution, knowing how
many individuals have already defected, given the actions of his ex-club members, the
defectors and other contributors, who may be members of other clubs or independent
contributors. From the second defector on, the optimal defecting strategy is derived in
an environment where the defecting player knows how many individuals have
previously defected. The utility of defection for each subsequent defector may
increase or decrease with the number of individuals who have already defected. There
may be economies or diseconomies of scale in defection.
        To formally derive a club member’s utility of defection, we must first consider
the offer made by a particular club j . Each member of club j pays the same
“membership fee,” z j . Hence, zil = z j for every individual i who belongs to club j .
This implies that xil = x j for every member of club j because each individual has the
same income. The club also offers the same amount of “club good,” p j , to each of its
members. The amount of club good supplied is

      ⎛                ( )
             n j z j − C n j + Q− j   ⎞ ⎛                          ( )
                                                           n z − C n j + Y− j   ⎞
 pj = ⎜ zj −
      ⎜                 2N            ⎟ ⎜
                                                   ( )
                                      ⎟ + ⎜ nj z j − C nj − j j
                                                                  J
                                                                                ⎟,
                                                                                ⎟
                                                                                        (4)
      ⎝                               ⎠ ⎝                                       ⎠




                                                         7
                                                           J
where Q− j ≡ Q − Y j and Y− j ≡ ∑ ⎡⎣nχ zχ − C ( nχ )⎤⎦ . If there are no independent contributors,
                                                       χ≠ j

Q− j = Y− j . Finally, the club’s offer must be feasible. Feasibility requires that total
collections are at least as large as the club’s total cost

 nj z j ≥ C nj . ( )                                                                                                              (5)

             Let e j ∈ ⎡⎣0, n j ⎤⎦ denote the number of individuals who exit club j . Define the
number of individuals who stay in club j as s j ≡ n j − e j . Thus, s j ∈ ⎡⎣1, n j ⎤⎦ . When s j
individuals stay, club j contributes Y ( s j , z j ) = s j z j − C ( s j ) units to the collective good.
                     ej
Let Z lD ≡ ∑ zδl denote the total amount contributed to the collective good by the
                     δ =1

defectors. These definitions enable us to rewrite Q− j as Q− j ≡ Q − Y ( s j , z j ) − Z lD . Now,
let Q−( j + i ) ≡ Q− j − zil be the amount of collective good provided in the economy
excluding the contributions made by club j and by an independent contributor i . The
payoff a club member i obtains from exiting club j when e j individuals have already
exited the club is
                 (               )i
                                     {                     (                    ) ( (
             Vi Q−( j +i ) ≡ Max zl ∈[0, w]U w − zil , zil + Q−( j +i ) + B zil − zil + Q−( j +i )            ) 2N )} .
        Assuming an interior solution to the problem faced by a club member i who
exits club j after e j individuals have already exited, we have the following first order
condition:


       ⎣         (                             )           (
 4 N 2 ⎢⎡UQ w − zil , zil + Q−( j +i ) − U x w − zil , zil + Q−( j +i ) ⎥⎤ + ( 2 N − 1) B ⎡( 2 N − 1) zil − Q−( j +i ) ⎤ = 0 .
                                                                        ⎦       )         ⎣                            ⎦
                                                                                                                                  (6)

Let zil ( e j ) be defined implicitly by equation (6). A straightforward exercise in
comparative statics yields

  dzil
       =
             (
         z j − Cn s j U QQ  ( )) (
                            l
                              − U xQ
                                  l

                                     .
                                                       )
                                                                                                                                  (7)
  de j       U xxl + U QQ
                       l
                          − 2U xQ
                               l




Equation (7) informs us that the optimal contribution of a defecting club member rises
with the number of individuals who have previously defected if z j > Cn ( s j ) .We show
below that this inequality holds in the equilibrium candidate for e j > 0 . Now, note that


      (
dVi Q−( j +i )   ) = dV (Q ( ) )                                   (
                                               dQ−( j +i ) dY s j , z j   ) = − ⎛U
                                     − j +i                                                   B ⎞
                                                                                                  (         ( ))
                             i
                                                                                ⎜
                                                                                     l
                                                                                         −          z j − Cn s j                 (8a)
                                                   (           )                             2 N ⎟⎠
                                                                                     Q
      de j                  dQ−( j +i )       dY s j , z j         de j         ⎝
and




                                                                            8
                   (
           d 2Vi Q−( j + i )   )=                              ⎛ Ul Ul − Ul 2
                                                                             ( )         ⎞
                                       (            ( ))       ⎜ xx QQ                   ⎟ − ⎛U l − B ⎞ C s .
                                                                                                                            ( )
                                                           2                      xQ
                                           z j − Cn s j                                                                                       (8b)
                   de2j                                        ⎜⎜ U xxl + U QQ
                                                                            l
                                                                               − 2U xQ
                                                                                     l   ⎟⎟ ⎜⎝ Q 2 N ⎟⎠ nn j
                                                                ⎝                         ⎠

           Suppose that z j > Cn ( s j ) for e j > 0 (i.e., s j < n j . ). If UQl ( w − zil , Q ) > B 2 N for
zil ∈ [0, w] and Q ∈[0, Nw] , equation (8a) yields dVi Q−( j +i )                           ( ) de < 0 for e > 0 . If U is
                                                                                                                j                     j


strictly concave, equation (8b) implies that                                             d V (Q ( ) ) de < 0 for e > 0 . When
                                                                                          2
                                                                                              i    − j +i
                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                    j                     j


      (
dVi Q−( j +i )   ) de   j   < 0 for e j > 0 , there are diseconomies of scale in defection. Defection
becomes less attractive the larger it is the number of individuals who have previously
defected. If, on the other hand, we have z j > Cn ( s j ) for e j > 0 and UQl ( w − zil , Q ) < B 2 N
                                                                                 (
for zil ∈ [0, w] and Q ∈[0, Nw] , we obtain dVi Q−( j +i ) de j > 0 for e j > 0 from equation )
(8a). In this case, there are economies of scale in defection. Of course, it is also
possible that for some interval of e j values we observe diseconomies of scale while
for some other interval of e j values we observe economies of scale in defection.
                   (           )
           If Vi Q−( j +i ) is monotonically decreasing (increasing) in e j , the payoff received
by the first defector is the largest (lowest) and the payoff enjoyed by the last defector
is the lowest (largest) in the set of defection payoffs. If Vi Q−( j +i ) is not monotonic in               (               )
e j , there will be at least one value of e j that maximizes Vi Q−( j +i ) . In any event,                              (         )
                       {                        (         )}
letting Vi M ≡ Max e ∈⎡0,n ⎤Vi Q−( j +i ) , the no-defection constraints faced by any club can
                               j   ⎣       j⎦


be expressed in terms of one inequality stating that the utility level offered by the club
is at least as high as Vi M .
         We are now ready to consider the problem faced by the manager of club j .
Since Q = n j z j − C ( n j ) + Q− j , the manager of club j chooses {n j , p j , x j , z j } to maximize
  (                    ( )             )                                    (                     ( )
U x j , n j z j − C n j + Q− j + Bp j subject to U x j , n j z j − C n j + Q− j + Bp j ≥ Max Vi (Q−i ) ,Vi M ,  )                         {     }
equations (4) and (5), x j + z j = w , x j ≥ 0, z j ≥ 0, and n j ∈ [1, N ] , taking Q− j , Y− j , Vi (Q−i ) ,
Vi M and J as given.
        Suppose that the offer made by club j satisfies the feasibility, participation
and no-defection constrains. We will later show that these constraints are indeed
satisfied in a feasible equilibrium candidate. Assuming an interior solution, the first
order conditions are equation (4), the budget constraint and the following two
equations for j = 1,..., J :
               ⎛ U Ql ⎛ J − 1 ⎞ B ⎞ ⎛ 2 N − n j ⎞ B
           nj ⎜ l + ⎜                 ⎟+                 =1,                                                                                  (9a)
               ⎜ U x ⎝ J ⎟⎠ U xl ⎟ ⎜ 2 N ⎟ U xl
               ⎝                      ⎠ ⎝          ⎠
                            ⎡                         ⎤
           ⎡ z j − Cn n j ⎤ ⎢U Ql + ⎛⎜ J − 1 − 1 ⎞⎟ B ⎥ = 0 .
                            ( )                                                                                                               (9b)
           ⎣              ⎦          ⎝ J      2N ⎠ ⎦
                            ⎣
Since J ≤ N , we have ( J −1) J > 1 2N if J ≥ 2 . Assuming that J ≥ 2 in the equilibrium
candidate implies that z j = Cn ( n j ) from equation (9b).




                                                                             9
        Close inspection of equations (9a) and (9b) reveals that prestige clubs are
identical in the equilibrium candidate. This implies that J = N n j .8 Letting z j ≡ z l and
nj ≡ n      for       ∀j ,         we   have       Y j = Y = nz l − C ( n ) = Yˆ ,   Q = N ⎡⎣ nz l − C ( n )⎤⎦ n       and
 p j = p = ⎡⎣ z + C ( n ) n ⎤⎦ 2 > 0 . Note that nz − C ( n ) = nCn ( n ) − C ( n ) > 0 , where the inequality
              l                                         l


follows from the fact that C is strictly convex. Thus, the feasibility constraint is
satisfied in the equilibrium candidate.
        In sum, the equilibrium candidate is characterized by the following conditions:

           ⎡ U Ql ⎛ N − n ⎞ B ⎤ ⎛ 2 N − n ⎞ B         U Ql ⎡ 1 ( N − n )( 2n + 1) ⎤ B
         n⎢ l +⎜            ⎟ l    ⎥ + ⎜  ⎟ l = 1 ⇒ n     +⎢ +                    ⎥ l = 1,                         (10a)
           ⎣⎢ U x ⎝ N ⎠ U x ⎦⎥ ⎝ 2 N ⎠ U x            U xl ⎢⎣ 2       2N          ⎦⎥ U x
         zl = Cn ( n ) ,                                                                                           (10b)
         Y = nz l − C ( n ) = Yˆ ,                                                                                 (10c)
                    NC ( n )
         Q = Zl −              ,                                                                                   (10d)
                        n
                     Q 1 ⎛ l C (n) ⎞
         p = zl −        = ⎜z +    ⎟,                                                                              (10e)
                    2 N 2 ⎜⎝    n ⎟⎠
          xl + z l = w ,                                                                                           (10f)
           ( )l
                                    {
         U x , Q + Bp ≥ Max Vi (Q−i ) ,Vi      M
                                                   },                                                              (10g)
         U ( x , Q ) = U ( w, Q ) .
              a
                                                                                                                   (10h)

         The first equation in (10a) states that the representative prestige club
determines its contribution level by equating the sum of marginal group and
individual contribution benefits, properly discounted by the marginal utility of
income, to the marginal rate of transformation between contribution and the
numeraire good. The marginal group benefits consist of two components, the
marginal pure benefits from grouping and the marginal impure benefits from
grouping. The marginal pure benefits from grouping are the sum of the group
members’ marginal rates of substitution between collective and numeraire goods. The
marginal impure benefits from grouping are the weighted sum of the group members’
marginal rates of substitution between prestige and numeraire goods. The rationale for
the weight, ( N − n) N , comes from the fact that a unit increase in the contribution
made by the representative club member is perceived to produce a net increase of
( N − n) N units in the prestige level enjoyed by each club member stemming from the
institutional component of the prestige production function. The marginal individual
benefit is the net marginal impure benefit associated with an expansion of each club
member’s prestige level stemming from the individual component of the prestige
production function. The club manager knows that an expansion in a club member’s
contribution produces positive and negative effects on the welfare of each club

8
    The assumption that J ≥ 2 is thus equivalent to N ≥ 2n j . This assumption is harmless if N is
sufficiently large or if marginal crowding costs rise sufficiently quickly in n j . To illustrate, we provide

                                                                                               ( )
an example below in which N = 120 , n j = 30 and J = 4 . The cost function is C n j = n j n j − 1 2 .      (       )


                                                            10
member. The manager internalizes the positive and negative prestige externalities
associated with an expansion in each member’s contribution for all individuals who
belong to the club. He neglects, however, the positive and negative prestige
externalities that are imposed on members of other clubs.
         The bracketed term in the second equation in (10a) represents the perceived
net effect in prestige production for each unit of contribution made by a club member.
Consistent with our assumption that either N is sufficiently large or crowding costs
rise sufficiently quickly so that multiple clubs emerge in the equilibrium candidate
(i.e., N ≥ 2n ), it is straightforward to show that

        ( N − n )( 2n + 1)       1
                                                                                                     (10i)
                             >
               2N                2

since 2 ( N − n ) > 1 . In light of result (10i), one can clearly see that the bracketed term in
the second equation in (10a) is larger than one. This implies that a club manager
perceives a net increase of more than one unit in the prestige level enjoyed by every
club member for each unit of contribution made by a club member.
         Equation (10b) informs us that the representative prestige club selects its
membership size by equating the club’s marginal benefit of expanding membership to
its marginal crowding cost. The club’s marginal benefit of expanding membership is
the contribution collected from each club member. Given the optimal member fee, the
optimal club size maximizes the club’s contribution to the collective good.
         Equation (10c) shows that each club’s attempt to advance its institutional
prestige level is futile. In equilibrium, institutional prestige levels are identically zero
since all clubs make identical contributions to the collective good. However, as
illustrated by equation (10a), the race for maximizing institutional prestige yields
coordination benefits, which induce each club to expand its contribution level.
Equation (10d) makes it clear that the formation of prestige clubs has a social cost.
This cost is measured in terms of units of the collective good that are given up in
order to advance prestige. The total social cost is the club industry’s operating cost.
         Equation (10e) is immediately implied by equations (4), (10c) and (10d). Each
individual’s prestige level is the average of individual contributions, which together
finance provision of the collective good and the club industry’s operating cost. The
prestige level in this equilibrium candidate is higher than the prestige level in the
previous equilibrium candidate without prestige clubs, since here each individual
contributes a higher amount to the collective good.9
         We now demonstrate that the offer made by a feasible representative club
satisfies the participation and no-exit constraints (10g). Consider the problem faced by
an individual i who gets the highest payoff from defecting a representative club j .

9
  It is straightforward to demonstrate this. For the sake of comparison, suppose that n = 1 and note that
the left hand side of equation (10a) with n = 1 is larger than the left hand side of equation (3). Since the
right hand side of each equation is the same, we reach the conclusion that the individual contribution
amount that satisfies equation (3) is “too small” to satisfy equation (10a) under the hypothesis that
 n = 1 . Since N > n > 1 in the interior optimum, one can easily verify that the left hand side of equation
(10a) is larger than the left hand side of equation (3). This implies that the individual contribution in
this equilibrium candidate is higher than in the previous one.




                                                    11
This problem is identical to the problem faced by the manager of club j if we restrict
the manager’s set of feasible actions as follows: (i) except for the contribution made
by individual i , fix the contribution of every other member; (ii) set club membership
size equal to s j ; and (iii) set the club’s contribution equal to the average of
contributions made by clubs. Since the maximum of such a problem cannot be larger
than the maximum of the problem in which the additional restrictions are not
imposed, we can affirm that the indirect utility level the club manager delivers to each
club member is at least as large as Vi M .10
           Now consider the problem faced by an independent contributor i who refused
the club’s offer. This problem is identical to the problem faced by the manager of a
feasible representative club j with the additional restrictions (i), (ii) and (iii)
described above, but for s j = 1 . Thus, the payoff obtained by this contributor cannot be
larger than the utility level offered by the feasible representative club in the
equilibrium candidate. In sum, a feasible representative club is sustainable because its
offer satisfies both no-defection and participation constraints.
           We gather the results of our analysis in the following proposition:
Proposition 1. The competitive equilibrium features identical prestige clubs. It is
characterized by equations (10a) – (10h).
           To illustrate our results, we provide a numerical example. Suppose that the
utility functions are the same as we used in our previous example. Let B = w and
C ( n ) = n ( n −1) 2 .   Equation            (10b)       implies        that     zl = n −1 2.  Since
UQ = x = w − z = w − n + 1 2 and U x = Q = Nn 2 , we can express equation (10a) as
    l    l         l                        l


follows: Nn ( 2w + 1 − 2n ) + 2n ( N − n ) w + ( 2N − n ) w = N 2n . Letting N = 120 and w = 50.3 , the
quadratic equation yields n ≅ 30 . Then, z l = 29.5 , Y = 450 , J = 4 , Q = 1800 , p = 22 and
 x l = 20.5 . The utility level for each prestige lover is U ( 20.5,1800) + 50.3( 22) = 38006.6 .
The utility level for each altruist is U (50,1800) = 90000 .
           For comparison purposes, the outcome for the voluntary contributions game is
Q = 99.56 , z l = 0.83 , p = 0.41 and x l = 49.17 . The utility levels reached by each prestige
lover and each altruist in this game are respectively 4915.99 and 4978 . The
competitive equilibrium yields higher levels of prestige and collective goods and
higher utility levels for both types of consumers than the equilibrium candidate with
independent contributions.

IV.     Pareto Efficient Allocation
We now derive the conditions for a Pareto efficient allocation with positive utility
levels for both types of consumers and compare it with the competitive equilibrium in
order to highlight the latter’s sources of inefficiencies.
        A Pareto efficient allocation in which purists and prestige lovers enjoy
positive utilities is the solution to the following problem: Choose {xa , xl , z a , zl , Q, n} to

maximize U ( xl , Q ) + B ⎛⎜ z l −
                                      Q ⎞
                                            subject to
                            ⎝        2 N ⎟⎠


10
   Even though the institutional prestige level is zero in the equilibrium candidate, each club’s attempt
to maximize it yields coordination benefits, as we discussed in the text.




                                                         12
          (      )
       U xa , Q ≥ U a > 0 ,                                                                     (11a)
                               NC ( n )
          (          )
       N z a + zl = Q +
                                n
                                          ,                                                     (11b)
       x a + xl + z a + z l = 2w ,                                                              (11c)
       x a ≥ 0, xl ≥ 0, z a ≥ 0, z l ≥ 0, Q ≥ 0, N ≥ n ≥ 1.

According to (11c) an increase in z a must be accompanied by a reduction in at least
one of {xa , xl , z l } . A reduction in either xl or z l lowers the objective function. A
reduction in x a lowers the utility function in (11a). Since z a does not enter directly in
either the objective or (11a), we must have z a = 0 in the optimum. Equation (11b)
now implies that

              Q C (n)
       zl =     +     ,                                                                         (11d)
              N   n

Plugging (11d) into both the objective function and constraint (11c) implies that the
                                                                                   ⎛     C (n) ⎞
problem simplifies to the choice of {x a , xl , Q, n} to maximize U ( xl , Q ) + B ⎜ Q +       ⎟⎟
                                                                                   ⎜
                                                                                        ⎝ 2N     n ⎠
subject to (11a) and

                               NC ( n )
          (          )
        N x a + xl + Q +
                              n
                                  = 2 Nw ,                                                      (11e)
        x a ≥ 0, xl ≥ 0, Q ≥ 0, N ≥ n ≥ 1.

Since the average cost function, C ( n ) n , is increasing at a nondecreasing rate in n ,
the objective function is convex in n and the constraint set is convex. It follows that
the solution involves either n = 1 or n = N depending, among other things, on the
degree of convexity of C and on the value that B takes. We shall assume that
 2Nw > C ( N ) and that the utility functions are such that x a > 0 , xl > 0 and Q > 0 in any
optimum.11
        Suppose first that n = 1 . The resource constraint (11e) becomes

          (          )
        N x a + xl + Q = 2 Nw .                                                                  (11f)

Let λ1 ≥ 0 and µ1 ≥ 0 be the Lagrangian multipliers associated with (11a) and (11f),
respectively. The first order conditions are constraints (11a), (11f) and the following
equations:

       x a : λ1U xa = N µ1 ,                                                                    (11g)

11
   A sufficient condition for this result is that U satisfies the Inada conditions with respect to both
arguments. Since the Inada conditions are not necessary, as the example below demonstrates, we shall
not impose it.




                                                      13
        xl : U xl = N µ1 ,                                                                            (11h)
                         B
        Q : U Ql +         + λ1U Qa = N µ1 ,                                                          (11i)
                        2N

Combining equations (11g), (11h) and (11i), we obtain

         ⎛ U Qa U Ql ⎞ 1 B
        N⎜ a + l ⎟+         = 1.                                                                      (11j)
         ⎜ U x U x ⎟ 2 U xl
         ⎝           ⎠

        Equation (11j) is the modified Samuelson condition. It equates the marginal
social benefit of contributing to the collective good to the marginal social of doing so.
The marginal social benefit is the sum of two components: the pure marginal social
benefit and the impure marginal social benefit. The pure marginal social benefit is the
sum of the marginal rates of substitution between collective good and the numeraire
good. The impure marginal social benefit equals half the marginal rate of substitution
between prestige and the numeraire good. This represents the increase in prestige
faced by each prestige lover as the collective is expanded. The marginal social cost of
provision is the marginal rate of transformation between contribution and the
numeraire good.
        Suppose now that n = N . The resource constraint (11e) becomes

         (          )
       N xa + xl + Q + C ( N ) = 2Nw ,                                                                (11k)

Let λN ≥ 0 and µN ≥ 0 be the Lagrangian multipliers associated with (11a) and (11k),
respectively. The first order conditions are constraints (11a), (11k) and the following
equations:

        λN U xa = N µ N ,                                                                             (11l)
        U xl = N µ N ,                                                                               (11m)
                  B
        U Ql +      + λN U Qa = N µ N .                                                               (11n)
                 2N

Combining equations (11l) – (11n) we obtain the modified Samuelson condition (11j).
            Let {x1a ( B ) , x1l ( B ) , z1l ( B ) , Q1 ( B )} denote the solution to the system of equations
(11a), (11d), (11f) – (11i). This solution is a candidate for a Pareto efficient allocation
with positive consumption of numeraire, prestige and collective goods, positive utility
levels for all consumers and featuring independent contributors. Let
{xNa ( B ) , xNl ( B ) , zNl ( B ) , QN ( B )} denote the solution to the system of equations (11a),
(11d), (11k) – (11n). This solution is a candidate for a Pareto efficient allocation with
positive consumption of numeraire, prestige and collective goods, positive utility
levels for all consumers and featuring one prestige club. Since both solutions satisfy
the utility constraint (11a) and U a is the same in both situations, the solution featuring
independent contributors is a Pareto efficient allocation if




                                                    14
                                   BQ1 ( B )                                ⎛ QN ( B ) C ( N ) ⎞
          (                 )
        U x1l ( B ) , Q1 ( B ) +
                                     2N
                                                   (                 )
                                               > U xNl ( B ) , QN ( B ) + B ⎜
                                                                            ⎜ 2N
                                                                                      +
                                                                                         N ⎟⎠
                                                                                               ⎟.   (12)
                                                                            ⎝

The solution featuring one prestige club is a Pareto efficient allocation if the
inequality in expression (12) is reversed. If the left and right hand sides of expression
(12) are equal, both solutions are Pareto efficient.
         We gather the results in the following proposition:
Proposition 2. Whenever condition (12) holds, a Pareto efficient allocation with
positive consumption of numeraire, prestige and collective goods and positive utility
levels for all consumers is given by equations n = 1 , z a = 0 , (11a), (11d), (11f) – (11i).
If the reverse of condition (12) holds, a Pareto efficient allocation with positive
consumption of numeraire, prestige and collective goods, positive utility levels for all
consumers is given by n = N , z a = 0 , (11a), (11d), (11k) – (11n).
         Comparing the conditions that characterize the competitive equilibrium with
those that characterize any type of Pareto efficient allocation, it is immediately clear
that the competitive equilibrium is inefficient because it features clubs of inefficient
size, it yields an inefficient amount of collective good and an inefficient prestige level
to each prestige lover. Comparing equations (10a) and (11j) reveals that they differ
with respect to the “weights” placed on both components of the marginal benefit of a
contribution to the collective good. Consider the second equation in (10a). Its pure
marginal benefit consists of the sum of the marginal rates of substitution between
collective and numeraire goods for the members of a representative club only. The
pure marginal social benefit in equation (11j) is the sum of the marginal rates of
substitution between collective and numeraire goods for all members of society. Since
the pure marginal benefit that the representative club takes into account in the
competitive equilibrium neglects the sum of the marginal rates of substitution
between collective and numeraire goods for all members of society who do not belong
to the club, the representative club places a lower weight on the pure marginal benefit
of a contribution than it is efficient.
         As for the comparison between impure marginal benefits, we can clearly see
from the bracketed term in the second equation in (10a) that the weight placed by the
representative club manager on the impure marginal benefit is larger than the efficient
weight. In fact, as we discussed before, the weight placed on the impure marginal
benefit by a club manager in the competitive equilibrium is larger than one. This
follows from the fact that the representative club internalizes prestige externalities for
its own members only.
         As the competitive club places a lower than efficient weight on the pure
marginal benefit but a higher than efficient weight on the impure marginal benefit, it
is unclear whether the competitive club industry undersupplies or oversupplies the
collective good. The lower than efficient weight on the pure marginal benefit provides
incentives for underprovision. The higher than efficient weight on the impure
marginal benefit, on the other hand, provides incentives for overprovision. Since the
prestige level enjoyed by a prestige lover in either competitive equilibrium or a
relevant Pareto efficient allocation is an increasing function of the overall level of
collective good and since the competitive equilibrium does deliver an efficient
amount of collective good, the prestige level supplied by each competitive club is also
inefficient.



                                                            15
             To illustrate our results, we consider a numerical example. Suppose that the
utility functions are identical to those we used in our previous examples. Let N = 120
and U a = 90000 . It is straightforward to show that if B = w = 50.3 , the Pareto efficient
allocation with positive consumption of numeraire, prestige and collective goods is
{x1a ( B ) , x1l ( B ) , z1l ( B ) , Q1 ( B )} = {14,88,35.22,50.4,6048.56} . The prestige level enjoyed by
each prestige lover is 25.2 . The utility level for a representative prestige lover is
214903.41. Remember that each competitive club offers a prestige level equal to 22
to each of its members, the competitive industry supplies 1800 units of the collective
good and the utility level for a representative club member is 38006.6. Thus, the
competitive equilibrium undersupplies the collective and prestige goods and yields a
much lower utility level to each prestige lover than it is efficient.
             Suppose now that U a = 9000 and B = 6000 < Nw = 6036 . In this case, the Pareto
efficient allocation with positive consumption of numeraire, prestige and collective
goods              is           the           solution       featuring       a   single     prestige     club:
{xN ( B ) , xN ( B ) , zN ( B ) , QN ( B )} = {2.27,5.78,92.55,3966} . The prestige level enjoyed by each
   a            l            l


prestige lover is 76.025 . The utility level for a prestige lover is 479073.48 . The solution
featuring independent contributors is {x1a ( B ) , x1l ( B ) , z1l ( B ) , Q1 ( B )} = {1.19,36.61,62.8,7536}.
The prestige level enjoyed by each prestige lover is 31.4 . The utility level for a
prestige lover is 464260.56 .

V.      Conclusion
The incentives to promote the individual and institutional components of prestige
motivate individuals (managers) to form prestige clubs. The race for advancement of
both prestige components produces coordination benefits within clubs, even though
the race per se is futile. The coordination benefits stem from internalization of
positive and negative prestige externalities within clubs. Such coordination benefits,
in turn, motivate managers to expand membership sizes, but the expansions are
limited by growing crowding costs. Net of administrative costs, the prestige club
industry produces a greater amount of collective good than one would observe in a
hypothetical economy without prestige clubs.
        The competitive equilibrium, however, is inefficient because it features clubs
of inefficient size and each club does not fully internalize the positive and negative
externalities associated with its members’ contributions to the collective good. As a
result, the competitive equilibrium produces inefficient amounts of prestige and
collective goods.




                                                     16
                                    References

Andreoni, J. (1989), Giving with impure altruism: Applications to charity and
       Ricardian equivalence, Journal of Political Economy 97, 1447-1458.
Andreoni, J. (1990), Impure altruism and donations to public goods: A theory of
       warm-glow giving, Economic Journal 100, 464-477.
Andreoni, J. (2006a), Leadership giving in charitable fund-raising, Journal of Public
       Economic Theory 8, 1-22.
Andreoni, J. (2006b), Philanthropy, Handbook of Giving, Reciprocity and Altruism,
       in L-A. Gerard-Varet, Serge-Christophe Kolm and Jean Mercier Ythier, Eds.
       Elsevier/North Holland, forthcoming.
Andreoni, J. and A.A. Payne (2003), Do government grants to private charities crowd
       out giving or fund-raising? American Economic Review 93, 792-812.
Berglas, E. (1976), On the theory of clubs, American Economic Review Papers and
       Proceedings 66, 116-121.
Bergstrom, T.C., L.E. Blume and H.R. Varian (1986), On the private provision of
       public goods, Journal of Public Economics 29, 25-49.
Brueckner, J.K. and K. Lee (1989), Club theory with a peer-group effect, Regional
       Science and Urban Economics 19, 399-420.
Buchanan, J.M. (1965), An economic theory of clubs, Economica 32, 1-14.
Cornes, R.C. and R. Hartley (2005), The geometry of aggregation games, Manchester
       University Economics Discussion Paper EDP-0514.
Cornes, R.C. and R. Hartley (2007), Aggregative public good games, Journal of
       Public Economic Theory 9, 201-219.
Cornes R.C. and T. Sandler (1984), Easy riders, joint production and public goods,
       Economic Journal 94, 580-598.
Cornes R.C. and T. Sandler (1986), The Theory of Externalities, Public Goods and
       Club Goods, 2nd Edition. Cambridge University Press, New York.
Cornes R.C. and T. Sandler (1994), The comparative static properties of the impure
       public good model, Journal of Public Economics 54, 403-421.
Ellickson, B., B. Grodal, S. Scotchmer and W. Zame (1999), Clubs and the market,
       Econometrica 67, 1185-1218.
Ellickson, B., B. Grodal, S. Scotchmer and W. Zame (2001), Clubs and the market:
       Large finite economies, Journal of Economic Theory 101, 40-77.
Glazer, A. and K.A. Konrad (1996), A signaling explanation for charity, American
       Economic Review 86, 1019-1028.
Hammond, P., M. Kaneko and M.H. Wooders (1989), Continuum economies with
       finite coalitions, core, equilibria, and widespread externalities, Journal of
       Economic Theory 49, 113-134.
Harbaugh, W.T. (1998a), What do donations buy? A model of philanthropy based on
       prestige and warm glow, Journal of Public Economics 67, 269-284.
Harbaugh, W.T. (1998b), The prestige motive for making charitable transfers,
       American Economic Review 88, 277-282.
Oakland, W.H. (1972), Congestion, public goods, and welfare, Journal of Public
       Economics 1, 339-357.
Page, F. and M.H. Wooders (2008), Networks and clubs, Journal of Economic
       Behavior and Organization, forthcoming.




                                         17
Sandler, T. and J. Tschirhart (1984), Mixed clubs: Further observations, Journal of
        Public Economics 23, 381-389.
Scotchmer, S. (1985a), Profit-maximizing clubs, Journal of Public Economics 27, 25-
        45.
Scotchmer, S. (1985b), Two-tier pricing of shared facilities in a free-entry
        equilibrium, Rand Journal of Economics 16, 456-472.
Scotchmer, S. (2005), Consumption externalities, rental markets and purchase clubs,
        Economic Theory 25, 235-253.
Scotchmer, S. (2008), Clubs, in L. Blume and S. Durlauf, Eds. New Palgrave
        Dictionary of Economics, forthcoming.
Scotchmer, S. and M.H. Wooders (1987), Competitive equilibrium and the core in
        club economies with anonymous crowding, Journal of Public Economics 34,
        159-173.
Silva, E.C.D. (1997), A-la-carte or smorgasbord: multiproduct clubs with costly
        exclusion, Journal of Urban Economics 41, 264-280.
Silva, E.C.D. and C.M. Kahn (1993), Exclusion and moral hazard: The case of
        identical demand, Journal of Public Economics 52, 217-235.
Wooders, M.H. (1978), Equilibria, the coreand jurisdiction structures in economies
        with a local public good, Journal of Economic Theory 18, 328-348.
Wooders, M.H. (1980), The Tiebout Hypothesis: Near-optimality in local public good
        economies, Econometrica 48, 1467-1485.
Wooders, M.H. (1994), Equivalence of games and markets, Econometrica 62, 1141-
        1160.




                                        18
