    Structural change and industrial linkages: a perspective on China’s sustained
                                  growth pattern1


                                                             Roberto Alexandre Zanchetta Borghi2


Abstract

China’s successful growth experience has been subject to several analyses. This paper
provides a perspective on China’s long-term economic growth from a Kaldorian-
Structuralist framework that emphasises the importance of the consolidation of a large,
diversified and integrated industrial base as central to economic growth without facing
balance of payments constraints. Input-output indicators reveal key macrosectoral
transformations of the Chinese productive structure and changes in interindustry linkages
during the 1990s and 2000s. Results point that the Chinese sustained growth pattern so
far can be described as an investment-cum-foreign exchange growth with diversification
alongside a deeper integration of domestic industrial production.

Keywords: China; economic growth; structural change; industrial sectors; input-output
analysis.
JEL Codes: C67; F43; O11; O14; O53.


Resumo

A bem-sucedida experiência de crescimento chinesa tem sido objeto de diversas análises.
Este artigo oferece uma perspectiva acerca da trajetória de crescimento de longo prazo da
China a partir de um arcabouço Kaldoriano-Estruturalista, que enfatiza a importância da
consolidação de uma base industrial ampla, diversificada e integrada como central para o
crescimento econômico sem restrições de balanço de pagamentos. Os indicadores de
insumo-produto revelam as principais transformações da estrutura produtiva chinesa e as
mudanças nos encadeamentos intersetoriais ao longo dos anos 1990 e 2000. Os resultados
indicam que o sustentado crescimento chinês pode ser descrito a partir de um padrão que
combina investimento, divisas estrangeiras e mudança estrutural com diversificação e
integração da produção industrial doméstica.

Palavras-chave: China; crescimento econômico; mudança estrutural; setores industriais;
análise de insumo-produto.
Classificação JEL: C67; F43; O11; O14; O53.


                                 Área 7 – Economia Internacional



1
  The author wishes to thank Capes, Brazilian Ministry of Education, for supporting his PhD studies. This
paper is a result of the author’s PhD thesis “Growth trajectories in the globalisation era: a macrosectoral
analysis of China and Brazil” (University of Cambridge, UK).
2
  Lecturer in Economics at the Institute of Economics, University of Campinas, Brazil. PhD in Development
Studies, University of Cambridge, UK. Contact: razb@unicamp.br.

                                                                                                         1
1. Introduction

China’s growth miracle has been subject to several analyses. Undoubtedly, the fact that
China has been growing around ten percent a year over the last thirty years, the most
recent and long-lasting experience of sustained economic growth with major implications
for the world economic order, raises many questions about its continuity and new policy
directives, making important to understand the achievements thus far. As a great
productive competitor and increasing consumer market, China has shifted trade and
investment routes at a global level.

This paper offers a perspective on China’s long-term economic growth by identifying key
macrosectoral changes in the Chinese productive structure during the 1990s and 2000s.
From the Kaldorian-Structuralist framework that is taken into consideration, the
consolidation of a large, diversified and integrated industrial base is central to economic
growth without facing balance of payments constraints. The strengthening of
interindustry linkages contributes to a more compatible response of domestic supply to
demand and, consequently, a sustained growth trajectory.

Input-output analysis allows for a detailed view on major structural changes that the
Chinese economy has experienced over the years. The following indicators are calculated
by sector: output multipliers, backward and forward linkages, fields of influence and
export-import coefficients. Data from the World Input-Output Database (WIOD) used in
this paper cover the period 1995-2009.

Results point that the Chinese growth pattern so far can be understood as an investment-
cum-foreign exchange growth with diversification alongside a deeper integration of
domestic industrial production. Large industrial sectors were the key economic sectors of
the Chinese productive structure. They presented, in general, the highest output
multipliers and the strongest interindustry linkages. In addition, the Chinese economy
became more diversified and industrial production, more integrated, over the years, given
the strengthening of interindustry linkages, particularly between industrial sectors.
Finally, the analysis of China’s trade pattern reveals that, despite the increasing need of
imports mostly for intermediate consumption, the economy as a whole and most sectors
were able to raise exports and assure necessary foreign exchange.

The paper is divided into three sections. The first section presents the main arguments
related to the Kaldorian-Structuralist theoretical framework in the literature. The second
section details the methodological approach based on input-output analysis. The third
section discusses the main results of the paper concerning the macrosectoral
transformations of the Chinese economy. Concluding remarks follow.

2. Productive structure and economic growth: a Kaldorian-Structuralist perspective

Both Kaldorian and Structuralist traditions in the economic literature highlight the
importance of industry for economic growth. According to these approaches, higher
demand multiplier effects over the domestic economic system depend on how domestic
production is organised in terms of sectoral composition, interindustry linkages, and
domestic and foreign supply. A more diversified and integrated industrial productive
structure with stronger interindustry linkages provides a more compatible response of
domestic supply to demand, thus generating more income and accelerating domestic

                                                                                         2
growth from initial demand stimuli. It assures that multiplier effects are transmitted from
one sector to another over the productive chain, such that they become interindustry
domestic demand. Multiplier effects are also affected by the share of imports for meeting
final and intermediate demand, once avoiding a demand leakage to foreign markets.
Additionally, given different income elasticities of demand for exports and imports,
structural changes in the productive structure of developing economies towards higher
value-added industrial sectors are required to prevent them from structural disequilibrium
for long-term economic growth.

In the Structuralist tradition, based on either the Latin American or the Anglo-Saxon
approach3, the process of industrialisation is widely recognised as essential to facing the
bottlenecks and rigidities that may prevent low- and middle-income countries from
achieving higher income levels. Patterns of sustained economic growth are generally
associated with the promotion of industrialisation and the diversification of domestic
manufacturing industries. Great emphasis is also placed on external constraints to
industrialisation. This differs from the Ricardian comparative advantages argument,
according to which countries should specialise in the production of goods in which they
have greater resource endowments and trade them in the international market so that a
more efficient allocation of resources would be achieved. As Chenery (1980, p.281)
highlights, “sustained economic growth requires a transformation of the structure of
production that is compatible with both the evolution of domestic demand and the
opportunities for international trade. This transformation normally involves a substantial
rise in the share of industry and [...] a shift away from dependence on primary exports
towards manufactured goods as a source of foreign exchange”.

According to this tradition, the consolidation of a diversified and integrated industrial
productive structure with strong interindustry linkages is a necessary condition for
furthering long-term economic growth. The establishment of a domestic productive
system could increase income levels through the demand that one sector would generate
to another. Complementarity of demand between sectors could break the “vicious circle
of underdevelopment” but would require for some authors, such as Rosenstein-Rodan
(1943) and Nurkse (1953), large-scale planned investments led by the State to be
implemented at once, i.e. a “Big Push”, to assure inter-sectoral balance. For others, such
as Hirschman (1958 and 1987), in support of an unbalanced growth strategy, efforts
should focus on key sectors, i.e. those sectors with strong interdependence and linkages
with other sectors in the economy. Two types of linkages between sectors are identified:
backward and forward linkages. Backward linkage refers to the ability of a sector to
stimulate production and investment of sectors that provide its inputs, whilst forward
linkage relates to the ability of a sector to induce productive activities of sectors that
demand its output. That “Big Push” to promote a balanced process of growth would
require precisely what underdeveloped economies lack, such as the amount of financial
resources, managerial capabilities and planning efforts to carry out large-scale
investments and industrialisation across all sectors at once.

Another key structural feature of developing economies, known in the Structuralist
literature as the Prebisch-Singer hypothesis, refers to the deterioration in their terms of
trade over time due to different income elasticities of demand for exports and imports.
Peripheral economies tend to produce and export goods with low-income elasticity of
3
  For details of these two different approaches, see Blankenburg et al. (2008) and Sanchez-Ancochea
(2007).

                                                                                                 3
demand, such as primary commodities, while importing high-tech industrialised goods,
which are provided with a higher income elasticity of demand. The opposite relationship
holds true for central economies. That means a world system where cheap unprocessed
commodities flow from the periphery to the centre and more sophisticated industrialised
goods flow from the centre to the periphery, reinforcing productivity and technological
differentials between these groups of economies (Prebisch, 1949; Singer, 1950).

In response to this dichotomy regarding the productive specialisation and export-import
dynamics between central and peripheral economies that is advocated in the Structuralist
tradition the continuous industrialisation of developing economies, in order to
progressively internalise the production of manufacturing goods previously imported,
including consumer durables, intermediate inputs and capital goods. The ongoing
industrialisation would result in a diversified and interdependent domestic productive
structure that could spread demand effects as well as technological and productivity gains
over the economy, i.e. a supply composition able to respond with national production to
final and intermediate demand.

The Kaldorian economic tradition also discusses the importance of the supply
composition for growth. On the one hand, it points out the sectoral supply composition,
arguing that some sectors, namely manufacturing industries, are more capable of
promoting dynamic growth. That implies sectors have different growth-enhancing
properties. On the other hand, it addresses the supply composition in terms of domestic
and foreign supply, given export-import demand differentials, concluding that the
specialisation of trade and production structures in lower value-added sectors may lead
to balance of payments growth constraints.

The defence of manufacturing as the engine of economic growth is clear, as highlighted
by Kaldor’s laws4. Manufacturing industries would be responsible for more technological
progress and productivity increases in the economy, thus being able to promote more
growth than any other sector when stimulated by demand. The first law states that the
faster the rate of growth of output in manufacturing is, the faster the rate of growth of
total output in the economy will be. In other words, growth in manufacturing is positively
associated with economic growth.

Connected with it, the second law, also known as Verdoorn’s law, stresses the existence
of a positive relationship between the rate of growth of output in manufacturing and the
rate of growth of labour productivity in manufacturing. This law accounts for the special
properties of manufacturing industries, since they intrinsically embrace static and
dynamic economies of scale or increasing returns to scale that generate more output and
productivity growth than other sectors.

The third law states that the faster the growth of manufacturing output is, the faster the
rate of labour transference from non-manufacturing to manufacturing activities is, so that
total productivity growth is positively associated with the growth of output and
employment in manufacturing and negatively associated with the growth of output and
employment outside manufacturing. Therefore, high growth of manufacturing output is
important to the overall productivity growth. In other words, the faster the growth of
output, the greater the rate of labour transference from other sectors in the economy where

4
    See Kaldor (1966, 1968, 1977 and 1981), Thirlwall (1979, 1983 and 2002) and King (2009 and 2010).

                                                                                                        4
productivity is lower to manufacturing industries where productivity is higher, thus
resulting in an increasing overall rate of productivity growth.

The fourth law, also known as Thirlwall’s law, places emphasis on balance of payments
growth constraints, once the long-term growth rate of a country is regarded as given by
the ratio between the rate of growth of exports and the income elasticity of demand for
imports. During the process of economic development, there is a need for generating
foreign exchange to import necessary inputs for promoting changes in the domestic
productive structure and internalising higher value-added activities. Consequently, the
lack of foreign exchange would impose constraints on further economic growth.

Kaldorian contributions, therefore, have not only focused on the importance of the
manufacturing sector per se as a dynamic source of growth, but also on its importance
from an open economy perspective. Manufacturing industries embody increasing returns
to scale and higher levels of labour productivity in the economy, from which results that
manufacturing growth is the engine of GDP growth and that the higher the rate of growth
of manufacturing output, the faster the overall rate of productivity growth. Additionally,
due to different income elasticities of demand for exports and imports, exports of low
value-added goods, mainly primary commodities, and imports of high value-added goods
(especially manufacturing goods) would create a structural disequilibrium for economic
development, thus requiring a migration to higher value-added manufacturing production
in order to overcome balance of payments constraints on long-term economic growth.

In conclusion, from a Kaldorian-Structuralist perspective, it is clear the importance of
consolidating a large, diversified and integrated industrial base to long-term economic
growth without facing balance of payments constraints. Demand multiplier effects over
the productive structure would be higher depending on: (i) the complementarity of
demand between sectors and, consequently, the strength of domestic interindustry
linkages; (ii) the sectoral supply composition, particularly the prevalence of industrial
sectors; and (iii) the dynamics between domestic and foreign supply, in order to avoid
demand leakage to foreign markets.

3. Methodological notes on input-output analysis

This section details the input-output methodology applied in this paper to depict the
productive structure of the Chinese economy. Chinese input-output tables released by the
World Input-Output Database (WIOD) cover the 1995-2009 period5. WIOD input-output
tables are disposed at basic prices and industry-by-industry format. In order to make them
comparable over the years, tables at current prices and previous year’s prices were used
to transform current prices into constant prices of the last available year (2009). All input-
output indicators to be presented are therefore based on data expressed in 2009 constant
prices. Additionally, original 35-sectors tables were reduced to 17-sectors tables
considering similarities of sectors’ productive structures and preserving a large number
of industrial sectors. The Appendix of this paper presents the map of sectoral aggregation
used for China, showing the correspondence between the original WIOD 35-sectors
matrix and the calculated 17-sectors matrix.



5
   Period when tables at both current prices and previous year’s prices were available at:
http://www.wiod.org. For more information about WIOD tables, see Timmer (2012).

                                                                                            5
According to the input-output framework, total output in the economy (X) is given by the
sum of output for intermediate consumption (Z) of different sectors and output for final
demand (Y), as in (1). The matrix of interindustry flows (Z) and the total output allow for
the calculation of the matrix of technical coefficients (A). The technical coefficient ( a ij )
measures, in monetary terms, how much of goods the sector j has used from the sector i
for its total output. In other words, it shows the proportion of inputs purchased by sector
j from sector i in relation to the total output of sector j, as in (2)6.
                                         X  Z Y                                   (1)
                                               Z ij
                                         aij                                       (2)
                                               Xj

It follows that:
                                                X  A X Y                           (3)

The solution to this equation gives the total output necessary to meet the final demand:
                                      X  (I  A) 1  Y                           (4)
              1
where ( I  A)  L is known as the Leontief inverse or the total requirements matrix.

The basic Leontief model allows for several analyses of the productive structure. The
output multiplier indicates, for each sector, the amount of production directly and
indirectly generated in the economy for each unit of final demand. The bigger the
multiplier of one sector in comparison to the multipliers of other sectors, the greater its
impacts on the rest of the economy, thus pointing to its importance to stimulate total
output. It is given as below:
                                        mx  i'L                                  (5)
where i ' is a row vector of 1’s that adds up the values of each column of matrix L and mx
is the vector of sectoral output multipliers.

Input-output models allow for calculations of other indicators highlighting the linkages
between sectors, such as Hirschman-Rasmussen backward and forward linkages. These
indices contribute to the assessment of key sectors in the economy. The term “forward
linkage” is used to indicate the interconnection of a particular sector with sectors to which
it sells its output, i.e. it measures how much of its output is demanded by other sectors. In
turn, the term “backward linkage” refers to the interconnection of a particular sector with
those sectors from which it purchases inputs, i.e. it measures how much a sector demands
from other sectors in the economy.

This approach of identifying main sectors in the economy and calculating sectoral
linkages dates back to the works of Hirschman (1958) and Rasmussen (1956). From the
Leontief inverse, considering the elements lij of matrix L and defining L* as the average
of all elements of L and L* j as the sum of a column of L, the Hirschman-Rasmussen
backward linkage can be calculated as:
                                     BL j  ( L* j n) L*                    (6)

For the calculation of the forward linkage, however, the direct-output coefficients matrix
(F) is used. It consists of allocation coefficients (rather than technical coefficients)
6
    For more details, see Miller and Blair (2009).

                                                                                             6
obtained from the matrix of interindustry flows (Z) as expressed in (7). Instead of dividing
the elements of each column of Z by the total output of the sector associated with that
column, the elements of each row of Z are divided by the total output of the sector
associated with that row.
                                      F  xˆ 1  Z                                  (7)

Similar to the calculation of the Leontief inverse using A, the Ghosh matrix or output
inverse (G) can be obtained from F:
                                     G  ( I  F ) 1                          (8)

Hence, considering the elements g ij of matrix G and defining G * as the average of all
elements of G and Gi* as the sum of a row of G, the Hirschman-Rasmussen forward
linkage can be calculated as:
                                  FLi  (G i* n) G *                     (9)

According to Miller and Blair (2009), sectors can be distributed over a four-way
classification depending on the results of their backward and forward linkages. Sectors
can be classified as: (a) generally independent of (or not strongly connected to) other
sectors, when both linkages measure less than 1; (b) generally dependent on (or connected
to) other sectors, when both linkages measure greater than 1; (c) dependent on
interindustry supply, when only the backward linkage is greater than 1; and (d) dependent
on interindustry demand, when only the forward linkage is greater than 1.

Previous indicators contribute to assessing the importance of each sector in terms of their
impacts on the economic system as a whole but do not offer a clear picture of how
interconnected the sectors are. The analysis of fields of influence shows the main linkages
between sectors, describing how changes in direct coefficients are distributed within the
economic structure. It allows for the identification of the most important linkages between
sectors in the productive process and how they have changed over time (Sonis and
Hewings, 1989 and 1991; Guilhoto, 2009).

Considering the matrix of technical coefficients A and defining a matrix of marginal
changes in input direct coefficients as   [ ij ] , it follows that corresponding Leontief
inverses would be given by L  ( I  A) 1  [l ij ] and L ( )  ( I  A   ) 1  [l ij ( )] . Then,
considering a small change in only one direct coefficient, i.e.:
                                       if i  i1 , j  j1
                              ij                                                              (10)
                                        0        if i  i1 or j  j1
the field of influence of this change can be approximately expressed as:
                                                   [ L ( ij )  L ]
                                       F ( ij )                                              (11)
                                                          ij
where F ( ij ) is the field of influence matrix of coefficient aij .

In order to identify those coefficients with the greatest fields of influence, a value given
by S ij in equation (12) is associated with each matrix F ( ij ) .


                                                                                                      7
                                               n    n
                                       S ij    [ f kl ( ij )] 2                   (12)
                                              k 1 l 1



In this approach, direct coefficients presenting the greatest values of S ij are those with
the largest fields of influence in the economy. The way chosen to illustrate results in this
paper is to calculate both the average and standard deviation of S ij values and classify
each linkage as below the average, between the average and one standard deviation,
between one and two standard deviations, between two and three standard deviations, or
above three standard deviations. As the analysis is made in comparison with the average
of all linkages, linkages that weakened in relative terms do not necessarily mean they
reduced in absolute numbers. A colour-scale figure is used to represent the fields of
influence between sectors throughout the economy according to this classification in
different years, showing the relative transformations of the productive structure over time.

The analysis of China’s productive structure is complemented by export-import
coefficients that indicate the evolution of its trade pattern. That includes the composition
of exports and imports, the share of total imports by domestic demand components, and
both total and sectoral export and import penetration coefficients.

Sectoral export coefficients ( EXC j ) can be calculated as any direct coefficient, i.e. by the
ratio between the value of exports of each sector ( EX j ) and the total output of the
corresponding sector, as shown by (13). In other words, they represent the share of total
output of each sector that is exported. Similarly, the total export coefficient ( EXC ) is
given by the share of the economy’s total output that is exported, as shown by (14). The
bigger the export coefficient, the greater the orientation of domestic production to exports.
It also provides a proxy to the ability of the economy or each sector to obtain foreign
exchange from exports.
                                                   EX j
                                        EXC j                                       (13)
                                                     Xj
                                                i 'ex
                                        EXC                                         (14)
                                                 i ' x
where i ' is a row vector of 1’s that adds up the values of exports in the vector ex and the
values of output in the vector x.

Analogous to equation (1), there is a matrix of imports by sector (M) that shows how
imports are distributed across the economy. Total imports are directed either to
intermediate consumption of different sectors ( Z m ) or final demand ( Ym ), as in (15).
                                    M  Z m  Ym                                     (15)

Import penetration coefficients account for the share of imports in non-exported total
(both domestic and imported) production. That means, imports are added and exports
subtracted from the denominator of total output, resulting in equations (16) and (17) for
import penetration coefficients by sector ( IMPC j ) and for the whole economy ( IMPC ),
respectively. The bigger the import coefficient, the higher the share of imports to meet
domestic demand. This analysis shows the degree of output dependence on imports and,



                                                                                             8
combined with the analysis of export coefficients, offers a perspective on eventual foreign
exchange growth constraints.
                                                     IM j
                              IMPC j                                                (16)
                                          X j  IM j  EX j
                                                 i 'im
                              IMPC                                                  (17)
                                       i ' x  i 'im  i 'ex
where IM j represents the total imports by sector j, i.e. each value of the vector im , given
by im  M  i , where i is a column vector of 1’s that adds up each row of matrix M, and
where i ' is a row vector of 1’s that adds up the values of output in the vector x, the values
of imports in the vector im and the values of exports in the vector ex.

As import penetration coefficients take into account imports for both final demand and
intermediate consumption, it is useful to make explicit the share of total imports by
domestic demand components ( IM sharezh ). Equation (18) expresses the share of each sort
of demand that total imports meet, whether intermediate demand for domestic production
represented by lower case letter z or final demand components h (exports excluded).
                                              IM zh
                                 IM sharezh         100                       (18)
                                               IM

4. Macrosectoral transformations of the Chinese economy

Investments have been key to the Chinese sustained growth trajectory. Investment rates
have accounted for more than 40% and, in several years, nearly 50% of total GDP after
the gradual opening up reforms. The importance of investment for economic growth is
related not only to its spillovers and significant multiplier effects within the economic
system as a source of demand, but also to its unique capacity to transform the productive
structure. Investments are the condition for industrial transformations to take place as fast
as they have been occurring in China7.

Input-output indicators allow for the identification of key economic sectors in the
economy to verify how far structural changes occurred. Output multipliers indicate, by
sector, the amount of production generated in the economy for each unit of final demand,
i.e. allow for highlighting those sectors whose production has a stronger response to
demand stimuli given their direct and indirect effects over the economic system.

For the 1995-2009 period, most sectors presented an average multiplier above 2, and all
sectors, above 1.5. The main sectors able to stimulate total production from a given
change in final demand were industrial sectors, in particular “transport equipments”,
“electrical equipments”, “textiles and footwear” and “machinery” (Figure 1). In other
words, these sectors presented deeper productive linkages in the economy as a whole, a
sign of the large and diversified industrial base China developed. Several services and
primary sectors ranked among the lowest output multipliers in the economy during this
period.




7
  See Flassbeck (2005), Lo (2006), Fang et al. (2009), Bibow (2010), Lin (2012) and Felipe et al. (2013)
for different but complementary perspectives on the Chinese growth trajectory.

                                                                                                      9
                                  Figure 1. China – Output multipliers, average 1995-2009
        3.5


        3.0


        2.5


        2.0


        1.5


        1.0


        0.5


        0.0
                                                                                              Metals & Non-Met.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mineral Commod.
                                                                                                                                        Food & Beverages




                                                                                                                                                                                   Construction




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Refined Oil & Fuels




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Public Adm., Educ. &
                                                                                                                   Other Manufact.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Transport & Food




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Trade




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Agricultural
                                                                                  Machinery
                                                            Textiles & Footwear




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Utilities




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Fin. Serv. & Real
                                                                                                                                                            Chemicals & Plastics
               Transport Equip.


                                    Electrical Equip.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Commod.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Estate
                                                                                                                        Activ.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Serv.
                                                                                                    Miner.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Health
       Source: Own elaboration based on WIOD Chinese tables.

This analysis of output multipliers is complemented by the degree of dependence between
sectors provided by Hirschman-Rasmussen forward and backward linkages. In
accordance with these results, sectors could be classified as generally dependent on other
sectors, dependent on interindustry supply, dependent on interindustry demand or
relatively independent of other sectors. Sectors with the highest output multipliers in the
Chinese productive structure also presented the highest backward linkages, therefore
classified as dependent on interindustry supply. They usually required supply of
intermediate inputs from other sectors whilst their production was generally directed to
meet final demand (Figure 2).

Figure 2. China – Hirschman-Rasmussen backward and forward linkages, average
                                1995-2009
                 1.6
                                                                                              Mineral                                                      Utilities
                                                                                              Commod.
                 1.4                                                                                                                                                                                   Chem. &
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Plastics
                                                                                                                                     Ref. Oil & Fuels
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Met. & Non-Met. Miner.
                 1.2
                                                                                                                                                     Transp. &
                                                                                                                                                     Food Serv.                                                 Other Manuf. Act.
                 1.0
          FL




                                                        Fin. Serv. & Real Estate                                                                                                                                Machinery
                                                                                                                         Trade
                                                                                                                  Agric.                                                                                                                                                  Transp. Equip.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Text. &
                 0.8                                                                                              Commod.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Food &               Foot.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Beverages                                                 Elect. Equip.


                 0.6                                                                                              Public Adm., Educ.
                                                                                                                  & Health
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Construction
                 0.4
                                  0.4                                                 0.6                                             0.8                                                 1.0                                           1.2                                            1.4                                    1.6

                                                                                                                                                                                             BL


Source: Own elaboration based on WIOD Chinese tables.
Note: The circle size represents the output multiplier of a sector proportional to other sectors’ multipliers
in the economy, so that the bigger the circle, the higher the multiplier in relation to other multipliers.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
Some other sectors with high output multipliers were “chemicals and plastics”, and
“metals and non-metallic minerals”, which presented both forward and backward
linkages above 1, thus considered as sectors generally dependent on other sectors, once
important to the productive structure both as demanding and supplying inputs for other
sectors in the economy. “Mineral commodities”, “utilities” and “refined oil and fuels”
were dependent on interindustry demand, as they showed high forward linkages only.
Some relatively independent sectors were some services and “agricultural commodities”,
although they registered in average a considerable forward linkage. In this regard, “public
administration, education and health” figured as the most independent sector in the
economy (Figure 2).

In order to depict how interconnected sectors are, the notion of fields of influence is
applied, so that most important linkages between sectors become evident. Three major
facts regarding relative transformations of the Chinese productive structure arise from the
analysis of fields of influence over time in Figure 3.

Firstly, linkages between traditional primary sectors, namely agriculture and mineral
commodities, and other sectors in the economy weakened, although they remained
important. Linkages between them as well as linkages between them and industrial
sectors clearly attenuated in relation to linkages in the overall economy (see linkages
between sectors 1 and 2 and the rest of the economy).

Secondly, linkages between services sectors and other sectors in the economy changed
their configuration and, in general, weakened as well. Linkages only between services
sectors were not highly significant, as they were below the average every year, whilst
linkages between services and industrial sectors relatively reduced (see linkages between
sectors 14 to 17 and the rest of the economy).

Thirdly, the Chinese economy became more diversified and industrial production became
more integrated. Industrial linkages were mostly above the average of the economy every
year and consistently presented the highest linkages.

There were also fewer outlier points of very intense interconnection, such as between
“metals and non-metallic minerals” and other industrial sectors, in favour of a relative
strengthening of linkages between other industrial sectors. The relative intensity of
linkages between key industrial sectors changed in the productive structure so that
“metals and non-metallic minerals” (sector 7), “chemicals and plastics” (sector 6) and
“textiles and footwear” (sector 4) experienced, for instance, relative weakness,
maintenance and strengthening of their linkages with other sectors in the economy,
respectively (Figure 3).




                                                                                        11
                    Figure 3. China – Fields of influence, selected years




               Average = 3.03; SD = 1.36                             Average = 2.95; SD = 1.27




               Average = 3.16; SD = 1.34                             Average = 3.48; SD = 1.63




Source: Own elaboration based on WIOD Chinese tables.
Note: 1-2 as primary sectors; 3-13 as industrial sectors; 14-17 as services sectors. See Appendix for sectors
correspondence to numbers in detail.

The huge process of structural change that China promoted in its productive structure is
reflected in its trade pattern. The share of manufactures exports in total merchandise
exports continuously increased, passing from less than 60% in 1987 to more than 90%
already in 2003. The share of manufactures imports in total merchandise imports followed
an opposite trend, reducing from more than 80% in 1987 to approximately 55% in 2012
(Figure 4). These movements clearly show how sectoral composition changed in favour
of industrial goods to the detriment of primary goods in the economy over the years. After
1994, the share of manufactures exports surpassed the share of manufactures imports. Not



                                                                                                         12
by coincidence, China began registering systematic trade surpluses and, consequently,
alleviating foreign exchange constraints on growth.

            Figure 4. China – Manufactures exports and imports, 1987-2012
                         (% merchandise exports and imports)
               100

                90

                80

                70

                60

                50

                40

                30

                20

                10

                    0
                         1987
                                1988
                                       1989
                                              1990
                                                     1991
                                                            1992
                                                                   1993
                                                                          1994
                                                                                 1995
                                                                                        1996
                                                                                               1997
                                                                                                      1998
                                                                                                             1999
                                                                                                                    2000
                                                                                                                           2001
                                                                                                                                  2002
                                                                                                                                         2003
                                                                                                                                                2004
                                                                                                                                                       2005
                                                                                                                                                              2006
                                                                                                                                                                     2007
                                                                                                                                                                            2008
                                                                                                                                                                                   2009
                                                                                                                                                                                          2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                        2012
                                                                             Manufactures exports (% merchandise exports)
                                                                             Manufactures imports (% merchandise imports)


Source: Own elaboration based on data from the World Bank – World Development Indicators.
Note: Manufactures comprise commodities in the Standard International Trade Classification (SITC)
sections 5 (chemicals), 6 (basic manufactures), 7 (machinery and transport equipment), and 8
(miscellaneous manufactured goods), excluding division 68 (non-ferrous metals). Non-manufactures refer
to primary goods, which, by exclusion, correspond to commodities in the SITC sections 0 (food and live
animals), 1 (beverages and tobacco), 2 (crude materials, except fuels), 3 (mineral fuels and related
materials), 4 (animal and vegetable oils), and 9 (commodities and transactions not classified elsewhere in
the SITC), including division 68 (non-ferrous metals).

Exports of tradable sectors – mostly manufacturing industries – generated the necessary
foreign exchange to assure imports to carry on with the process of economic development.
Total import penetration coefficient also rose, meaning that a higher share of imports was
used to meet domestic demand (Figure 5). Nonetheless, it accounted for less than 10% of
domestic demand and was consistently lower than the export coefficient.

                                Figure 5. China – Trade coefficients, 1995-2009
             0.18

             0.16

             0.14

             0.12

             0.10

             0.08

             0.06

             0.04

             0.02

             0.00
                        1995     1996         1997          1998          1999      2000         2001         2002         2003          2004          2005      2006         2007        2008          2009

                                                                                        TEC                                                       TIPC


Source: Own elaboration based on WIOD Chinese tables.
Notes: TEC = Total Export Coefficient; TIPC = Total Import Penetration Coefficient.

                                                                                                                                                                                                               13
Imports complemented the process of economic growth once providing necessary inputs
while promoting continuous industrial deepening as observed in the Chinese productive
structure. As Figure 6 shows, the share of imports to meet intermediate consumption
increased whilst imports for final demand, such as household consumption and especially
investment, relatively reduced when the total import penetration coefficient was higher.

   Figure 6. China – Share of total imports by components of domestic demand,
                                  1995-2009 (%)
             100

              90

              80

              70

              60

              50

              40

              30

              20

              10

              0
                   1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

                           Total Intermediate Consumption     Household Consumption
                           Government Expenditure             Investment

           Source: Own elaboration based on WIOD Chinese tables.

Most sectoral export and import penetration coefficients followed the pattern observed
for the overall economy that the import penetration coefficient increased but to a lesser
extent than the export coefficient, therefore preventing the economy from foreign
exchange constraints in the short-term. This was the pattern for most industrial sectors.
Sectoral analysis shows, however, some important differences among them.

The trend of imports to meet domestic demand significantly increased for sectors such as
“mineral commodities”, “refined oil and fuels”, “metals and non-metallic minerals”,
“electrical equipments”, “utilities”, and “construction”. Most of them are sectors that
supply inputs for other sectors and infrastructure-related sectors. Given the massive
infrastructure expansion and investments in general in China over the period, it was
expected that the proportion of imports to meet domestic demand for these sectors would
increase. However, the level of the import penetration coefficient was considerably high
only for a highly export-oriented sector (“electrical equipments”) and a less integrated
sector in the domestic productive structure (“refined oil and fuels”), as for the great
majority of sectors the coefficient was lower than 10% (Figure 7).

Apart from “refined oil and fuels”, “utilities”, and “construction”, export coefficients
were in general higher than import penetration coefficients. Among these sectors, two of
them, which were more integrated into the domestic productive structure, namely
“construction” and “utilities”, presented a low level of import penetration, as they were
relatively small sectors in the Chinese import structure. Sectors whose import penetration
coefficients surpassed their export coefficients were “mineral commodities”,
“agricultural commodities”, and “public administration, education and health”. However,
their level were not very high (Figure 7). Among them, one should remark that “mineral
commodities” became an increasingly large import sector in the mid-2000s.

                                                                                                14
                                      Figure 7. China – Trade coefficients by sector, 1995-2009
0.05                                                              0.10                                                                  0.10
                            Agr. Commod.                                                          Min. Commod.                                                      Food & Bever.
0.04                                                              0.08                                                                  0.08

0.03                                                              0.06                                                                  0.06

0.02                                                              0.04                                                                  0.04

0.01                                                              0.02                                                                  0.02

0.00                                                              0.00                                                                  0.00




                                                                                                                                               1995


                                                                                                                                                      1997


                                                                                                                                                             1999


                                                                                                                                                                      2001


                                                                                                                                                                              2003


                                                                                                                                                                                     2005


                                                                                                                                                                                            2007


                                                                                                                                                                                                    2009
       1995


              1997


                     1999


                               2001


                                      2003


                                             2005


                                                    2007


                                                           2009




                                                                         1995


                                                                                1997


                                                                                         1999


                                                                                                    2001


                                                                                                           2003


                                                                                                                   2005


                                                                                                                          2007


                                                                                                                                 2009
0.45                                                              0.40                                                                  0.20
0.40                        Text. & Foot.                         0.35                          Ref. Oil & Fuels                                                Chem. & Plastics
0.35                                                              0.30                                                                  0.15
0.30
                                                                  0.25
0.25
                                                                  0.20                                                                  0.10
0.20
                                                                  0.15
0.15
0.10                                                              0.10                                                                  0.05
0.05                                                              0.05
0.00                                                              0.00                                                                  0.00
       1995


              1997


                     1999


                               2001


                                      2003


                                             2005


                                                    2007


                                                           2009




                                                                         1995


                                                                                1997


                                                                                         1999


                                                                                                    2001


                                                                                                           2003


                                                                                                                   2005


                                                                                                                          2007


                                                                                                                                 2009




                                                                                                                                               1995


                                                                                                                                                      1997


                                                                                                                                                             1999


                                                                                                                                                                      2001


                                                                                                                                                                              2003


                                                                                                                                                                                     2005


                                                                                                                                                                                            2007


                                                                                                                                                                                                    2009
0.15                                                              0.25                                                                  0.60
                     Met. & Non-Met. Miner.                                                       Machinery                                                         Elect. Equip.
                                                                  0.20                                                                  0.50

0.10                                                                                                                                    0.40
                                                                  0.15
                                                                                                                                        0.30
                                                                  0.10
0.05                                                                                                                                    0.20
                                                                  0.05                                                                  0.10

0.00                                                              0.00                                                                  0.00
       1995


              1997


                     1999


                               2001


                                      2003


                                             2005


                                                    2007


                                                           2009




                                                                                                                                               1995


                                                                                                                                                      1997


                                                                                                                                                             1999


                                                                                                                                                                      2001


                                                                                                                                                                              2003


                                                                                                                                                                                     2005


                                                                                                                                                                                            2007


                                                                                                                                                                                                    2009
                                                                         1995


                                                                                1997


                                                                                         1999


                                                                                                    2001


                                                                                                           2003


                                                                                                                   2005


                                                                                                                          2007


                                                                                                                                 2009




0.20                                                              0.25                                                                  0.10
                            Transp. Equip.                                                 Other Manuf. Activ.                                                         Utilities
                                                                  0.20                                                                  0.08
0.15

                                                                  0.15                                                                  0.06
0.10
                                                                  0.10                                                                  0.04
0.05
                                                                  0.05                                                                  0.02

0.00                                                              0.00                                                                  0.00
                                                                         1995


                                                                                1997


                                                                                         1999


                                                                                                    2001


                                                                                                           2003


                                                                                                                   2005


                                                                                                                          2007


                                                                                                                                 2009
       1995


              1997


                     1999


                               2001


                                      2003


                                             2005


                                                    2007


                                                           2009




                                                                                                                                               1995


                                                                                                                                                      1997


                                                                                                                                                             1999


                                                                                                                                                                      2001


                                                                                                                                                                              2003


                                                                                                                                                                                     2005


                                                                                                                                                                                            2007


                                                                                                                                                                                                    2009




0.10                                                              0.25                                                                  0.20
                             Construction                                                              Trade                                                  Transp. & Food Serv.
0.08                                                              0.20
                                                                                                                                        0.15
0.06                                                              0.15
                                                                                                                                        0.10
0.04                                                              0.10
                                                                                                                                        0.05
0.02                                                              0.05

0.00                                                              0.00                                                                  0.00
       1995


              1997


                     1999


                               2001


                                      2003


                                             2005


                                                    2007


                                                           2009




                                                                         1995


                                                                                1997


                                                                                         1999


                                                                                                    2001


                                                                                                           2003


                                                                                                                   2005


                                                                                                                          2007


                                                                                                                                 2009




                                                                                                                                               1995


                                                                                                                                                      1997


                                                                                                                                                             1999


                                                                                                                                                                      2001


                                                                                                                                                                              2003


                                                                                                                                                                                     2005


                                                                                                                                                                                            2007


                                                                                                                                                                                                    2009




0.15                                                              0.10
                     Fin. Serv. & Real Estate                                          Public Adm., Educ. & Health
                                                                  0.08
0.10
                                                                  0.06

                                                                  0.04
0.05
                                                                  0.02

0.00                                                              0.00
       1995


              1997


                     1999


                               2001


                                      2003


                                             2005


                                                    2007


                                                           2009




                                                                         1995


                                                                                1997


                                                                                         1999


                                                                                                    2001


                                                                                                           2003


                                                                                                                   2005


                                                                                                                          2007


                                                                                                                                 2009




  Source: Own elaboration based on WIOD Chinese tables.
  Notes: EC = Export Coefficient; IPC = Import Penetration Coefficient.


                                                                                                                                                                                                   15
Export coefficients were higher than import penetration coefficients for most of other
large import sectors, such as “machinery”, “chemicals and plastics”, “metals and non-
metallic minerals”, “textiles and footwear”, and “electrical equipments” (Figure 7). They
were, indeed, also large export sectors in the trade structure, although their production
was not necessarily directed mostly to foreign markets, which was only the case of
“electrical equipments” and “textiles and footwear”.

The Chinese trade pattern, therefore, reflected the structural composition in favour of
industrial sectors, given the large industrial base built up over the years, as well as the
fact that, despite the increasing need of imports mostly for intermediate consumption, the
economy and most of its sectors were able to meet this need by raising exports. In this
regard, the Chinese economy was able to promote sustained growth without facing
balance of payments constraints8.

5. Concluding remarks

This paper provided a perspective on China’s sustained growth trajectory from a
Kaldorian-Structuralist framework. These approaches emphasise the importance of the
consolidation of a large, diversified and integrated industrial base as central to economic
growth without facing balance of payments constraints. Higher demand multiplier effects
over the domestic economic system depend on the organisation of the productive structure
in terms of sectoral composition, interindustry linkages, and domestic and foreign supply.

Input-output analysis of the Chinese economy allowed for the identification of major
structural changes over the years. Results showed evidence for the understanding of
China’s growth pattern as an investment-cum-foreign exchange growth with
diversification alongside a deeper integration of domestic industrial production. The key
economic sectors of the Chinese productive structure were large industrial sectors. In
general, they presented the highest output multipliers and the strongest interindustry
linkages. Furthermore, the strengthening of interindustry linkages, particularly between
industrial sectors, reveals that the Chinese economy became more diversified and
industrial production, more integrated, in the period between 1995 and 2009.

The process of structural change that China experienced in its productive structure
towards larger industrial sectors and stronger industrial linkages was reflected in its trade
pattern, breaking with the particular Kaldorian-Structuralist concern for developing
economies of balance of payments constraints on long-term economic growth.
Manufacturing exports substantially increased over time, while manufacturing imports
reduced, indicating the changes in the sectoral composition of production. Trade
coefficients also showed that, in spite of an increasing need of imports, which were mostly
directed to intermediate consumption – as expected in case of a growing and changing
economy such as China –, the economy as a whole and most sectors were able to raise
exports. That meant they were able to assure necessary foreign exchange to meet the need
of imports and continue the process of strengthening domestic industrial production.

These conclusions for China are aligned with the Kaldorian-Structuralist arguments for
long-term economic growth discussed in this paper. The Chinese economy succeeded in
promoting a sustained growth trajectory without facing balance of payments constraints,
8
  These constraints were further reduced once considering the large amount of capital inflows that occurred
in the period particularly in the form of foreign direct investments.

                                                                                                       16
given the important changes made towards the consolidation of a large and diverse
productive structure. New challenges, however, may come ahead to direct the complex
Chinese economy in a world that is continuously changing.

References

BIBOW, J. (2010) “How to sustain the Chinese economic miracle? The risk of unraveling
   the global rebalancing”, Levy Economics Institute Working Paper, n.617, Levy
   Economics Institute of Bard College, September.
BLANKENBURG, S.; PALMA, J. G.; TREGENNA, F. (2008) “Structuralism”. In:
   DURLAUF, S.; BLUME, L. (Eds.) The new Palgrave dictionary of economics, v.8.
   Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, pp.69-74.
CHENERY, H. B. (1980) “Interactions between industrialisation and exports”, American
   Economic Review, v.70, n.2, May, pp.281-287.
FANG, C.; YANG, D.; MEIYAN, W. (2009) “Crise ou oportunidade: resposta da China
   à crise financeira global”, Revista Tempo do Mundo, v.1, n.1, December, pp.97-119.
FELIPE, J.; KUMAR, U.; USUI, N.; ABDON, A. (2013) “Why has China succeeded?
   And why it will continue to do so”, Cambridge Journal of Economics, v.37, pp.791-
   818.
FLASSBECK, H. (2005) “China’s spectacular growth since the mid-1990s –
   macroeconomic conditions and economic policy changes”. In: UNCTAD, China in
   a globalising world. New York and Geneva: United Nations, pp.1-44.
GUILHOTO, J. J. M. (2009) Análise de insumo-produto: teoria, fundamentos e
   aplicações. São Paulo: FEA-USP.
HIRSCHMAN, A. O. (1958) The strategy of economic development. New Haven: Yale
   University Press.
HIRSCHMAN, A. O. (1987) “Linkages”. In: EATWELL, J.; MILGATE, M.;
   NEWMAN, P. (Eds.) The new Palgrave: a dictionary of economics. London:
   Macmillan, pp.206-211.
KALDOR, N. (1966) Causes of the slow rate of economic growth of the United Kingdom.
   Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
KALDOR, N. (1968) “Productivity and growth in manufacturing industry: a reply”,
   Economica, New Series, v.35, n.140, November, pp.385-391.
KALDOR, N. (1977) “Capitalism and industrial development: some lessons from
   Britain’s experience”, Cambridge Journal of Economics, v.1, n.2, June, pp.193-204.
KALDOR, N. (1981) “The role of increasing returns, technical progress and cumulative
   causation in the theory of international trade and economic growth”, Économie
   Appliquée, Cahiers de l’ISMEA, v.34, n.4, pp.593-617.
KING, J. E. (2009) Nicholas Kaldor. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
KING, J. E. (2010) “Kaldor and the Kaldorians”. In: SETTERFIELD, M. (Ed.) Handbook
   of alternative theories of economic growth. Cheltenham and Northampton: Edward
   Elgar, pp.157-172.
LIN, J. Y. (2012) Demystifying the Chinese economy. Cambridge: Cambridge University
   Press.
LO, D. (2006) “Making sense of China’s economic transformation”, SOAS Economics
   Working Papers, n.148, Department of Economics, School of Oriental and African
   Studies (SOAS), University of London, March.


                                                                                  17
MILLER, R. E.; BLAIR, P. D. (2009) Input-output analysis: foundations and extensions,
   2nd edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
NURKSE, R. (1953) Problems of capital formation in underdeveloped countries. Oxford
   and New York: Oxford University Press.
PREBISCH, R. (1949) The economic development of Latin America and its principal
   problems (From the original in Spanish El desarrollo económico de América Latina
   y algunos de sus principales problemas). Lake Success: United Nations, 1950.
RASMUSSEN, P. (1956) Studies in intersectoral relations. Amsterdam: North Holland.
ROSENSTEIN-RODAN, P. N. (1943) “Problems of industrialisation of Eastern and
   South-Eastern Europe”, Economic Journal, v.53, n.210/211, June-September,
   pp.202-211.
SANCHEZ-ANCOCHEA, D. (2007) “Anglo-Saxon versus Latin American structuralism
   in development economics”. In: CALDENTEY, E. P.; VERNENGO, M. (Eds.)
   Ideas, policies and economic development in the Americas. London and New York:
   Routledge, pp.208-226.
SINGER, H. W. (1950) “The distribution of gains between investing and borrowing
   countries”, American Economic Review, v.40, n.2, May, pp.473-485.
SONIS, M.; HEWINGS, G. J. D. (1989) “Error and sensitivity input-output analysis: a
   new approach”. In: MILLER, R. E.; POLENSKE, K. R.; ROSE, A. Z. (Eds.)
   Frontiers of input-output analysis. New York: Oxford University Press, pp.232-244.
SONIS, M.; HEWINGS, G. J. D. (1991) “Fields of influence and extended input-output
   analysis: a theoretical account”. In: DEWHURST, J. H. L.; JENSEN, R. C.;
   HEWINGS, G. J. D. (Eds.) Regional input-output modelling: new developments and
   interpretations. Avebury: Aldershot, pp.141-158.
THIRLWALL, A. P. (1979) “The balance of payments constraint as an explanation of
   international growth rate differences”, Banca Nazionale del Lavoro Quarterly
   Review, v.128, pp.45-53.
THIRLWALL, A. P. (1983) “A plain man’s guide to Kaldor’s growth laws”, Journal of
   Post Keynesian Economics, v.5, n.3, Spring, pp.345-358.
THIRLWALL, A. P. (2002) The nature of economic growth: an alternative framework
   for understanding the performance of nations. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
TIMMER, M. (Ed.) (2012) The World Input-Output Database (WIOD): contents, sources
   and methods, version 0.9. Groningen: University of Groningen, April.




                                                                                  18
                     Appendix. Map of sectoral aggregation for China
1. Agricultural Commodities:
   1. Agriculture, Hunting, Forestry and Fishing
2. Mineral Commodities:
   2. Mining and Quarrying
3. Food and Beverages:
   3. Food, Beverages and Tobacco
4. Textiles and Footwear:
   4. Textiles and Textile Products
   5. Leather, Leather and Footwear
5. Refined Oil and Fuels:
   8. Coke, Refined Petroleum and Nuclear Fuel
6. Chemicals and Plastics:
   9. Chemicals and Chemical Products
   10. Rubber and Plastics
7. Metals and Non-Metallic Minerals:
   11. Other Non-Metallic Mineral
   12. Basic Metals and Fabricated Metal
8. Machinery:
   13. Machinery, Nec
9. Electrical Equipments:
   14. Electrical and Optical Equipment
10. Transport Equipments:
   15. Transport Equipment
11. Other Manufacturing Activities:
   6. Wood and Products of Wood and Cork
   7. Pulp, Paper, Paper, Printing and Publishing
   16. Manufacturing, Nec; Recycling
12. Utilities:
   17. Electricity, Gas and Water Supply
13. Construction:
   18. Construction
14. Trade:
   19. Sale, Maintenance and Repair of Motor Vehicles and Motorcycles; Retail Sale of Fuel
   20. Wholesale Trade and Commission Trade, Except of Motor Vehicles and Motorcycles
   21. Retail Trade, Except of Motor Vehicles and Motorcycles; Repair of Household Goods
15. Transport and Food Services:
   22. Hotels and Restaurants
   23. Inland Transport
   24. Water Transport
   25. Air Transport
   26. Other Supporting and Auxiliary Transport Activities; Activities of Travel Agencies
   27. Post and Telecommunications
16. Financial Services and Real Estate:
   28. Financial Intermediation
   29. Real Estate Activities
   30. Renting of M&Eq and Other Business Activities
17. Public Administration, Education and Health:
   31. Public Admin and Defence; Compulsory Social Security
   32. Education
   33. Health and Social Work
   34. Other Community, Social and Personal Services
   35. Private Households with Employed Persons
Source: Own classification transforming original 35-sectors matrix into 17-sectors aggregated matrix.



                                                                                                        19
