                               Keynes at the Periphery:
    Currency hierarchy and challenges for economic policy in emerging
                               economies
        Barbara Fritz*, Daniela M. Prates** and Luiz Fernando de Paula***

Abstract: While the Post Keynesian literature offers a rather clear concept for
growth-oriented policies, it is necessary to adapt them for peripheral emerging
economies. We base our analysis of an appropriate Keynesian policy mix for
these countries on the concept of currency hierarchy, where the currencies of
peripheral emerging economies have a lower liquidity premium than the
currencies of advanced economies. Under these conditions, we argue that
domestic economic policy coordination should lay a major focus on a low policy
rate and, especially, a competitive exchange rate for, at least, a balanced
current account, in order to prevent capital flows boom-bust-cycles with
subsequent financial crises and their damaging effects on employment and
growth. We conclude that it is a rather ambitious and long term goal to climb up
the currency hierarchy, especially under the current conditions of financial
globalization.

Key-words: financial globalization; currency hierarchy; Keynesian policies

Resumo: Enquanto a literatura pós-keynesiana oferece recomendações de
políticas orientadas para o crescimento bastante claras, é necessário adaptá-
las para as economias emergentes periféricas. Nesse artigo, a reflexão sobre a
combinação de políticas keynesianas apropriada para essas economias
baseia-se no conceito de hierarquia de moedas, na qual as moedas
“emergentes periféricas” possuem um menor prêmio de liquidez do que as
moedas dos países centrais. Sob essas condições, argumenta-se que a essa
combinação deve ter como principais focos uma taxa de câmbio competitiva
que garanta, ao menos, o equilíbrio da conta corrente, pré-condição para a
prevenção de ciclos “boom-bust” de fluxos de capitais, que culminam em crises
financeiras, com consequências negativas para o emprego e crescimento.
Finalmente, conclui-se que é um objetivo bastante ambicioso e de longo prazo
subir na hierarquia de moedas, especialmente sob as condições atuais de
globalização financeira assimétrica.
Palavras-chave: globalização financeira, hierarquia de moedas, políticas
keynesianas.

Área Anpec: Área 07. Economia Internacional

Classificação JEL: F3, F4, E6



*
   Professor of Economics at the Institute for Latin American Studies at the Freie Universität
Berlin; barbara.fritz@fu-berlin.de
**
    Professor of Economics at the University of Campinas (Unicamp, Brazil) and CNPq
researcher; daniprates@eco.unicamp.br.
***
    Professor of Economics at the University of the State of Rio de Janeiro and CNPq
Researcher; luizfpaula@terra.com.br

                                                                                            1
1. Introduction

The Post Keynesian literature offers a rather clear concept for growth-oriented
policies. This literature assumes that the establishment of monetary stability is
far from being sufficient to assure growth, as uncertainty undermines market
coordination towards equilibrium with full employment. Thus, the State should
take an active role in several kinds of economic policies. Specifically, monetary,
exchange rate, fiscal, labour and sectorial policies should be coordinated to
assure monetary and financial stability as well as sustainable growth and
employment.
This set of policies usually is formulated or in general, or for centre economies
specifically. But is this also adequate for peripheral emerging economies 1 ?
These countries are not only characterized by a lower level of productive
sophistication and diversification. The State’s ability to pursue economic policies
also seems to be more limited due to the different quality of their currencies,
which are not accepted at the global level. Moreover, the negative
consequences of this difference seem to be exacerbated by financial
globalization.
In this paper, we ask if under these conditions the same set of Keynesian
policies is adequate and feasible for centre and for peripheral emerging
economies. What are the specific constraints faced by these economies to
implement adequate policies for fostering sustainable growth? How Keynesian
policies should be adopted in emerging economies under the environment of
financial globalization?
Our main argument is that the international asymmetry related to the currency
hierarchy, amplified by financial globalization, imposes major constraints to the
adoption of Keynesian policies for these economies. Consequently, such
policies should be adapted to allow for an increase of the policy space to pursue
domestic policy goals, especially a competitive exchange rate and a low policy
rate, pre-conditions for the ascension of their currencies in the global currency
hierarchy in the long run.
Besides this introduction, the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines
the standard Post Keynesian approach to economic policy. In Section 3, we
define the concept of currency hierarchy in general and under financial
globalization. Sections 4 and 5 discuss the limits of and challenges for
(Keynesian) economic policy, for emerging economies, followed by a brief
conclusion.




1
  Here we define peripheral emerging economies as peripheral countries that are
engaged in the context of financial globalization, which refers to the interpenetration of
national monetary and financial markets with globalised markets (Chesnais, 1996,
p.10-11). The terms “peripheral emerging”, “emerging” and “developing” will be used
interchangeably as well as “centre”, “advanced” and “developed”.
                                                                                        2
2. Keynesian economic policy

Keynesian policies, in a broader sense, have as their main objectives the
achievement of full employment and macroeconomic stability. According to the
Post Keynesian approach, there is no endogenous mechanism in a monetary
economy which ensures that economic activity tends to full employment (Arestis
and Sawyer, 1998).
In a monetary economy, all assets, including money, have specific attributes
that together determine their own rate of interest (ra), or their total expected
return:
   (1) ra = a + q – c + l
where “a” is the expected appreciation, “q” is the expected quasi-rent (or yield),
“c” is the carrying cost, and “l” is the liquidity premium, which is the power of
disposal that confers a potential convenience or security (Keynes, 1936, Ch.17).
Assuming perfect competition, assets with lower (higher) expected returns will
be sold (purchased), until equalization of yields. As liquidity is strongly valued in
times of higher uncertainty, the liquidity attribute (“l”) is valued higher compared
to the monetary returns (q-c) in moments of higher uncertainty. The overall
effect is a reduction in the demand for capital assets, resulting in the
postponement of real investment plans. The concept of a monetary economy
results in the possibility of effective demand failures, as non-producible money
can dominate labour-using capital as a means to accumulate wealth. Under
extreme uncertainty, to hold money or other liquid assets is a rational act since
money provides flexibility to the agents in their portfolio due to its maximum
liquidity (Carvalho, 1992).
In a monetary economy whose dynamics is determined by the non-neutrality of
money and the principle of effective demand, economic policy is able to affect
the real variables of the economy in the short and in the long run. In other
words, nominal variables affect real variables in the long run because changes
in the short term interest rate have permanent effects on investment decisions
about capital assets (Arestis and Sawyer, 2006a). Thus, a Keynesian policy
refers to economic policies designed to boost demand in order to raise demand
prices of capital assets with respect to money. Economic policy should affect
aggregate private investment, as it can create a safe environment that
stimulates private agents to make more risky choices – that render profits and
generate employment – than just accumulating liquid assets. The objective of
economic policy in this approach is related to macroeconomic stability, a
broader concept than just price stability, as it aims to reduce the uncertainties
that are intrinsic to business.
In order to reach multiple policy objectives – such as economic growth and price
stability– it is necessary to have a greater co-ordination of macroeconomic
policies (fiscal, monetary, exchange rate, and income policies). Specific policies
should never be implemented in isolation from other policies. A credible, well-
coordinated and workable Keynesian economic policy would be one that: “(i)
aims at unambiguous goals (economic growth, full employment and price
stability) and leaves the least room for its tools to be used in contradiction with

                                                                                   3
each other, or with other policy tools; (ii) makes use of tools suitable to its goals;
and (iii) gives out clear signals to financial markets and entrepreneurs in order
to stimulate them to act in the direction desired by the authorities” (Sicsú, 2001,
p.673). Therefore, the success of Keynesian policies depends a great deal on
private agents’ belief in its effectiveness.
Monetary policy through interest rate management can have a significant
impact on the level of economic activity by influencing private agents’ portfolio
composition in favour of both an increase in production (using current
productive capacity) and the acquisition of capital goods. According to the Post
Keynesian approach, as interest variations can have long-lasting effects over
investment and small effects over the inflation rate, monetary policy should be
conducted in a way to produce moderate changes in short-term rates in order to
avoid negative effects on capital accumulation employment (Carvalho, 1992,
p.38). Post Keynesian economists argue that “a monetary policy is required
which ensures stability to the financial system and pitches interest rates as low
as possible (…) for this may give some (possibly slight) stimulus to demand”
(Arestis and Sawyer, 1998, p.189). The low elasticity of inflation to interest rates
and the strong impact on investments decisions calls into question the
relevance of controlling the inflation rate only by means of an interest rate
policy, as advocated in the inflation targeting regime framework. Inflation is
seen not as a monetary phenomenon (Davidson, 1994), but mostly as a
symptom of a fight over income distribution (workers and capitalists), and of
cost factors. Therefore, price stabilization policy should consider the nature of
the inflation and can include the use of buffer stocks of certain essential
products, the adoption of some sort of income policy, and in special cases the
adoption of prudential credit controls as necessary to limit the rate of expansion
of aggregate demand (Arestis and Sawyer, 2006b; Davidson, 1994).
As for fiscal policy, during the economic slowdown, when agents’ expectations
about the future have deteriorated, expansionary monetary policy can fail to
stimulate an increase in the aggregate demand due to a rise in agents’ liquidity
preferences. Under such conditions, expansionary monetary policy should be
complemented by expansionary fiscal policy. 2
Regarding exchange rate policy, since the collapse of the Bretton Woods
system, these have been excessively volatile. Exchange rates, under the
conditions of capital mobility and high international capital flows, are
increasingly determined by portfolio decisions of global investors, and are more
related to short-run outlooks than to sustainable long term developments. When
aiming at full employment, exchange rate volatility should be avoided. For this
purpose, some Post Keynesians recommend an international monetary system
with (i) fixed exchange rate, (ii) provisions to control capital flows, and (iii)
trigger mechanisms for automatically adjusting balance of payment
disequilibrium, shifting the burden of resolving trade imbalances on the surplus
economies (i.e. Davidson, 1994). The main objective is to create a safe and


2
 For the sake of limited space, in the following we restrict our analysis to monetary and
exchange rate policies, even if fiscal policies are a key element in a post Keynesian
approach.
                                                                                       4
flexible (more elastic) international monetary system to expand the global
effective demand and the level of employment.
In the following, we seek to reformulate the Post Keynesian concept of
macroeconomic policies by adjusting it to the specific monetary conditions of
emerging economies. For this, we link the Post Keynesian perspective on
uncertainty and the fundamental role of money with the concept of currency
hierarchy, where emerging economies’ currencies are placed at the bottom.

3. Currency hierarchy under financial globalization
In this section, besides defining the concept of currency hierarchy in general
(Section 3.1), we contend that this hierarchy revealed itself even more
deleterious to the countries whose currencies are placed at its lower end in the
current international monetary and financial system which is characterised by
an asymmetric financial integration (Section 3.2).
3.1. Currency hierarchy
In an open monetary economy, currencies are a class of asset traded in foreign
currency markets. As with any other asset, agents hold them because they
favourably price their total expected returns. Since currencies are held as a
portfolio capital asset, equation (1) above can be used to represent this
behaviour. For example, if ran > ram, then currency n appreciates relatively to
currency m. Thus, the process of price determination of these assets can be
represented through the variables of this equation. Thus, we understand the
variables a, q, c and l as attributes of currencies (Andrade and Prates, 2013).
Pricing of currency assets is peculiar due to their distinctive traits. Under the
Keynesian assumption of uncertainty, short run capital gains govern
transactions in the currency markets, and expectations concerning the future
evolution of exchange rates are the main determinants of the current rates
(Davidson, 1982; Harvey, 2009). In particular, variable a, the expected
appreciation of the currency, will tend to be highly unstable and subjective.
Variable c, the carrying cost, can be specified for currencies as the financial
openness of a country.
Yet, in the case of emerging currencies, the volatility of variable a tends to be
higher due to their position at the lower end of the so-called currency hierarchy,
which refers to as the existence of a centre-periphery structure 3 in the
international monetary system. This means that the international monetary
system comprises a hierarchical and asymmetrical institutional arrangement,
organized around a key currency, currently the US dollar. Indeed, Eichengreen
et al (2007, p.160) point out that economic agents tend to concentrate
international portfolios and markets in few major currencies – the dollar, euro,
yen, pound, and Swiss franc –and have limited appetite for adding additional
currencies for their portfolio. Cohen (1998; 2004) adopts the concept of


3
 The centre-periphery metaphor was introduced by the structuralist development
economist Raúl Prebisch (1949). The ‘peripheral condition’ results from a given
economy’s structural insertion in the international division of labour, which can be seen
as organized in two poles (Ocampo and Martin, 2003).
                                                                                       5
“monetary pyramid” to classify the different types of currencies, which should be
distinguished according to their degree of “monetary internationalization”.
Under the Keynesian perspective adopted here, the key currency is placed at
the top of the hierarchy because it has the highest degree of liquidity. The
currencies issued by the other core countries are in intermediate positions, and
are also liquid currencies, yet with a smaller degree of liquidity than the key
currency. At the opposite end are the currencies issued by emerging countries,
which are non-liquid currencies (Andrade and Prates, 2013). The liquidity
premium of these currencies is lower than that of the key currency and of those
in the middle, labelled here as Northern currencies ls < ln (n = North, s = South).
Thus, to compensate for the lower liquidity premium, these currencies have to
offer a higher q, which is a policy variable, try to achieve a higher a, thus create
conditions which are attractive for international investors, and/or reduce c, i.e.
the obstacles for capital inflows. Only under these conditions the exchange
market can come to equilibrium:
   (1) an + qn – cn + ln = as + qs – cs + ls
The currency hierarchy is a fundamental feature of the international monetary
systems that came before in history inasmuch since the sterling-gold standard a
national currency has performed the role of international currency. As Flandreau
and Sussmann (2005) show, international bonds of Latin American countries,
from the beginning of the creation of domestic currencies due to political
independence in the early 19th century, even if denominated in their domestic
currencies, contained gold clauses, giving them the characteristics of foreign-
currency denominated debt. This is what Eichengreen and Hausmann (2005)
label the ‘original sin’ – a country’s inability to borrow abroad in own.
However, currently, this hierarchy revealed itself even more deleterious to
countries whose currencies are placed at its lower end due to the
characteristics of the international monetary system that has came out after the
collapse of the Bretton Woods Agreement, in 1971-1973, as detailed below.

3.2. Asymmetric financial integration

The main features of the current international monetary and financial system
are: (i) the fiduciary dollar as the key currency, on the top of the currency
hierarchy; (ii) the floating exchange rate regime; (iii) almost free capital mobility;
(iv) the dynamics of the current international financial system, governed by
financial globalisation (Prates, 2005).
As Keynes (1980b) stressed during the Bretton Woods debates, the
characteristics of the international monetary system shape the profile of the
international financial system. The interplay between the fiduciary and flexible
key-currency and the high capital mobility environment has fostered financial
market integration and financial innovations (securitization, derivatives, etc.),
leading up to the financial globalization setting. This setting, in turn, has been
marked by higher volatility, with capital flows, exchange rates, interest rates and
assets prices subject to large short-run fluctuations and a high degree of
contagion, with financial turbulence spreading from the epicentre of the system

                                                                                    6
to countries and markets that apparently have no connection with the original
problem (even to those considered to have “sound” macroeconomic policies)
(Chesnais, 1996; Bryan, 1999).
Yet, the international financial integration process is also asymmetric. Emergent
countries have become even more vulnerable to the inherent volatility of capital
flows, which ultimately depend on exogenous sources. In bust phases, by virtue
of changes in the monetary policy in the centre and/or increase in the
international liquidity preference, their currencies and financial assets are the
first to be sold due to their position at the lower end of the currency hierarchy. In
other words, they turn up the main victims of the global investors’ “flight to
quality” because their lowest l and, consequently, their inability to function as
store of value (Andrade and Prates, 2013). Furthermore, the still-marginal
insertion of currencies and financial assets of emerging economies in the
portfolios of these investors since the 1990s has also contributed to this process
(Obstfeld and Taylor, 2004).
The potentially destabilising effects of these flows on their financial markets and
exchange rates are significant. As in most of these countries financial markets
are not as liquid and deep, sales by foreign investors significantly reduce
securities prices, affecting the financial position of domestic debtors, besides its
direct effect on residents’ external debt (Studart, 2003; Griffith-Jones, 1995).
Some mainstream economists have also highlighted the boom and bust pattern
of capital flows, although they not take into account the hierarchical character of
the current international monetary system. According to the recent analysis
carried out by Rey (2013), this pattern is determined by a global financial cycle,
which depends mainly on monetary conditions in the centre country. These
monetary conditions are transmitted to the rest of the world through gross credit
flows and leverage, irrespective of the exchange rate regime. This channel, in
turn, invalidates the traditional “trilemma” (i.e., “impossible trinity”) view of the
open economy, upon which in a world of free capital mobility, independent
monetary policies are possible only if exchange rates float.


4. Limits of economic policy in emerging economies

In the following, we discuss the limits to exchange rate (section 4.1) and
monetary (section 4.2) policies of emerging countries that stem from the
position of their currencies at the lower end of the currency hierarchy. As we will
explore in the sequence the international asymmetry related to the currency
hierarchy, extrapolated by financial globalization, imposes major constrains to
the adoption of Keynesian policies for emerging economies.

4.1. Exchange rate policy

The policies of managed exchange rate adopted by peripheral emerging
countries in the late 1980s and 1990s proved highly vulnerable to speculative
attacks and culminated in successive currency crises. In most countries, these
policies were replaced by de jure floating exchange rates. However, in practice
domestic monetary authorities try to curb the volatility of their exchange rates

                                                                                   7
through active intervention in currency markets. What drives the systematic
interventions of central banks in the peripheral emerging economies’ currency
markets (the “fear of floating”, cf. Calvo and Reinhart, 2002) is the need to
contain the excessive volatility of exchange rates (see Section 3.2). This
defensive behaviour is manifested through attempts to reduce external
vulnerability by pre-emptive accumulation of foreign reserves -for the purpose of
meeting unforeseen requirements- and/or by curbing the tendency of currency
overvaluation during boom in capital flows (Aizenman et al, 2004; Carvalho,
2010). After the global financial crisis of 2008, several emerging economies
have also introduced capital account regulations in response to the new boom
in capital flows, which came out with huge currency appreciation pressures and
risk of credit and asset price booms (IMF, 2012; Fritz and Prates, 2014).
The Post Keynesian literature (Schulmeister, 1988; Davidson, 2000; Harvey,
2009) has already highlighted that short-term capital flows and expectations
about differentials of yields and/or liquidity constitute the key determinants of
exchange rates. Yet, in the case of emerging economies which have their
currencies placed at the lower end of the currency hierarchy, the volatility of
capital flows is higher than for centre economies and these flows are even more
sensitive to the monetary policy in the centre (see Section 3.2). As exchange
rates are more volatile, frequent interventions by the central banks are required,
which, in turn, reinforce the interaction between the exchange rate and the
policy rate. Therefore, the loss of monetary autonomy in a context of free capital
mobility is greater.
Further, for peripheral emerging economies, macroeconomic challenges are not
restricted to monetary policy, but also encompass exchange rate policy
inasmuch the volatility of the exchange rate is harmful due to its negative
impacts on growth, financial fragility and inflation (Flassbeck, 2001). Exchange
rates are particularly vulnerable to the inherent volatility of capital flows,
ultimately determined by an exogenous process. As already mentioned (section
3.2), at points of reversal of the cycle, of monetary policy changes in the centre
or of increase in the liquidity preference, emerging financial assets are the first
victims of the global investors’ “flight to quality”, as they cannot a safe haven
under uncertainty on a global scale. In this setting, the liquidity premium l and
the expected appreciation a are of utmost importance, since it is by means of
their assessment that agents in currency markets take decisions regarding
which assets to demand. If investors leave these countries swiftly, this may
deteriorate l even more, placing further pressure on local policy-makers to raise
the interest rate (with the aim of increasing q and a), as well as to deepen the
financial openness (namely, remove capital controls) to reduce c. (Andrade and
Prates, 2013). If this policy is successful, (a + q – c) will increase to compensate
the lower liquidity premium l (see section 3.1). As Grabel (1996, p. 1763)
stressed, the movement of portfolio investment induced by these policies
produce two harmful outcomes: “the exacerbation of constraints on policy
autonomy; and the increased vulnerability of the economy to risk, financial
volatility and crisis”
On the other hand, in periods of capital flows´ boom, when the appetite for risk
is higher, emerging assets become objects of desire on the part of global
investors because of the expectation of appreciation (increase in a) of their

                                                                                  8
respective currencies (associated with the favourable interest rate differential
and/or with the perspective of capital gains in the stock markets, which increase
q), compensating for their reduced liquidity premium l.
Yet, higher capital inflows, in the form of increased external debt, and/or higher
portfolio investments put pressures towards the appreciation of the domestic
currency, causing boom-bust cycles of credit and capital inflows and the
subsequent need to further increase the interest rate.

4.2. Monetary policy
The proper concept of currency hierarchy requires a specific policy to
compensate the difference between the liquidity premiums of currencies. One
option would be to increase the carrying costs cs, especially with regards to
capital outflows, in order to enable a difference qs - qn lower than ls - ln. Yet, this
kind of capital account regulation and low interest rate policy is difficult to
succeed when there is devaluation expectations attached to this peripheral
currency, i.e. a low as. When currency devaluation expectations are
predominant, market actors will urgently seek to circumvent outflow controls in
order to prevent future income and wealth losses.
The other option is the orthodox receipt of increasing the interest rate to
compensate for the lower liquidity premium. This makes domestic investment
and growth dependent from capital inflows. This growth by external debt may in
the best case increase domestic investment, however does cause an
appreciation   of   the   domestic      currency,    decreasing    international
competitiveness. This makes the growth process unsustainable in the medium
term, as amounting external vulnerability creates devaluation expectations and,
at some moment, the reversal of capital flows which may cause a financial crisis
in the emerging economy (Riese, 1997).
One important factor that also contributes for higher interest rates in peripheral
emerging countries is the fact that some traditional transmission channels of
monetary policy do not work well in most of them compared to centre
economies. Firstly, the credit channel is less effective due to the smaller ratio
credit to private sector-to-GDP. Second, the low development of capital market
makes domestic expenditure less sensitive to wealth effect. Third, as for the
exchange rate channel, exchange rate volatility is higher in emerging
economies (see section 4.1) and additionally evidences show that exchange
rate pass-through has tended to be stronger in such economies4 (Mohanty and
Scatigna, 2005); therefore, as exchange rate movements play a more
prominent role than in advanced economies, central banks rely often on interest
rate interventions to stem exchange rate volatility.
For all these reasons, monetary policy in emerging countries should be more
tightened than in centre economies in order to affect aggregate demand, what
means that the sacrifice ratio of deflationary policy is frequently higher. An
additional problem for emerging economies is their greater vulnerability to
external shocks than advanced ones due to specificities of their external

4
  The main reason is that income is negatively and significantly correlated with pass-
through as lower income economies have a larger portion of traded goods in the
households’ consumption basket.
                                                                                     9
insertion: empirical studies show that the impact of external shocks on domestic
inflation is more intensive in emerging economies than in advanced ones5, what
can contribute for a higher inflation rate compared to developed economies.
These specificities of monetary policy in peripheral emerging countries make
the implementation of inflation targeting regimes (ITR) – adopted by an
increasing number of these countries since beginning of the 1990s – even
harder than in advanced ones.
Indeed, even the standard literature recognizes that emerging countries face
particular challenges when put in place ITR due to (i) their higher pass-through
(see above), (ii) the greater difficulty in forecasting inflation, because shocks are
larger and have stronger effect, the productive diversification is lower and
domestic financial markets are shallower, (iii) their external liabilities are
overwhelmingly denominated in external currency (original sin), creating a
problem of ‘fear of floating’, and (iv) many emerging economies have a
credibility problem regarding monetary policy, which at least partially are
interdependent with these structural features (Eichengreen 2002; Mishkin,
2008).
Yet, there is an additional specific feature of ITR which applies under the
condition of an open capital account, and that further complicates the
achievement of a competitive and stable exchange rate, thus perpetuating the
problem of the low position in the currency hierarchy. The problem is that a
nominal appreciation of the currency is much more credible for a central bank
committed to inflation targeting than depreciation, due to the negative effect of
the latter on inflation through its pass-through effect. Indeed, empirical
evidence shows that in many emerging countries that adopt ITR central banks
make use of deliberate asymmetric policy with respect to the exchange rate, as
they avoid sharp currency depreciation and tend to tolerate currency
appreciation as it contributes to the achievement of the inflation targets. Thus,
under ITR, actors at the currency market internalize the expectation that the
central bank has an inclination towards currency appreciation, giving it highly
asymmetric power to influence the exchange rate, and creating an upward trend
which may further exacerbate exchange rate volatility and related boom bust-
cycles (Kaltenbrunner, 2011).
It is worth mentioning that most empirical literature that compares inflation and
output performance between emerging economies that adopt and that do not
adopt ITR show no conclusive evidences that the first group performs better
and that the differences between the two groups of countries with respect to
inflation performance appears small (Brito and Bystedt, 2010). Indeed, the
relatively low inflation of early 1990s until 2008 may be mostly related to the
impact of the entry of China and other emerging countries that produces
industrialized products at low costs.
We conclude this section with two lessons for our discussion. The first one is
the higher vulnerability to external shocks of peripheral emerging countries than
centre countries turns out such economies more prone to cost-push inflation.

5
  Mohanty and Klau (2001), analyzing the experience of 14 emerging countries during
the 1980s and 1990s, found that external supply shocks, in special food and energy
prices, are important determinants of domestic inflation.
                                                                                  10
The second lesson is that exchange rate movements pose some essential
challenges to emerging economies’ monetary authorities, considering the strong
influence of the exchange rate on domestic inflation in these countries and also
the effects of exchange rate volatility on real variables. While the higher
vulnerability to external shocks is associated with the very peripheral condition,
the essential challenges posed by exchange rate movements stem from, in the
last resort, the position of their currencies at the lower end of the currency
hierarchy.

5. Currency hierarchy and Keynesian economic policies for emerging
economies
In this section we discuss the implementation of Keynesian policies for
emerging economies under the conditions of currency asymmetries and
financial globalization, with special focus on exchange rate policies (section 5.1)
and growth policies combined with the reduction of interest rate differential and
macroeconomic stability (section 5.2). Such policies should be adapted to allow
for an increase of the policy space to pursue in the short and medium run
domestic policy goals, especially a competitive exchange rate, pre-condition for
the ascension of their currencies in the global currency hierarchy in the long
run.
5.1. Exchange rate policies
The literature that discusses what should be the most appropriate exchange
rate regime for peripheral emerging economies has not considered one key
issue stressed by Keynes: the adverse consequences of the position in the
currency hierarchy for the degree of macroeconomic policy autonomy.
Indeed, one of the central elements of Keynes´ proposal at the Bretton Woods
Conference was to reduce the asymmetries between creditor and debtor
countries, avoiding macroeconomic instability and deflationary adjustments that
hindered economies from achieving full employment (Keynes, 1980a, Davidson,
1992/93). In today’s world, a reform of the international monetary system as
proposed by Keynes would benefit, mainly, the emerging countries. However,
this sort of reform still seems to be a “monetary utopia”. We thus ask what could
be the most appropriate macroeconomic regime for allowing emerging
economies to achieve full employment and macroeconomic stability.
As in this system the hierarchy among currencies engenders structural
exchange rate volatility (higher a) in emerging peripheral economies, the
issuers of non-liquid currencies (lower l), the choice of the exchange rate
regime is of utmost importance. In the short run (currency hierarchy
unchangeable), the exchange rate policy can mitigate            the negative
consequences of the system´s asymmetries through its influence in the
attributes a and c, while the monetary policy can affect the attribute q (see
section 5.2).
We agree with other Post Keynesian authors which support that some sort of
managed floating exchange rate regime would be the best option for most
peripheral emerging economies (Ferrari-Filho and Paula, 2009; Frenkel, 2006).
Differently from a pegged/semi-pegged exchange rate, authorities’ interventions

                                                                                11
to limit exchange rate movements may not target a certain level of the
exchange rate, allowing the nominal exchange rate to float in order to
disincentive speculative capital flows. . Therefore, a managed floating exchange
rate regime can contribute to the fall in the volatility of a. The exchange rate
policy under the managed floating regime should also aim at influencing the
exchange rate path. The preservation of a competitive and stable real exchange
rate can be used as an intermediate target of macroeconomic policies oriented
to employment and growth objectives (Frenkel, 2006). This is because it is a
pre-condition for obtaining trade and current account surplus, which would
come out with lower external constraints to economic growth and greater policy
space to pursue Keynesian policies.
A competitive and stable exchange rate is the main target that peripheral
emerging economies should pursue to achieve external competitiveness. The
subordination of the exchange rate for the aim of price stability both in the case
of a pegged exchange rate or an inflation targeting regime is highly problematic
from this perspective. Price stability should rather be achieved by coordinated
monetary, fiscal and income policies.
Even if the attribute l is rather unchangeable in the short run, the accumulation
of trade and current account surpluses at the medium term is a necessary (but
not sufficient) condition to change this attribute. A low level of net external debt,
combined with export surpluses, may be able to create medium term currency
appreciation expectations, which would come out with an increasing demand for
this currency. This can lead to a sustained increase of a, thus giving room to
lower the policy rate q. The subsequent higher growth rates, together with
currency appreciation expectations, may in the long term enable this peripheral
currency to climb the global hierarchy, allowing gradually the country to issue
external debt in its own currency. A pre-condition for this rise, however, is that
there are other economies absorbing cumulative trade and current account
deficits. In a stable international monetary regime, this could be the case for the
hegemonic currency. Other economies will suffer the consequences of
cumulative destabilization due to subsequent trade and current account deficits
(Riese, 2004).
Yet, a crucial question still needs to be answered: Which tools have peripheral
emerging economies available to reach the aforementioned target of the
exchange rate policy in the current hierarchical and asymmetrical international
monetary system?
The effectiveness of the monetary authorities’ interventions in the currency
market depends on the size of foreign reserves and on the degree of financial
openness. Indeed, central banks of peripheral emerging countries, should act
as market makers in their currency markets, in order to influence the exchange
rate path. Yet, the larger the foreign reserves and the lower the degree of
financial openness (i.e, the broader the capital account regulation - higher c),
the greater their capacity to reduce the volatility of a and to influence the
exchange rate path.
Therefore, the “self-insurance” strategy of foreign reserves accumulation and
capital account regulation should be seen as complementary tools of the
exchange rate policy. This strategy would amount to a defensive response by
                                                                                  12
emerging economies which enhance the central banks capacity to counter
speculative attacks against their currency as well as boost the effectiveness of
their interventions in the currency market in normal times with the aim at
maintaining a stable and competitive exchange rate. Moreover, the very
accumulation of foreign reserves contributes to the net external debt fall. Thus,
this defensive response would result in a lower volatility and a sustained
increase of a, favouring to the process of climbing the currency hierarchy and,
eventually, to the rise in the liquidity premium l of their currency. On their turn,
capital account regulation work as a “filter” that soften the effects of fickle capital
flows (Greenville, 2000), enlarging the room of manoeuvre of the exchange rate
policy through its impact on the attribute c (the broader the capital account
regulation, the higher will be c). Therefore, despite the advances made by the
IMF (2012), its new framework on capital flow management does not provide
the necessary policy space for emerging economies inasmuch the IMF still
supports financial liberalization in these economies as a final goal, and set
bounds to their policy space. On the contrary, we support herein that capital
account regulation should be a permanent part of these countries´ exchange
rate regime and, thus, of their overall macroeconomic regime (Fritz and Prates,
2014).

5.2. Policies to achieve macroeconomic stability and to reduce interest
rate differential
Of particular interest in our discussion is the following question: How can an
emerging economy create conditions for alleviating pressure on monetary
policy, as the lower liquidity premium has to be compensated by higher interest
rates? A reduction in the interest rate if achieved could contribute to increase
the liquidity premium (l) of this economy (equation 2).
The tendency for a higher interest rate could be offset by regulation of capital
flows, by driving a wedge between onshore and offshore interest rates in order
to provide monetary authorities some policy autonomy. In particular, the
combination of foreign exchange reserves and some capital account regulation
can contribute for a greater stability in the foreign exchange market as financial
agents would have the perception that economic authorities have enough
instruments to reduce the volatility of capital flows, and doing so can contribute
for reducing the exchange rate risk and, consequently, the domestic interest
rate.
Further, the attachment of a stronger and sustained surplus in trade and current
account balance by reducing the country’s necessity of foreign capital could be
a structural factor for the fall in domestic interest rates, as it reduces the
necessity of high interest differential to attract capital inflows. This is one of the
main reasons why most East Asian developing countries have decreased
significantly their interest rates compared to Latin American ones.
Measures to stimulate the development of domestic financial markets by
diversifying firms’ financing sources can help to reduce country’s external
vulnerability and also to strengthen some traditional transmission mechanisms
of monetary policy (see section 4.2) to allow a reduction in the level of interest
rates. Of paramount importance are government’s efforts to reduce reliance on
indexed-public debt and at the same time to increase public financing through
fixed rate bonds, leading to the development of a long-term yield curve. In
                                                                                    13
particular, macroeconomic stability favours government’s efforts to improve
public debt and corporative bonds market. Greater access to domestic financing
derived from the development of the domestic bonds market can contribute for
the reduction of currency mismatches and can consequently reduce problems
related to the “original sin” (Mohanty, 2012). In short, the combination of low
interest rates (to support investment in fixed capital) with low and relatively
stable exchange rate (supportive to export growth), besides the implementation
of a countercyclical and flexible fiscal policy, would stimulate entrepreneurs to
make more risky choices than just accumulating liquid assets.
For the reasons that we have explored elsewhere in this paper, ITR is not the
most appropriate economic policy framework for peripheral emerging countries.
Their central banks should have a double target: employment and inflation. As
for the inflation target, we should consider some issues.
First, if monetary authorities have more than one goal they need more than one
tool (Tinbergen’s theorem), that can include, among others, macro-prudential
policies, including prudential credit controls (for instance, with the use of public
banks), and financial regulation. Due to the effects of the interest rate over
investment decision in capital assets, the use of interest rate for price
stabilization purposes should be avoided, and alternatively a broader and
pragmatic policy should be used for such goal, depending on the characteristic
of each type of inflation. As emerging economies are more vulnerable to supply
shocks, a pragmatic policy should include the use by government of buffer stock
of some essential products, the management of administrative prices (such as
private health plans), and/or some stability of the exchange rate (at a level that
not jeopardize the external competitiveness). The implementation of some sort
of income policy could contribute to ‘anchor’ prices: for instance, the adoption of
internal rules for nominal wage growth, which could follow productivity growth
plus some inflation index. Indeed, adjustment of real wages to productivity can
work as a sustainable stabilizer of domestic demand (Flassbeck, 2014), and at
the same time can be used as a policy of gradual real wage gains inasmuch in
a lot of peripheral emerging countries wage bargain is weak.
Second, empirical studies about ‘optimum’ intervals of inflation show the
existence of a non-linear relation between inflation rate and economic growth.
Most studies found critical levels higher to emerging economies than to
advanced ones6. One of the reasons is that a higher rate of GDP growth in the
former generates a higher rate of increase in non-tradable goods´ prices relative
to developed countries. Based on this reasoning we can state that the catching-
up of emerging countries to developed countries demands, amongst other
reasons, different target levels of inflation. Very low targets can compromise
economic growth in such economies.

6. Conclusion
In this paper we analysed how the set of Post Keynesian policies formulated to
pursue the goal of full employment should be adjusted for the case of emerging

6
 Khan and Sehadji (2001), for instance, found critical levels above of which inflation
decreases significantly economic growth between 1-3% p.a. for industrialized countries
and 11-12% p.a. for developing countries.
                                                                                   14
economies under the conditions of an asymmetric global monetary and financial
order. Within the global currency hierarchy, the currencies of peripheral
emerging economies are characterized by a lower liquidity premium than the
currencies of centre economies, which is severely damaging for a sustained
growth process. Under these conditions, we argue that economic policy
coordination should lay a major focus on exchange rate policies. It seems to be
relevant to avoid an appreciation of the domestic currency beyond a level which
allows at least for a balanced current account in order to prevent capital flows´
boom-bust-cycles with subsequent financial crises and their damaging effects
on employment and growth. In order to attain such goal, it is important to
sustain a stable and low interest rate alongside the strategies of foreign
reserves accumulation and capital account regulation.
The maintenance of an exchange rate aim for an equilibrated current account is
already a rather complex task which requires supportive monetary policy, but
also fiscal and wage policies. Policy coordination certainly is a key issue here,
especially to relieve monetary policy while at the same time maintaining a
moderately low level of inflation, and to create policy space for fiscal
countercyclical policies.
If this kind of policy set already is rather ambitious, this holds even more for
policy prescriptions to climb up the currency hierarchy. Here, certainly further
research in terms of country studies is required. There is an additional
challenge, as a key condition here seems to be the accumulation of trade and
current account surpluses. This, however, depends on the ability and
willingness of other economies to accept the counterpart of cumulative trade
and current account deficits. It thus seems that not all countries can climb the
ladder of the currency hierarchy at the same time, especially without others
declining.
References
Aizenman, J., Lee, Y. and Rhee, Y. (2004) “International reserves management
      and capital mobility in a volatile world: Policy considerations and a case
      study of Korea”. NBER Working Paper No. 10534.

Andrade, R. and Prates, D. M (2013).“Exchange rate dynamics in a peripheral
      monetary economy”. Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, vol. 35, 399-
      416.

Arestis, P. and Sawyer, M. (1998). “Keynesian economic policies for the new
       millennium”. The Economic Journal, vol. 108, 181-195.

Arestis, P. and Sawyer, M. (2006a). “Interest rates and the real economy”. In:
       Gnos, C. and Rochon, L.P. (eds.). Post Keynesian Principles of
       Economic Policy. Aldershot: Edward Elgar.

Arestis, P. and Sawyer, M. (2006b). “The nature and role of monetary policy
       when money is endogenous”. Cambridge Journal of Economics, v. 30,
       847-860.

Bryan, D. (1999) “Internationalization of Capital.” In P.A. O’Hara (ed.),
      Encyclopedia of Political Economy, vol. 1. London: Routledge, 1999.
                                                                              15
Brito, R.D. and Bystedt, B. (2010). “Inflation targeting in emerging economies:
       Panel evidence”. Journal of Development Economics, vol.91, 198–210.

Calvo, G. and Reinhart, C. (2002) “Fear of floating”. Quarterly Journal of
      Economics, vol. 117, no. 2, 379-408.

Carvalho,F.J.C. (1992).Mr Keynes and the Post Keynesians.Cheltenham:
      Edward Elgar.

Carvalho, F. J.C. (2010) “The accumulation of international reserves as a
      defense strategy”. In: Griffith-Jones, S., Ocampo, J.A. & Stiglitz, J.(2010)
      (eds.) Time for a Visible Hand: Lessons from the 2008 World Financial
      Crisis. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Chesnais, F. (1996) “Introduction générale”. In: Chesnais, F. (ed.) La
     Mondialisation Financière: Genèse, Coût et Enjeux.Paris: Syros.

Cohen, B. J. (1998). “The Geography of Money”. Ithaca, Cornell University
     Press.

Cohen, B. J. (2004). “The Future of Money”. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
   Press.

Davidson,P. (1982) International Money and the Real World. New York: Wiley.

Davidson,P. (1994). Post Keynesian Macroeconomic Theory. Cheltenham:
      Edward Elgar.

Davidson, P. (2000) “Liquidity vs. efficiency in liberalized international financial
      markets: a warning to developing economies”. Revista de Economia
      Política, vol. 20, no. 3, 3-21.

Eichengreen, B. (2002). Can Emerging Markets Float? Should they Inflation
      Target? Banco Central do Brasil Working Paper No. 36.

Eichengreen, B. and Hausmann, R. (2005) (eds) Other People’s Money – Debt
      Denomination and Financial Instability in Emerging Market Economies,
      Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Eichengreen. B., Hausmann, R., and Panizza, U. (2007). “Currency
      mismatches, debt intolerance, and the original sin: Why they are not the
      same and why it matters”. In Edwards, S. (ed.). Capital Controls and
      Capital Flows in Emerging Economies. Chicago: University of Chicago
      Press.

Ferrari-Filho, F.and Paula, L.F. (2009). “Exchange rate regime proposal for
       emerging countries: a Keynesian perspective”.       Journal of Post
       Keynesian Economics, vol. 31, 227-248.

Flandreau, M. and Sussmann, N. (2005).“Old sins – exchange clauses and
      European foreign lending in the nineteenth century”. In: Eichengreen, B.


                                                                                 16
      and Hausmann, R. (eds.). Other People’s Money. Chicago: University of
      Chicago Press.

Fritz B. and Prates, D (2014). “The new IMF approach to capital account
       management and its blind spots: lessons from Brazil and South Korea”.
       International Review of Applied Economics, v.28, 210 - 239.

Flassbeck, H. (2001). “The exchange rate – market price or economic policy
      tool”, UNCTAD Discussion Paper, n. 149.

Flassbeck, (2014).“Competitive exchange rates and macroeconomic theory”. In
      Bresser-Pereira, L.C., Kregel, J., and Burlamaqui, L.(ed.). Financial
      Stability and Growth: Perspectives on Financial Regulation and New
      Developmentalism. Abington: Routledge.

Frenkel, R. (2006). “An alternative to inflation targeting in Latin America:
      macroeconomic policies focused on employment”. Journal of Post
      Keynesian Economics, vol. 28, no.4, 573-591.

Grabel, I. (1996). “Marketing the Third World: The contradictions of portfolio
      investment in the global economy”. World Development, vol. 24, no. 11,
      1761-1776.

Greenville, S. A. (2000). “Exchange rate regimes for emerging markets”.
     Reserve Bank of Australia Bulletin. Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia,
     November.

Griffith-Jones, S. (1995) “Globalización de los mercados financieros y el
        impacto de los flujos hacia los países en desarrollo: Nuevos desafíos
        para la regulación”. Pensamiento Iberoamericano, vol. 27, 41-76.

Harvey, J. T. (2009) Currencies, Capital Flows and Crises: A Post Keynesian
      Analysis of Exchange Rate Determination. London: Routledge.

IMF (2012). The Liberalization and Management of Capital Flows – An
      Institutional View, at:
      http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2012/111412.pdf (last access
      03/18/2013).

Kaltenbrunner, A. (2011). Currency Internationalization and Exchange Rate
      Dynamics in Emerging Markets: A Post-Keynesian analysis of Brazil.
      (PhD Thesis), School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS), University
      of London.

Keynes, J.M. (1936). The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money.
     London: Palgrave Macmillan.

Keynes, J.M. (1980a). Activities 1940-46 Shaping the Post World: Employment
     and Commodities. Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes, vol.
     XXVII. London: Macmillan.



                                                                           17
Keynes, J. M. (1980b). The Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes, v.
     XXV, activities 1940-44: Shaping the Post-War World, the Clearing
     Union, D. Moggridge (ed.). London: Macmillan.

Khan, M. And Senhadji, A. (2001). “Threshold effects in the relationship
     between inflation and growth”. IMF Staff Papers vol. 48, no. 1, 1-21.

Mishkin, F. S. (2008). “Challenges for inflation targeting in emerging market
      countries”. Emerging Markets Finance And Trade, vol. 44, no. 6, 5-16.

Mohanty, M. (2012).    “Fiscal policy, public debt and monetary policy in
     EMEs: an overview”. BIS Papers no 67, October.

Mohanty, M., and Klau, M. (2001). “What determines inflation in emerging
     market economies?” BIS Papers n. 8. Basle: Bank for International
     Settlements.

Mohanty, M., and Scatigna, M. (2005). “Has globalization reduced monetary
     policy independence?” BIS Papers n. 23. Basle: Bank for International
     Settlements.

Obstfeld, M. and Taylor, A. M. (2004).Global Capital Markets – Integration,
      Crisis, and Growth.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Ocampo, J. A. and Martin, J. (2003) Globalization and Development: A Latin
     American and Caribbean Perspective. Palo Alto (CA): Stanford University
     Press.

Prates, D. M. (2005). “As assimetrias do sistema monetário e financeiro
      internacional”. Revista de Economia Contemporânea, vol. 9, no. 2, 263-
      288.

Prebisch,R.(1950). The economic development of Latin America and its
      principal problems.New York: United Nations Department of Economic
      Affairs, mimeo.

Rey, H. (2013). “Dilemma not trilemma: The global financial cycle and monetary
      policy independence”. London Business School, CEPR and NBER,
      Jackson Hole Symposium.

Riese, H, (1997): Stabilität und Entwicklung – Anmerkungen zur Integration der
      Dritten Welt in die Weltwirtschaft, in: Braig, M., Ferdinand, U. and
      Zapata, M. (eds.) Begegnungen und Einmischungen: Festschrift für
      Renate Rott zum 60. Geburtstag, Stuttgart: Akademischer Verlag,

Riese, H. (2004) “Development strategy and economic theory: comments on a
      Neglected Topic”. In: Hölscher, J. and Tomann, H. (ed.). Money,
      Development and Economic Transformation. Selected Essays,
      London/New York: Palgrave.

Schulmeister,S. (1988) “Currency speculation and dollar fluctuations”. Banca
      Nazionale Del Lavoro Quarterly Review, December.

                                                                           18
Sicsú, J. (2001). “Credible monetary policy: a Post Keynesian approach”.
      Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, vol. 23, no. 4, 670-686.

Studart, R. (2003). “A integração de parceiros desiguais: os efeitos
      desestabilizadores da liberalização financeira e a internacionalização
      das economias latino-americanas”. In: Ferraz, J. C., Crocco, M. and
      Elias, L.A. (ed.) Liberalização Econômica e Desenvolvimento. São Paulo:
      Futura.




                                                                          19
