     The export of commodities and the validity of the Export-Led Growth (ELG)
    hypothesis for the Brazilian economy: an analysis of the commodity boom period

Tiago Luiz Pesquero1
Aniela Fagundes Carrara2

                                  Área 7 - Economia Internacional

Abstract
The Export-Led Growth (ELG) hypothesis considers that rising exports can generate
positive externalities, the so-called spillovers, which accelerate economic growth, mainly
through gains in economies of scale. The present study examines the Brazilian economy in
the light of the Export-Led Growth (ELG) hypothesis, in order to examine if this hypothesis
is valid for periods in which commodities occupy a significant part of exports, for this
reason, for the period known as the "commodity boom", characterized by the considerable
growth of the Brazilian economy and the increase in the export of commodities, driven by
economic relations with China. In order to address the proposed objective, the estimation
method used was the Autoregression with Vector Error Correction (VEC) in its structural
version. The results suggest that the economic growth that occurred in Brazil during the
analyzed period does not corroborate the ELG hypothesis, which is endorsed by results
obtained in similar studies that evaluate economies whose exports were qualitatively
similar to the Brazilian ones.
Keywords: Commodities, Export-Led Growth, Exports.
JEL Classification: F41, F43, F47, Q17

Resumo
A hipótese Export-Led Growth (ELG) considera que a elevação das exportações pode gerar
externalidades positivas, os chamados spillovers, que aceleram o crescimento econômico,
principalmente por meio dos ganhos em economia de escala. O presente estudo examina a
economia brasileira à luz da hipótese Export-Led Growth (ELG), com o objetivo de
averiguar se esta hipótese é válida para situações em que as commodities ocupam parte
importante da pauta exportadora, por este motivo, a análise será feita para o período que
ficou conhecido como o "boom das commodities", caracterizado pelo crescimento
considerável da economia brasileira e elevação das exportações das commodities,
impulsionadas pelas relações econômicas com a China. De modo a contemplar o objetivo
proposto, foi utilizado o método de Autoregressão Vetorial com correção de Erro na sua
versão estrutural (SVEC). Os resultados alcançados indicam que o crescimento econômico
apresentado no Brasil, durante o período analisado, não se ajusta à hipótese ELG, o que é
corroborado por resultados obtidos em estudos semelhantes, que avaliam economias que
apresentavam pautas de exportação qualitativamente similares à brasileira.
Palavras-chave: Commodities, Export-Led Growth, Pauta Exportadora
Classificação JEL: F41, F43, F47, Q17
1
  Bacharel em ciências econômicas pela Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso – UFMT campus Rondonópolis, E-mail:
tilpesq@yahoo.com.br
2
  Doutora em Economia Aplicada pela ESALQ/USP e Professora Adjunta do curso de ciências econômicas da
Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso – UFMT, campus Rondonópolis. E-mail: anielacarrara@gmail.com.
        1. Introduction
        Economic growth is a widely addressed subject in Economics. From the study of the
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) to the study of labor productivity, from the macroeconomic
to the microeconomic level, the exercise of studying the relationship between the variables
that compose an economy in order to determine which are relevant for growth can be often
repetitive and display different and confounding results depending on the variables
considered and the statistical method employed. This paper discusses the influence of the
balance of trade, more specifically the exports of commodities and their role on Brazilian
economic growth within the scope of the export-led growth (ELG) hypothesis.
        The ELG hypothesis states that an increase in exports can generate externalities that
boost economic growth. Many papers that study this hypothesis analyze the influence of
exports on growth as well as the reverse influence – the Growth-Led Exports (GLE)
hypothesis, which states that economic growth promotes an increase in exports. Although
both hypotheses are reasonable, many papers show that different economies in different
periods verify (or not) either the ELG or the GLE hypothesis and, sometimes, both – that is,
bidirectional causality.
        Considering the recent Brazilian history, exports gained relevance during the so-
called commodity boom period, which occurred in the mid-2000s, a period in which the
Brazilian grew 4% per year on average according to BNDES (2012), characterized as a
moment of external vigor by Bacha (2013). In this context, a considerable increase in the
Brazilian exports was verified, relatively to imports, especially for commodities, in addition
to a great availability of cheap foreign currency caused by the appreciation of the Brazilian
currency and the inflow of foreign currency in the country (Barros, 2016).
        Therefore, the aforementioned moment of the Brazilian economy is very interesting
when compared to later periods in terms of carrying out an analysis in the light of the ELG
hypothesis, because of both the high growth rate presented and the increase in exports,
culminating thus in this paper’s purpose of analyzing whether commodity exports can
validate the ELG hypothesis based on the 2002-2012 period, known as commodity boom
period. To do so, a model based on the existing literature is constructed and the estimation
is performed using an autoregression with vector error correction (VEC) in its structural
version (SVEC), which enables the observation of potential dynamic effects between the
variables of interest.
        In order to attain its objective, this paper is split into four sections in addition to this
introduction. Second section brings a brief explanation of the ELG hypothesis and presents
some papers that sought to verify it, as well as a brief contextualization of Brazilian exports
during the time period considered. Third section presents the model, the methodology and
the data, fourth section discusses the results and the last section draws the major
conclusions reached in the study.


        2. The Export–Led Growth hypothesis and the Brazilian exports during the
commodity boom period
        This section presents the main assumptions of the hypothesis considered in this
study, in addition to some studies that use it to analyze the relationship between exports and
growth in a certain country or region. Then, we provide some information about Brazilian
exports and the economic scenario during the commodity boom period.
        2.1 The Export-Led Growth (ELG) Hypothesis
        The ELG hypothesis became relevant in the late 1970s replacing the import
substitution industrialization as the basis for development policy decisions. It is possible to
mention several recent papers that analyze such theory such as Palley (2011), Kumari &
Malhota (2014), Carvalho (2015), Akpan, Nwosu & Eweke (2017), Vieira & Xavier
(2017), among others.
        The ELG hypothesis postulates that the increase in exports can generate positive
externalities, the so-called spillovers, which boost economic growth. That is, by joining
international trade and being exposed to a more competitive market, the country may
develop economies of scale, which offer an increasing rate of return, increasing
productivity. It can also develop more efficient management techniques and broaden its
relationship with other countries and the access to their markets. All these factors can affect
other sectors of the economy that are not directly involved with exports, increasing both
their productivity and efficiency and benefiting the entire economy.
        According to Palley (2011), the ELG hypothesis is based on three pillars: the theory
of comparative advantages (OHLIN, 1933; SAMUELSON, 1948; DORNBUSCH et al.
1980); ii) the benefits of liberalization to control rent-seeking3; iii) the benefits of
liberalization to growth: the spillovers. Such pillars are assumptions of the new model
named “the liberalization hypothesis”. Therefore, according to the aforementioned author,
the ELG hypothesis derives from this new model, especially applicable to developing
economies.
         The adoption of the ELG premises or its first stage, according to Palley (2011),
occurred in economies such as Germany and Japan between the mid-twentieth century and
the 1970s, approximately. These countries already had industrialized regions and used
devaluation as a growth promoter. Later, the second stage was composed of countries such
as the Asian tigers, which also devaluated their currency but, differently from the countries
in the first stage, they needed to import technology and, therefore, depended on foreign
technology, but exported through national companies. The third stage aggravated even
more this foreign dependence, since countries like Mexico, which composed this stage,
served basically as a platform for multinationals and there was no incentive to local
industries, only foreign direct investment-seeking. Therefore, countries from the third stage
were subjected to the needs of foreign companies and the ultimate goal of this arrangement
was to carry out the production in developing countries via multinationals and export it to
developed countries.
        The fourth stage, still according to Palley (2011), had China as its exponent and
some fundamental changes occurred in the arrangement in relation to the previous stage.
The main ones were the asymmetric global agreements made by China, the currency
devaluation managed by controlling the flow of foreign capital, and the incentive given by
the Chinese government to joint ventures in order to absorb technological knowledge and
develop the local industry, even though exports were still made by multinationals.
        It is noteworthy that even though the ELG hypothesis is the most explored, there is
also in the literature a hypothesis opposite to it, the Growth-Led Exports (GLE) hypothesis,
which states that economic growth precedes the increase in exports, that is, the economy

3
 Rent-seeking: seeking to obtain income without the corresponding generation of value through political or
social means (for example: lobbying).
grows and develops its productive capacity, becomes more efficient and, therefore, more
competitive and, with a more efficient production, prices drop and the process of exporting
is facilitated (LANCASTER, 1980; KRUGMAN, 1984; KÓNYA, 2006).
         Although the ELG hypothesis is quite coherent, many factors must be considered
when one aims to investigate if it can be verified for a certain economic scenario. Since the
exports of an economy can be composed of several different types of products, from
commodities such as meat, soy and coffee – which have a low value added, since much can
be added to them after their purchase – to high value-added final goods such as state-of-the-
art electronics, vehicles and goods with a high degree of Research & Development, it is
reasonable to ask whether the ELG hypothesis applies to all exportable goods. Thus, many
authors segment the exports when studying the ELG hypothesis, such as Carvalho (2015),
who splits the goods exported by Portugal into processed and unprocessed goods. The
author studies the ELG hypothesis in the Portuguese economic scenario from 1970 to 2012
and also indicates the possibility of verification of the GLE hypothesis. In the conclusions,
which corroborated the existence of ELG, the author also verifies through the model that
the share of unprocessed goods in the exports, such as commodities, had a negative effect
on GDP. The author states that due to these products not providing a sustainable flow of
spillovers, they do not serve as growth promoters in the sense of the ELG hypothesis. In
this case, it is supposed that, for ELG to occur, high value-added exports are required.
         Still with regard to papers that investigate the ELG hypothesis, we can mention
Ghatak, Milner & Utkulu (1997), which carried out their analysis for Malaysia during the
1955-1990 period and found a positive relationship between total exports and economic
growth. However, a more thorough investigation carried out by the authors revealed that
there was a negative impact of exports of primary products on growth, with the exports of
manufactured goods (which have a higher value added) accounting for the aggregate
positive impact.
         Myovella, Paul & Rwakalaza (2015) study the possibility of occurrence of ELG and
GLE for Tanzania between 1980 and 2013. The authors indicate the adoption, by many
countries from 1980 on, of the new paradigm of growth through the promotion of exports –
especially the acceptance of this new model by organizations such as the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank. The authors concluded that the ELG hypothesis
was not corroborated by the data; however, Tanzanian foreign trade policy is recent, so this
might have affected the results. They also suggest that a segmentation of exportable goods
into manufactured and primary products, following Carvalho (2015) might have generated
different results.
         Akpan, Nwosu & Eweke (2017) analyze the effects of the exports of non-oil
derivatives and their impact on the growth of Nigeria, as well as the effect of the
development of the financial sector on growth, and conclude that there is a positive
relationship between the variables of the financial sector and GDP. Therefore, a developed
financial system, taking advantage from the extra income generated by the expansion of
exports more efficiently, can help expand the spillover effect and promote ELG.
         Tessema (2017) assesses the relevance and the performance of the balance of trade
in the Ethiopian economy between 1981 and 2014 using ELG as reference. Through an
econometric model that enables studying the relationship between the exporting sectors and
the short- and long-run growths, the author analyzes which would be the best set of policies
to be adopted in that developing economy out of the paradigms of import substitution
industrialization and promotion of exports. The author concludes that the Ethiopian
economy had a deficit in its balance of trade in the period analyzed. Thus, due to the
relevance of the balance of trade in the economy, the study recommends the use of policies
based on the ELG hypothesis.
        It is also noteworthy the work of Shafillah, Selvanathan & Naranpanawa (2017),
which investigated ELG in Australia and its regions. The authors segmented the exports of
the country into agriculture, minerals and oil, manufactured goods and others. The
evaluation was carried out for the 1990-2013 period and, as a result, the authors found that
ELG works differently in each region analyzed, but can be verified in the long run for the
country as a whole.
        All the aforementioned papers sought to verify (or not) ELG in several countries.
For the Brazilian case, there are also papers dedicated to the issue. Among them we can
mention Campos (2009), which seeks to evaluate ELG for Brazil considering the January
1975-February 2008 period and concludes that there is a bidirectional relationship between
exports and GDP in the short run. Machado (2017) also evaluates ELG for Brazil in the
1975-2017 period, but does not find evidence of the hypothesis for the period analyzed,
only a bidirectional Granger causality between PIB and Brazilian exports.
        In a more specific manner, Munduruca & Santana (2012) do not use the term ELG,
but analyze the possibility of economic growth through the exports of primary products for
the Brazilian state of Sergipe. To determine the products of the exports of Sergipe that had
greater potential, the authors use a matrix that determines export potential based on the
revealed comparative advantage (RCA) index together with data from the Brazilian
Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) for the 2001-2008 period. The authors found
that out of a total of 99 items exported by Sergipe, 35 did not display export potential, 8 are
dynamic and 56 displayed export potential.
        Vieira & Xavier (2017) also tested ELG for Brazil and verified if the result was
linked with the increase in the exports for China. To do so, they evaluated the 1983-2003
period using the Johansen cointegration, the Granger causality test and the synthetic control
method for comparative studies. The authors found that there are indications that the
Brazilian economic growth was already led by exports before China became the major
destination of such exports.
        Therefore, it can be observed in the small sample of aforementioned papers that, in
general, there is no unanimity with regard to proving (or not) the ELG hypothesis – and the
same can be noted for the Brazilian case. This encourages the elaboration of new studies,
such as this paper, in order to reinforce (or not) the verification of the ELG hypothesis.
Moreover, it is noteworthy that the objective of this paper is to verify if a certain segment
of exports – namely commodities – are able to validate ELG for Brazil, proposing, thus, an
analysis focused on an important sector of Brazilian exports, as suggested by Carvalho
(2015) and Myovella, Paul & Rwakalaza (2015).
        .
        2.2 Brazilian exports and the commodity boom period
        As it has been made clear in the previous subsection, a fundamental item for
verifying the ELG hypothesis is the exports of the region or the country analyzed; thus, it is
important to understand its composition. With regard to Brazilian exports, it has varied
considerably between 2002 and 2012, considering the segmentation by value added. Figure
1 presents the share of primary products, semi-manufactured goods, manufactured goods
and special Free on Board (FOB) operations in dollars. It can be observed that the share of
primary products almost doubled in the period considered, rising from 24% in 2002 to 46%
in 2012. Conversely, the share of manufactured goods fell from 57% in 2012 to 38% in
2012, what indicates a gradual increase in the prominence of primary products – which,
according to the Ministry of Industry, Trade and Services (MDIC), are unfinished products
or products that do not incorporate technology, that is, primary agricultural commodities
and minerals – in Brazilian exports in relation to the other products in the period
considered, which, due to such prominence, is known as the commodity boom period.
        Out of the primary products, one that stands out among the main exported products
listed by MDIC, between 2002 and 2012, is “soybeans (including crushed soybeans)”,
which, throughout the entire decade considered, was among the three main products
exported by Brazil in US$ FOB, being, in some years, the main exported product according
to MDIC (2018). Another commodity that stands out as one of the main exported products
in the period considered is “bran and residues from the extraction of soybean oil”, which is
usually among the ten main exported products in US$ FOB, reaching, in the period, an
average exported value of US$ 3.8 billion according to MDIC (2018). This sheds light on
the importance of the soy complex4 for Brazilian exports. Thus, this paper will use
information from such set of products as a proxy of the commodities exported by Brazil in
the model that will be estimated in the next sections.




Source: MDIC (2018)
Figure 1 – Brazilian exports by value added – 2002-2012

        In this same period, the country presented an average growth of 4% per year
(BNDES, 2012) and an average inflation of 6.5% per year (IPEADATA, 2018). According
to BNDES (2012), there has been a considerable improvement in income and quality of life
of lower-income households, since the unemployment rate increased between 2002 and
2003, possibly due to the presidential transition, reaching 12.3% in 2003, but from 2004 on
it presented successive declines, reaching 5.5% in 2012 as can be seen in Figure 2.



4
    According to MAPA (2018), this complex is composed by soybean bran, soybean oil and soybean grains.
Source: IBGE
Figure 2 – Unemployment rate 2000-2012


        Thus, there was an economic scenario of growth, given the conjunction of the
positive trend of important economic variables for the period considered – the commodity
boom period. Such increase in the exports was motivated by the rapid growth in the
demand for commodities, especially by China, which consolidated as a world great power
and as one of the main Brazilian partners in international trade. With the sharp increase in
the demand for commodities and a restricted supply, such products had a vigorous increase
in their prices and despite naturally showing volatility in prices, the boom period
represented an exception increase in them, as can be seen in Figure 3.




Source: IMF
Figure 3 – Commodity price index - IMF
        It is clear in Figure 3 the quite dramatic rise in commodity prices from 2004 on.
Between 2008 and 2009 the impact of the international crisis occurs, causing prices to fall;
however, between 2009 and 2010 prices start rising again.
        Once the impulse to exports provided by the commodity boom period and the
economic scenario of growth that marked the period are proven evident, this paper aims at
tacitly analyzing the possibility of the emergence of spillovers in this framework of exports
composed mainly by commodities.

           3. Methodology
           This section presents the data, the model and the econometric methods that were
used.

       3.1 The estimated model
       In order to attain our goal and following Shafiullah, Selvanathan & Naranpanawa
(2017), this paper estimates the following equation:
                                n              n                    n
                         ht   1i h t  i   1i quant t  i    1i e t  i 1t    (1)
                               i 1           i 1                 i 1
       where h is the output gap, which will serve as a measure of economic growth5,
quant is the exports quantum index of the soybean complex, which will serve as a proxy for
the commodities exported by Brazil, e is the real exchange rate, n represents the amount of
required lags, ε is the random error term.
       It is important to notice that the exports quantum of the soybean complex was
chosen as a proxy for exported commodities due to its relevance among the products that
compose Brazilian exports, as previously highlighted.

       3.2 Data
       To estimate our model, we used monthly data from January 2002 to December
2012. All series were transformed into indices being January 2002 the basis – then, they
were expressed in logarithms.




5
    When output gap is positive, actual output is greater than potential output and growth is occurring.
Table 1 - Variables
   Variables        Representation                                      Description
                                                 To calculate the gap, the following expression was used:
                                                  PIBreal  PIBpotenci al 
                                                          PIBpotenci al
      Output gap                   h
                                                 where, in order to represent GDP, the series Monthly
                                                 GDP – Current values (R$ million) was used. (Series nº
                                                 4380 - Source: Central Bank of Brazil). The potential
                                                 GDP was estimated by the Hodrick – Prescott* filter.
Exports quantum                                  Exports quantum of the soybean complex in kg. Source:
 of the soybean                 quant            Brazilian Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Supply
    complex                                      (MAPA).

     Exchange rate                               Real exchange rate index (IPCA) – June 2014=100 –
    series (Source:                e             North American dollars. Series nº.11753 - Source:
    Central Bank of                              Central Bank of Brazil.
        Brazil)
Source: The authors.
*With the Hodrick-Prescott (HP) filter, the potential output is calculated by minimizing the sum of the
squares of the differences between the effective series and its long-term trend subject to the constraint that the
sum of the squares of the second differences of the trend must be zero. The weight of the latter constraint,
represented by λ, may vary, and the idea is that the greater the weight, the greater the trend of the derivative of
the HP filter to become a straight line. In contrast, the smaller the weight given to the smoothing of the trend,
the more it gets closer to the original series. In this paper, the weight attributed to smoothing was 14,400,
since this is the standard value suggested in the literature for monthly series (Hodrick & Prescott, 1997).

        3.3 The estimation method
        In order to ensure goodness of fit, the first tests we performed were the ADF-GLS
(Elliot, Rothenberg & Stock, 1996) and the KPSS (Kwiatkowski et al., 1992)6 tests, which
verified the stationarity of the series. Such tests were chosen because they are deemed more
efficient in relation to the ADF test (Dickey & Fuller, 1981) since, according to Hatanaka
(1996), the changes introduced by these procedures aim at correcting power and size issues
observed in the original Dickey-Fuller test.
        After the unit root tests, the Johansen cointegration test (1988) was carried out in
order to capture the existence of a long-term relationship between the variables of the
model. The Granger causality test was also performed in order to verify the existence of
causality in the sense of Granger, that is, from the past to the present, between the variables
of the model. The results led to employing the autoregression with vector error correction
(VEC), which was estimated in its structural version (SVEC) following Enders (2004). The
described procedures were carried out with the aid of the econometric software WinRats.


6
  Kwiatkowski et al. (1992) propose a unit root test where, differently from the traditional ones, the null
hypothesis is that the observed series is stationary, testing this hypothesis against the hypothesis of existence
of unit root. Following Maddala & Kim (1998), KPSS can be considered a confirmatory test that increases the
efficiency of the analysis and ensures more robust results for the verification of the order of integration of
time series.
      4. Results
      This section presents the results of the auxiliary tests – stationarity, cointegration,
Granger causality – and the estimation of the proposed model.

        4.1 Results of the unit root tests
        The tests were carried out with the variables in logarithms and the number of lags
was chosen based on the modified Akaike criterion (MAIC) which, given the number
defined as the maximum7, indicates the number of lags appropriate for the variable being
tested. Table 2 displays the results obtained and we can verify that, by the ADF-GLS test,
only the variable gap was stationary at 5% 8 for both the test with a constant and the test
with constant and trend. For the KPSS tests with constant and constant and trend, all
variables are stationary at 5%.
        To correct the existence of unit root found in the tests (in the case of the variable
gap, only by KPSS), the first difference was applied to all series – then, the tests were
performed again and the issue was corrected. Thus, all variables used in the estimation are
I(1), that is, integrated of order 1.

Table 2 – Results of the ADF unit root test
                Variable                 ADF-GLS test (test                         KPSS test (test
                                             values) *                               values) **
        Gap (lh)           Constant            -2.96                                    1.10
                          Constant and
                             trend             -3.22                                       0.20
  Quantum (lquant)         Constant             0.30                                       0.50
                          Constant and
                             trend             -1.24                                       0.15
     Exchange (le)         Constant            -0.70                                       1.73
                          Constant and
                             trend             -1.50                                       0.20
Source: The authors.
* Critical values with constant: -1.61 to 10%, -1.94 to 5% and -2.57 to 1%. Critical values with constant and
trend: - 2.64 to 10%, -2.93 to 5% and -3.46 to 1% (values provided by the GRETL program following Elliot,
Rothenberg & Stock (1996)). ** Critical values with constant: 0.347 to 10%, 0.463 to 5% and 0.739 to 1%.
Critical values with constant and trend: 0.119 to 10%, 0.146 to 5% and 0.216 to 1% (values provided by the
GRETL program following Kwiatkowski et al. (1992).

       4.2 Results of the cointegration test
       In order to verify the existence of long-term relationship between the variables, the
Johansen cointegration test was performed. The number of lags used in the test was chosen
following the Bayesian criterion (BIC), which indicated two lags as the appropriate

7
  The criterion used to define the maximum lag (pmax) for the variables used in this paper was the one proposed
                                               T   , with T being the number of observations. Thus, since
                                                      1/ 4
                               max  int 12 *       
by Schwert (1989), where p
                                              100  
all the series used have 132 observations, the maximum lag found for them was 13.
8
  Significance level that will be used as parameter for all the tests performed in this paper.
number. Table 3 presents the results obtained from the test, which, at the 5% level,
indicates that we fail to reject the hypothesis of existence of at most one vector against the
alternative hypothesis that there is more than one cointegration vector.

Table 3 – Results of the Johansen cointegration test
Null hypothesis (H0)    Alternative hypothesis   Trace statistics                 Critical values at 5%*
        r=0                    r>0                 55.98                                   29.68
        r=1                    r>1                 13.08                                   15.41
        r=2                    r>2                   1.09                                   3.76
Source: The authors.
*Critical values according to Osterwald-Lenum (1992)

        With the verification of the existence of cointegration between the variables of the
model, we included in the estimation of the autoregressive vectors the terms of error
correction, culminating in an autoregressive model with vector error correction (VEC)
which will be estimated in its structural version, enabling the identification of structural
shocks with a theoretical basis and not only by the Cholesky ordination.
        Before estimating the model, it is possible to analyze the estimates of the short-run
(α) and long-run (β) coefficients of the model within the scope of the results of the
Johanson cointegration test, as can be seen in Table 4. It is noteworthy that the variable gap
takes value 1 for the long-run estimate because conjectures on the other parameters were
drawed in relation to this variable. According to the results, a shock of 1% in the exports
quantum of the soybean complex corresponds to a 0.55% elasticity of transmission from
this variation to the output gap, what shows that the exports of the soybean complex exert a
positive influence on total output. With regard to the exchange rate, all other things being
equal, a rise of 1% in the exchange rate affects the output gap in 0.24%.

Table 4 – Estimates of the short- and long-run coefficients of the model
 Variables        Estimate for the α’s (short-run        Estimate for the β’s (long-run
                     adjustment coefficients)*                   coefficients)*
   Gap                         0.039                                  1.00
 Quantum                      -0.402                                 0.556
 Exchange                      0.001                                 0.242
Source: The authors.
*The signs of the exposed coefficients are inverted in relation to the results of the estimation – this change
was made because, with the normalization of the cointegration vector, the variables remain on the same side
of the cointegration equation; thus, to proceed with the analysis, the opposite sign must be used.

        With regard to the short-run coefficients of adjustment, it is noted that temporary
imbalances of the output gap are corrected at a rate of 3.9% in each period, that is, the
positive impact that the exports considered in this study or the exchange rate may generate
on the output gap is corrected in 3.9% each month. In relation to the exports quantum of the
soybean complex, the speed of adjustment of an imbalance reaches 40.2%, the greatest
among the variables considered in the model. Exchange rate is the variable that presents the
slowest adjustment (0.1% in each period).
        4.3 Results of the Granger causality test
        Before the SVEC estimationl, it is important to note the existence of causality
between the variables of the model, pointing out that it will be verified only in the sense of
Granger, that is, from the past to the present; therefore, the effects of expectations are not
considered in this type of test.
        In order to perfom such causality test, the number of lags was chosen based on the
Bayesian criterion (BIC). As it has been verified in Table 5 and considering a 5%
significance level, the only pair of variables that presented causality in the sense of Granger
was the output gap (h) and the exports quantum of the soybean complex (quant) - a
bidirectional causality, that is, at 5%, both the exports quantum affect the output gap in the
sense of Granger and the output gap affects the quantum, what was expected since Campos
(2009) and Machado (2017) also obtained these same results for the relationship exports-
GDP, despite using different time periods and products in their analyses. The most
interesting direction of the causality, according to the goal of this paper, is the one that stats
that the exports quantum of the soybean complex causes the output gap. Proceeding with
the estimation, it will be possible to define if such relationship, which has already been
proven to exist in the long run, is robust enough to verify the ELG hypothesis.

Table 5 – Granger causality test
         Null hypothesis      Nº of lags             F-statistics           Conclusion
     quant does not cause h       2                     5.01                  Rejects
     h does not cause quant       2                     13.18                 Rejects
        e does not cause h        2                     1.35                  Rejects
        h does not cause e        2                     0.51               Fails to reject
     quant does not cause e       3                     0.12               Fails to reject
     e does not cause quant       3                     0.21               Fails to reject
Source: The authors.


        4.4 Results of the structural vector error correction (SVEC) model
        It was initially defined the matrix of contemporaneous relationships, which
considers the economic relations existing between the variables, constituting, thus, the
structural part of the model. The matrix was constructed based on the following sequence
of variables: output gap, exports quantum and exchange rate. The constraints imposed
ensured that the gap was written as a function of the quantum and the exchange rate and
that the quantum was written as a function of the exchange rate. With such constraints, the
matrix was exactly identified so no test was needed to evaluate overidentified constraints.

        4.4.1 Results of the matrix of contemporaneous relationships
        Using Table 6 we can evaluate the coefficients obtained through the specification of
the matrix of contemporaneous relationships. We note that the only contemporaneous
relationship considered that was significant at 5% was the one between exchange rate and
output gap. According to the results, a contemporaneous increase of 1% in the real
exchange rate corresponds to a 0.12% increase in the output gap, indicating that a real
exchange devaluation in the present can contribute to increase the difference between real
and potential output. With regard to the relationship of greatest interest to this paper, it was
not possible to obtain any information via matrix of contemporaneous relationships due to
the statistical insignificance of the coefficient obtained.
        The results in Table 6 are related only to the contemporaneous behavior of the
variables without considering their dynamic interactions over time. Such aspect will be
dealt with in the following sections.

Table 6 – Results of the matrix of contemporaneous relationships
     Contemporaneous relationships           Estimated      Standard                          t* statistics
      FROM                    TO            coefficients    Deviation
     Dlquant                 Dlh              0.00008         0.007                               0.01
        Dle                  Dlh              0.12648         0.072                               1.74
        Dle                Dlquant            0.14699         0.853                               0.17
Source: The authors.
* The t statistics measures the significance of the estimated coefficients for each contemporaneous
relationship (H0: coefficient is zero). However, it is noteworthy that this statistics is not as rigorous for
analyzing the significance of the coefficients of the matrix of contemporaneous relationships from the VAR
methodology as it is for the ones from the ordinary least squares method (Bacchi, 2005).

        4.4.2 – Results for the decomposition of the variance of the forecast error
        Since we are focused on finding evidence that commodity exports (represented here
by the exports quantum of the soybean complex) have impacted economic growth
positively in the period known as “commodity boom period”, it is fundamental to
understand the importance of the exports quantum on the variations of the output gap.
        Table 7 presents the decomposition of the variance of the output gap forecast error.

Table 7 – Decomposition of the variance of the output gap forecast error
                 Periods Std. Dev.       Dlh     Dlquant     Dle
                     1      0.030086 97.663         0       2.337
                     2      0.034478 95.07        2.277     2.652
                     3       0.03474 94.354       2.533     3.113
                     4      0.034909 93.914       2.876     3.209
                     5      0.035049 93.845       2.957     3.198
                     6       0.03508 93.848        2.96     3.192
                     7      0.035081 93.847       2.961     3.193
                     8      0.035083 93.844       2.963     3.192
                     9      0.035085 93.844       2.964     3.192
                    10      0.035085 93.844       2.964     3.192
                    11      0.035085 93.844       2.964     3.192
                    12      0.035085 93.844       2.964     3.192
Source: The authors.

        As can be seen in Table 7, in all periods (months) considered, great part of the
variation of the output gap (94.31% on average) is explained by the variable itself. In the
first two periods such percentage is higher since the quantum has no influence on the
variation of the analyzed variable and the real exchange rate affects it only by 2.33%. In the
second period, the quantum explains a small part (2.27%) of the oscillations in the gap and
the influence of the exchange rate also rises (2.65%). From the third period on it is possible
to verify that the importance of the exports quantum and the exchange rate on the variations
of the gap still shows some increases, but these are getting smaller, in a way that in the last
month considered, the exports quantum explains about 2.96% of te variations in the gap and
the exchange rate, 3.19%. This suggests that the quantum of commodity exported by the
country has some influence on the variations of the output gap, but it is not relevant.

         4.4.3 Results for the impulse-response functions
         This subsection presents the responses of the output gap to exogenous and
individual shocks in the variables that compose the model.
         Figure 4 presents the response of the output gap to a positive shock in the exports
quantum of commodities. It is possible to note that if we consider a positive shock of 1% in
the exports quantum, the initial response of the gap is a reduction that reaches its peak in
the second period (-0.015%), but, afterwards, the response of such variable reverses and
between the third and the fourth periods we can verify an increase of 0.0009% that slowly
dissipates. From the seventh period on, no relevant variation can be observed anymore.
Corroborating these results, Carvalho (2015) and Ghatak, Milner & Uktulu (1997) also
verify negative effects of commodity exports on the output of the economy they analyze.
         From this result, it is possible to conclude that in periods where commodity exports
rise, like the commodity boom period, there is a generally positive effect on the output;
however, such effect is rather small and lasts for only a few periods – thus, it does not seem
to be robust enough to generate the positive externalities (spillovers) required to ensure
economic growth within the scope of the ELG hypothesis. Some indications of this result
had already been heralded by the decomposition of the variance of the output gap exposed
above.




Figure 4 – Impulse-response function: response of the output gap to a shock in the
exports quantum of the soybean complex
Source: The authors.

       Still in the scope of the instruments of the impulse-response function, it is possible
to observe the variation of the output gap when a shock in the real exchange rate occurs.
Figure 5 shows that, if the exchange rate increases by 1%, the output gap in the first period
increases by 0.13%, which dissipates over time, reaching the sixth period with such
response almost exhausted. This result reinforces something that had been already indicated
by the decomposition of the variance of the gap: an influence of the real exchange rate on
the output greater than that of the exports quantum. Thus, a variation in exchange rate
causes a greater response in the output, showing that if the Brazilian currency is devaluated
– which makes domestic products cheaper to foreigners – the trend is that this is reflected in
the Brazilian domestic product, since the items that will benefit from it will not be only
commodities, the focus of this paper, but all the exports of the country.




Figure 5 – Impulse-response function: response of the output gap to a shock in the
real exchange rate.
Source: The authors.



        5. Conclusions
        The Export-Led Growth is not recent in the literature – the export-led growth model
is a paradigm long studied and discussed since it became the new standard, in many
countries, after the decline of the import substitution model in the 1970s (Palley, 2011).
However, such a paradigm presents different characteristics depending on the economy
where it is verified.
        The Brazilian exports are highly dependent on commodities, what became evident
during the period known as commodity boom, when the Chinese demand for such products
boosted its prices. In this scenario, this papers sought to analyze if this export-led growth
paradigm, more specifically the ELG hypothesis, is validated by commodity exports for the
Brazilian economy during the commodity boom period.
        Based on the estimated short- and long-run coefficients, it was possible to observe
that there is a long-run relationship between the exports quantum considered in this study
and the output gap, with the speed of adjustment of the latter to any given shock being not
too high (3.9% per month); thus, shocks from exports would have a chance of lasting for
some time. It was also verified a bidirectional causality in between commodity exports and
output gap in the sense of Granger, that is, from the past to the present. Through the
estimation of a structural vector error correction model, it was possible to verify that the
contemporaneous relationship between the exports quantum of commodities and the output
gap is not significant. Conversely, through the decomposition of the variance of the forecast
errors, the results indicated an influence of the exports quantum on the output gap,
corroborating the result of the estimated long-run coefficient; it is, however, a small
influence of 2.61%. Analyzing the impulse-response functions, this weak influence was
confirmed, since the positive response of the output gap to a shock in the exports quantum
that can be verified only from the middle of the second period on was once again small and
not robust enough to generate the spillover of positive externalities to other sectors as the
ELG hypothesis states. As it is reinforced by Carvalho (2015), for ELG to occur, the
generation of spillovers is required, that is, the increase in productivity generated by
economies of scale, with this expansion, that occurs in the exports sector, overflowing to
the other sectors.
        Thus, it can be stated that the ELG hypothesis was not captured by the results of this
paper, which is not a surprise since Myovella, Paul & Rwakalaza (2015) did not obtain the
comprovation of the hypothesis in a similar context either. Moreover, Carvalho (2015) also
does not prove it for the Portuguese sector of low value-added products and Machado
(2017), despite the difference in relation to this paper with regard to time period and type of
product analyzed, also did not verify the ELG hypothesis for Brazil.
        Finally, a potential advance or continuation to this paper could be carried out in
order to estimate a new model for the same time period, but considering only Brazilian
agribusiness exports so as to produce a comparison with the results obtained in this work.
References

AKPAN, E.S.; NWOSU, E.C.; EWEKE, G.O. Causality Between Non-Oil Export,
Financial Sector Development and Economic Growth: Evidence from Nigeria. Nigeria:
Journal of Mathematical Finance, v.7, p. 39-53. 2017.

BACHA, E. Bonança externa e desindustrialização: uma análise do período 2005- 2011. In:
BACHA, E.; BAUMGARTEN, B. M. (Orgs.). O futuro da indústria no Brasil:
desindustrialização em debate. Rio de Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira, p. 97-120. 2013.

BANCO CENTRAL DO BRASIL. Sistema Gerenciador de Séries Temporais. Retrieved
from:<https://www3.bcb.gov.br/sgspub/localizarseries/localizarSeries.do?method=preparar
TelaLocalizarSeries>.

BARROS, G. S. A. C. Medindo o crescimento do agronegócio: Bonança externa e preços
relativos. In: VIEIRA FILHO, J. E. R.; GASQUES, J. C. (Orgs.). Agricultura,
transformação produtiva e sustentabilidade. Brasília: IPEA p. 219-249. 2016.

CAMPOS, F. M. Exportações, crescimento econômico e causalidade: evidências empíricas
para o Brasil (1975:1-2008:2). In: ENCONTRO NACIONAL ASSOCIAÇÃO
BRASILEIRA DE ESTUDOS REGIONAIS E URBANOS, 7., 2009, São Paulo. Anais...
São Paulo: ENABER, 2009.

CARVALHO, G. N. B. A Relação entre as Exportações e o Crescimento Económico:
Análise do Caso Português. 2015. 45p. Dissertação (Mestrado em Economia Financeira)
Faculdade de Economia. Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, 2015.

DE NEGRI, F.; ALVARENGA, G. V. A Primarização da Pauta de Exportações no Brasil:
ainda um dilema. Instituto de Pesquisa Econômica Aplicada, Rio de Janeiro, maio 2011.
Retrieved from:<http://www.senado.gov.br/noticias/Jornal/emdiscussao/inovacao/produtos-
de-alta-tecnologia-na-exportacao-do-brasil.aspx >.

DICKEY, D. FULLER, W. Likelihood ratio statistics for autoregressive time series with a
unit root. Econometrica, Oxford, v.49, n.4, p.1057-1072, 1981.

DORNBUSCH, R. ; FISCHER, S. e SAMUELSON, P. A. Heckscher - Ohlin Trade Theory
with a Continuum of Goods. Quarterly Journal of Economics, n.95, p. 203 -224. 1980.

ELLIOT, G.; ROTHENBERG, T.J.; STOCK, J. H. Efficient test for an autoregressive unit
root. Econometrica, Oxford, v.64, n.4, p.813-836, jul. 1996.

ENDERS, W. Applied Econometric time series. 2ed. New York: Willey, 2004. 460p.

FUNDAÇÃO CENTRO DE ESTUDOS DO COMÉRCIO EXTERIOR - FUNCEX.
Retrieved from: < http://www.funcex.org.br/>.
FUNDO MONETÁRIO INTERNACIONAL - FMI - Série de preços das commodities.
Retrieved from: <http://www.imf.org/external/np/res/commod/index.aspx>.

GHATAK, S.; MILNER, C.; UTKULU, U. Exports, Export Composition and Growth:
Cointegration and Causality Evidence for Malaysia. Applied Economics, v. 29, n. 2, p.
213-223. 1997.

HATANAKA, M. Time Series Based Econometrics: Unit Roots and Co-Integrations. New
York: Oxford University Press, 1996. 306p.

HODRICK, R. PRESCOTT, E. C. Postwar U.S. Business Cycles: An Empirical
Investigation. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking. v.29, n.1, p. 1–16. 1997.

INDEX MUNDI. Dados históricos gráficos. Retrieved from:
<https://www.indexmundi.com/g/g.aspx?c=br&v=74&l=pt>.

INSTITURO BRASILEIRO DE GEOGRAFIA ESTATÍSTICA – IBGE. Séries Históricas
e Estatísticas. Retrieved from:< https://seriesestatisticas.ibge.gov.br/>.

INSTITUTO DE PESQUISA EM ECONOMIA APLICADA. Macroeconômico. Séries
históricas. Rio de Janeiro. Retrieved from:< http://www.ipeadata.gov.br/Default.aspx>.

JOHANSEN, S. Statistical analysis of cointegration vectors. Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control, North-Holland, v.12, n.2/3, p.231-254, 1988.

KÓNYA, L. Exports and growth: Granger causality analysis on OECD countries with a
panel data approach. Economic Modelling, v.23, n. 6, p. 978-992. 2006.

KRUGMAN, P. Import Protection as Export Promotion. In: KIERZKOWSKI, H.(ed.)
Monopolistic Competion in International Trade, Oxford, Oxford University Press. 1984.

KWIATKOWSKI, D. ; PHILLIPS, P.C.B. ; SCHMIDT, P. ; SHIN, Y. Testing the null
hypothesis of stationary against the alternative of a unit root. Journal of Econometrics,
North-Holland v.54, p.159-178, 1992.

KUMARI, D.; MALHOTRA, N. Export-Led Growth in India: Cointegration and Causality
Analysis. Journal of Economics and Development Studies, v.2, n.2, jun. 2014. 14p.
American Research Institute for Policy Development, Madison, 2014.

LANCASTER, K. Intra-Industry Trade under Perfect Monopolistic Competition, Journal
of International Economics, v.10, p. 151-175. 1980.

MACHADO, K. P. Impacto das exportações no crescimento econômico: Análise do caso
brasileiro. 2017. 58p. Dissertação (Mestre em Gestão e Desenvolvimento Rural).
Universidade Estadual do Oeste do Paraná. Francisco Beltrão, 2017.
MINISTÉRIO DA INDÚSTRIA, COMÉRCIO EXTERIOR E SREVIÇOS – MDIC.
Balança comercial. 2018. Retrieved from:< http://www.mdic.gov.br/>.

MUNDURUCA, D. F.V.; SANTANA, J. R. Comércio Exterior como Estratégia de
Crescimento Econômico: Uma Proposta de Priorização de Produtos Exportáveis para a
Economia Sergipana. Revista Econômica do Nordeste, Fortaleza, v.43, n.3, jul. 2012.
20p.

MYOVELLA, G. A.; PAUL, F.; RWAKALAZA, R. T. Export-Led Growth Hypothesis:
Evidence from Agricultural Exports in Tanzania. African Journal of Economic Review,
v.3, n.2, jul. 2015. 11p.

OHLIN, B. Interregional and International Trade, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press. 1933.

OSTERWALD - LENUM, M. A note with quantiles of the asymptotic distribution of the
maximum likehood cointegration rank test statistics. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and
Statistics. v.54, n.3. p. 461-472. Ago. 1992.

PALLEY, T. I. The Rise and Fall of Export-led Growth. Annandale-on-Hudson: Levy
Economics Institute of Bard College, jul. 2011. 24p. (Working Paper n. 675). 2011.

SAKARYA, N.; JONG, R. M. The Econometrics of the Hodrick-Prescott Filter. Review of
Economics and Statistics, Cambridge, v.98, n.2, maio 2016.

SAMUELSON, P. A. International Trade and Equalisation of Factor Prices. Economic
Journal, n. 58. p. 163–184. 1948.

SHAFIULLAH, M.; SELVANATHAN, S.; NARANPANAWA, A. The role of export
composition in export-led growth in Australia and its regions. Economic Analysis and
Policy, Australia, v. 53, 2017.

SHOMBE, N. H. Causality Relationships between Total Exports with Agricultural and
Manufacturing GDP in Tanzania. Chiba: Institute of Developing Economies, fev. 2008.
34p. (IDE Discussion Paper n. 136).

TESSEMA, B. T. The Relationship between Import, Exports and Economic Growth in
Ethiopia. Imperial Journal of Interdisciplinary Research, v.3, n.1, 4p. 2017. Retrieved
from:< https://www.onlinejournal.in/IJIRV3I1/071.pdf >.

VIEIRA, E. R.; XAVIER, C. L. O papel da China no crescimento da economia brasileira:
Uma análise contrafactual da hipótese do Export – Led – Growth. Economia Aplicada, v.
21, n.3, pp.387-415. 2017.
