Evidences of Incomplete Interest Rate Pass-Through,
  Directed Credit and Cost Channel of Monetary
                  Policy in Brazil

                  Igor Ézio Maciel Silva∗    Nelson Leitão Paes†
                            Jocildo Fernandes Bezerra‡



                  Área 4 - Macroeconomia, Economia Monetária e Finanças

                                              Abstract
     The aim of this study is to analyze the operationality of the monetary policy cost chan-
     nel in Brazil, highlighting the role played by the banks. For that, We present a New-
     Keynesian DSGE model in which the costs of the firms are directly influenced by the
     level of the banks loan rate. The model also tried to incorporates the possibility of a lim-
     ited interest rate pass-through and the directed credit. I estimate the model by adopting
     a minimum distance approach (Matching). The results indicate that: the cost channel
     plays a decisive role in the monetary policy transmission, explaining the Price-Puzzle;
     there is no evidence of incomplete interest rate pass-through; and, the directed credit re-
     duces the monetary policy capacity to modify the credit conditions.

     Keywords: Monetary Policy, Interest Rate Pass-Through, Cost Channel, Directed Credit.


                                              Resumo
     O objetivo deste artigo é analisar a operacionalidade do canal de custo da política mon-
     etária no Brasil, destacando o papel desempenhado pelos bancos. Para tanto, desenvolve-
     se um modelo DSGE Novo-Keynesiano, no qual o custo das firmas é diretamente influ-
     enciado pelo nível da taxa de juros cobrada pelos bancos. O modelo também incorpora
     a possibilidade de pass-through incompleto da taxa de juros e o crédito direcionado. O
     modelo foi estimado por meio do método da distância mínima (Matching). Os resultados
     indicam que: o canal de custo desempenha papel relevante na transmissão da política
     monetária (explicando o Price-Puzzle); não há evidência de pass-through incompleto; e, o
     crédito direcionado reduz a capacidade da política monetária modificar as condićões de
     crédito.

     Palavras-Chave: Política Monetária, Pass-Through da Taxa de Juros, Canal de Custo,
     Crédito Direcionado.

     JEL: C32, E44, E52.
 ∗
   UFRN. E-mail: igormacielsilva@gmail.com
 †
   SRFB e UFPE/PIMES. E-mail: nlpaes@gmail.com
 ‡
   UFPE/PIMES. E-mail: jocildo.bezerra@gmail.com



                                                   1
1       Introduction
A growing literature has addressed the possibility that monetary policy action do not ony
affect aggregate demand, but also excert an influence on economic variables through the
supply side (Gaiotti and Secchi, 2006). Accordingly to the the cost channel mechanism of
monetary policy, some production costs increase with the interest rate, hence a monetary
contraction can promote an increase in prices instead of a decrease (Rabanal and Rubio-
Ramírez, 2007).
    There is, at least, two kinds of evidence that point to the short run effects in the supply
side. The first evidence is the price-puzzle of the monetary policy observed in several stud-
ies that applied the VAR methodology. These studies find, as a result, that the prices level
increase after an increase in the interest rate. The second evidence is the degree of amplifi-
cation. This evidence suggests that monetary policy shocks that induce to relatively small
and transitory movements in open-market interest rates have large and persistent effects on
output (Barth and Ramey, 2002).
    The cost channel is incorporated in recent theoretical models. Christiano et al. (2005)
present a New-Keynesian DSGE model that incorporates the hypothesis of the credit for
working capital. The firms need to pay for the production factors before receiving revenue
from sales. As a result, the marginal costs of the firms depend positively on the interest
rate. Besides, a monetary contraction induce an upward pressure on prices. Ravenna and
Walsh (2006) introduce other economic shocks (productivity, preferences and government
spendings) in the model and they find important implications in terms of the conduction of
the monetary policy: the shocks imply in the trade-off between stabilization of the product
and inflation; and, under optimal monetary policy, product and inflation return gradually
to their steady state value. Rabanal (2007), in turn, innovates by considering that only a
fraction of firms depends of the credit for working capital. Hülsewig et al. (2009) insert
banks that extend loans to firms in an environment of monopolistic competition by setting
their loan rates in a staggered way (only a fraction of the banks is able to adjust the loans
interest rate in each period), which means that the adjustment of the aggregate loan rate to a
monetary policy shock is sticky1 . De Fiori and Tristani (2013) present a model that consider
assimetric information (under costly state verification set-up a la Townsend) and default
risk, and, because of this, the bank lending rate incorporate a spread over the deposit rate.
Accordingly to the model, the inflation rate increases with the spread and the deposit rate.
    According to Hülsewig et al. (2009), a number of studies have shown that the cost chan-
nel is empirically relevant in developed economies, e.g. Barth and Ramey (2002), Dedola
and Lippi (2005), Fabiani et al. (2006), Christiano et al. (2005), Ravenna and Walsh (2006),
Chowdhury et al. (2006) and Tillmann (2008). Hülsewig et al. (2009) also find evidence that
this transmission channel is important to explain the inflation inertia which emerges after a
monetary policy shock in the Euro area, but its effect is mitigated because of a dispropor-
tionate adjustment of loan rates to changing money market rates.
    Few studies, on other hand, analyze the cost channel of monetary policy for developing
economies. Agénor and Montiel (2008) argue that the cost channel may be relevant in these
countries because the bank debt is a significant source of financing operations for firms,
including the acquisition of fixed capital assets, and the stock and corporate bond markets
are weak. However, Glen and Singh (2004) observe a significant cross-country variation and
a declining trend of leverage ratio. According to Malikane (2012), it suggests that the cost
    1
    Hülsewig et al. (2009) give a crucial role to the loan market structure. The cost channel operationality
depends on the banks’ capacity reacting to monetary policy shocks. If the proportion of banks that are able to
adjust their rates is reduced, then the effect of the monetary policy over the aggregate loan rate is also reduced,
and the cost channel is not relevant.


                                                        2
channel may be as important in emerging markets as it is in developed economies and it
may be declining in importance2 .
    The study of the relevance of the cost channel seems to be crucial to improve the un-
derstanding of the monetary policy effects in the Brazilian economy due to a number of
reasons. First, the Brazilian firms resort to credit for working capital in a significant amount.
According the Brazilian Central Bank, the relative importance of this kind of credit indeed
increased among the firms from approximately 20% in 2007 to 30% in 2013.
    Another motivation to analyze the cost channel is because the Brazilian firms have signif-
icant financial expenses. According to the Annual Survey of Industry (The Brazilian Institute
of Geography and Statistics – IBGE), the financial expenses represented around 11% of the
total costs of the Brazilian industrial firms between 2009 and 2012. Just for comparison, the
labor expenses represented 14% of the total costs in the same period. Hence, it is very likely
that changes in the total amount of financial expenses influence the price and production
decisions.
    There is, also, monetary policy price-puzzle evidences in VAR model estimations for the
Brazilian economy, e.g. Rabanal and Schwartz (2001), Arquete and Jayme-Jr. (2003), Sales
and Tannuri-Pianto (2005) and da Silva Guimarães and Monteiro (2014). It is worth to point
that, even for other studies in which the price-puzzle is not observed, the monetary policy
effect in inflation is reduced, lagged and temporary, e.g. Fernandes and Toro (2005) and
Céspedes et al. (2008).
    Some changes in the Brazilian economy also motivate the cost channel analysis. The
monetary policy implementation was altered recently3 , so there is no plenty understanding
about the policy transmission mechanisms in Brazil. Besides, Minella and Souza-Sobrinho
(2009) argue that the relative importance of the monetary policy transmission channels may
have been altered recently because of the, among other reasons, credit market expansion
and financial markets development.
    As observed for the other emerging economies, few studies analyze the cost channel in
Brazilian economy including Martins (2011), Malikane (2012), Kawamoto and Oreiro (2011)
and Santos (2011). There are significant differences among these studies in terms of the
theoretical model, empirical strategy and results – only Martins (2011) and Kawamoto and
Oreiro (2011) find evidences for the cost channel. Despite the differences, all of these studies
neglected the banks behaviour, as well the capacity of the interest rate, instrument of the
monetary policy, modify the credit conditions faced by the firms.
    Considering the previous discussion, the aim of this paper is to analyze the channel cost
of monetary policy, highlighting the role played by the banks, by employing a DSGE New-
Keynesian model. In the model, the aggregate level of the loan rate directly influences the
costs of the firms. Besides, the model features financial market rigidity, only a fraction of
the banks is able to adjust the loan rate each period. As a consequence, the reaction of the
aggregate loan rate to a monetary policy shock may be sticky (limited pass-through).
    The novelty of the model presented in this paper is the incorporation of the directed
credit. The share of directed credit is significant in Brazil. According to the Brazilian Cen-
tral Bank, the directed credit represented 43% of total of the credit operations in 2013. Be-
sides, the Brazilian directed credit presents peculiar features which influence the monetary
capacity in modifying the economy’s credit conditions. We can highlight three of these char-
acteristics: the directed credit loan rates are lower and more stable than the other credit
    2
      Malikane (2012), by using robust estimation of the Phillips curve, does not find evidence of the cost channel
in a group of emerging economies (Brazil included), the only exception is Mexico.
    3
      The money targeting regime was replaced by the inflation target regime only in 1999. Since then, the Selic
rate (the banks’ overnight rate) is the most important instrument of monetary policy implementation (Sales
and Tannuri-Pianto, 2007).



                                                        3
modalities; the directed credit has public and private funds; and, the directed credit opera-
tions have been made mostly by large state owned banks. Hence, in the model, we assume
that a constant and exogenously determined fraction of the loans is made through directed
credit operations and the directed credit loan rate is also constant over time and exogenously
determined.
    It’s worth to mention that, except by Santin (2013) and Sato (2013), no effort has been
made to shed some light about the relation among monetary policy and directed credit, in
spite of the media discussion. In this sense, we present a contribution to the policymakers,
once we develop and estimate a model for Brazil that features the proportion of the directed
credit as a determinant of the monetary policy capacity in modifying the economy’s credit
condition.
    We estimate the DSGE for the Brazilian economy by using the Minimum Distance ap-
proach, which consists in two steps. First, we estimate a VAR model to generate empirical
impulse responses to a monetary policy shock. Second, we estimate the model parameters
by matching the theoretical impulse responses as closely as possible to the empirical impulse
responses. Considering the estimated model, we analyze the relevance of the channel cost.
Besides, we look for evidences of limited interest rate pass-through and the directed credit
influence over the monetary policy effect.
    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we display our eco-
nomic model. In section 3, we discuss our econometric methodology. In section 4, we
present and discuss the empirical analysis results. In section 5, we summarize the main
findings.


2       The Model
Hülsewig et al. (2009) build a New Keynesian DSGE model on the framework of Christiano
et al. (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2003)4 in order to study the relevance of the cost chan-
nel. The model consists of firms, households and banks.
    The firms are partitioned into final and intermediate good producers. The firms that
produce the final good operate under perfect competition, and they use only the intermedi-
ate goods as inputs. The intermediate good producers, in turn, operate under monopolistic
competiton, it means that each firm have some monopoly power over prices that are set in a
staggered way as in Calvo (1983). The inputs of the intermediate goods are capital and labor
services. We account for a cost channel by assuming that a fraction of firms require loans
from banks as they are obliged to pay their wage bill in advance of selling their product.
    Households obtain utility from consumption and leisure, they supply a differentiated
type of labor, own the capital stock and make investment decisions. They decide on their
wages, which are also set in a staggered way.
    Finally, banks extent loans to firms in an environment of monopolistic competition. They
face frictions when changing their loan rates, which implies that the aggregate loan rate
reacts stickily to a monetary policy shock.
    The equilibrium in the final goods market is characterized by the equality of production
and demand by households for consumption and investment adjusted for the resource costs
attached to variable capital utilization. The market clearing conditions in the capital rental
market, the loan market and the labor market require that supply equals demand at the
prevailing market prices.
    4
   According to Vereda and Cavalcanti (2010), these models have been the inspiration of the medium scale
DSGE models of several central banks.




                                                   4
    The solution of the model was derived by taking a log-linear approximation around the
non-stochastic steady state of the economy with zero inflation. The model is closed by speci-
fying the reaction function of the central bank, which is described by a log-linearized interest
rate rule.
    We modify the model employed by Hülsewig et al. (2009) in order to incorporate the
directed credit which is an important feature of Brazilian economy. Specifically, we divided
the financial intermediaries into the banks that operate directed credit and the ones that
operate free credit. Similar to the model of Hülsewig et al. (2009), we assume that the free
credit banks extent loans to firms in an environment of monopolistic competition, and they
face frictions when changing their loan rates, which implies that the aggregate loan rate
reacts stickily to a monetary policy shock.
    Next, we present the bank sector of our model. Firms and households are not discussed
in detail because we use the same formulation of Hülsewig et al. (2009). Then, we summa-
rize the relevant log-linearized relationships.


2.1   Banks
Banks indexed by k ∈ [0, 1] extend loans to firms in an environment of monopolistic compe-
tition. Profits by bank k are given by:

                        Πbank
                         t    (k) = Rtl (k)Lt (k) − Rtd Dt (k) − RtM Bt (k),                  (1)
where Lt (k) is the loan volume, Rtl (k) is the gross loan rate, Dt (k) is the level of deposits,
Rtd (k) is the gross deposit rate, Bt (k) is the net position on the money market and RtM (k) is
the gross money market rate, which is controlled by the central bank. Profits are distributed
to households at the end of each period.
     For each bank the balance sheet constraint is:

                                        Lt (k) = Dt (k) + Bt (k),                             (2)
which relates the loan volume to the level of deposits and the net position on the money mar-
ket Deposit and money market credits are assumed to be perfect substitutes for refinancing,
which implies that Rtd = RtM .
    Bank k maximizes profits subject to the balance sheet constraint and the downward
sloped loan demand. In a flexible loan market, each bank would set its loan rate as a mark-up
over nominal marginal costs. Since banks are exposed to identical marginal costs it holds
that the loan rate would be the same for eacho one of them.
    However, banks face frictions when setting their loan rates. First, a fraction τ2 of the
banks extend directed credit (DC) which loan rate is determined exogenously. The remain-
ing 1 − τ2 of the banks extend free credit (FC) and can choose their loan rates. Considering
this, the aggregate loan rate is given by:
                                                     1−τ2           τ2
                                       RtL = RtF C           RtDC          .                  (3)
  Profit maximization by the free credit banks that are allowed to set their loan rates opti-
mally leads to the following first-order condition:
                            ∞                                             
                            X                                      ζ
                       Et          l
                                  τ Λt,t+l Lt+l (k) RtL∗ (k) −        R M
                                                                             = 0,             (4)
                            l=0
                                                                 ζ − 1 t+l

where  RtL∗ (k)
            is the optimal loan rate and Λt,t+l is the stochastic discount factor. Using the
loan demand and solving the equation (4) for the optimal loan rate gives:


                                                      5
                                             P∞ l             L ζ       M
                                                                             
                                        ζ Et    l=0 τ ∆t,t (Rt+l ) Lt+l Rt+l
                         RtL∗ (k)   =          P∞
                                                        l ∆ (RL )ζ L
                                                                           ,                 (5)
                                      ζ − 1 Et    l=0 τ    t,t  t+l   t+l

which is identical for all banks, RtL∗ (k) = RtL∗ . Banks are assumed, in contrats to firms
and households, to re-optimize their loan rates in each period after the realization of any
disturbances.
   Free credit banks face frictions when setting their loan rates. Following Calvo (1983), we
assume that only a fraction 1 − τ1 of free credit banks re-optimize their loan rates in each
period, while the remaining fraction τ1 keeps their loan rates unchanged:
                                                                      1
                                                              F C 1−ζ 1−ζ
                           RtF C = (1 − τ1 )(RtL∗ )1−ζ + τ2 (Rt−1
                                  
                                                                  )       .                   (6)


2.2   Interest Rate Pass-Through
We linearize the (3), (5) and (6) by a first-order Taylor-series expansion, which gives:


          (1 − τ2 )βτ1          (1 − τ2 )τ1 F C (1 − τ2 )(1 − βτ1 )(1 − τ1 ) M
  RtL =                    FC
                       Et Rt+1  +           R +                              Rt + τ2 RtCD .   (7)
            1 + βτ12
                                  1 + βτ12 t−1             1 + βτ12

The equation (7) show that the evolution of the aggregate loan rate depends on the relevance
of the parameters τ1 and τ2 . If τ1 and τ2 go to zero, the aggregate loan rate tends to equal the
money rate and the pass-through becomes complete.


2.3   Additional Considerations on Loan Rates
We assume additionally that the loan rate of the directed credit (RtDC ) is constant over time:

                                              RtDC = R̄DC .                                   (8)
Besides, considering that there is not enough information about the aggregate loan rate for
the Brazilian economy, we replace RtL in equation (7), in order to determine the equation of
the dynamics of the free credit loan rate:

                           βτ1                 τ1          (1 − βτ1 )(1 − τ1 ) M
               RtF C =              FC
                                                    RF C +
                                        
                                 E Rt+1
                               2 t
                                          +       2 t−1
                                                                              Rt .            (9)
                         1 + βτ1            1 + βτ1            1 + βτ12

2.4   The Linearized Model
The following equations consist the log-linear approximation of the relevant model equa-
tions around the symmetric equilibrium steady state with zero inflation. The represen-
tation X̂t denotes the log-linear deviation from the steady-state value of the variable X,
X̂t = ln(Xt ) − ln(X̄t ), where X̄t is the steady-state value.
    The dynamics of real product (Ŷt ) is described by the equilibrium of the goods market:
                                                                  
                                                      ˆ          1
                              Ŷt = γc Ĉt + (1 − γc )It + α 1 −     ût ,               (10)
                                                                 
where Ĉt is the consumption, Iˆt is the investment and
                                                        
                                                1     1
                          γc = 1 − αδ 1 −          /    −1+δ .
                                                     β

                                                    6
   The consumption and investment equations are given by:
                          1                h            1−h
                 Ĉt =       Et−1 Ĉt+1 +     Ĉt−1 −          Et−1 (R̂tM − πt+1 ),                      (11)
                         1+h              1+h         (1 + h)σ
                                  β                1 ˆ           1
                         Iˆt =       Et−1 Iˆt+1 +     It−1 + 00        Et−1 Q̂t ,                        (12)
                                 1+β              1+β       S̄ (1 + β)
h is the external habit formation, the inflation rate πt is defined as πt = P̂t − P̂t−1 , Q̂t is the real
shadow price of installed capital (Tobin’s Q) and S̄ 00 are are investment adjustment costs.
    The equations of real shadow value of capital, capital accumulation, real rental rate of
capital and capital utilization are respectvely:

                                                              k
              Q̂t = β(1 − δ)Et−1 Q̂t+1 + [1 − β(1 − δ)]Et−1 r̂t+1 − Et−1 (R̂tM − πt+1 ).                 (13)

                                          K̂t = (1 − δ)K̂t−1 + δ Iˆt ,                                   (14)

                                         r̂tK = Ŷt − ût − K̂t−1 + ϕ̂t .                                (15)

                                                   ût = ψr̂tK ,                                         (16)
where ψ = Ψ0 (1)/Ψ00 (1), assuming that the utilization rate equals one in steady state.
  The evolution of inflation is described by the following New Keynesian Phillips curve:

                                   πt = γf Et−1 πt+1 + γb πt−1 + κp Et−1 ϕ̂t ,                           (17)
where:
                                                         βθp
                                        γf =                          ,
                                               θp + ωp [1 − θ(1 − β)]
                                                         ωp
                                        γb =                          ,
                                               θp + ωp [1 − θ(1 − β)]
                                             (1 − θp )(1 − βθp )(1 − ωp )
                                      κp =                                .
                                               θp + ωp [1 − θ(1 − β)]
The parameter κp measures the sensitivity of inflation with respect to real marginal costs
(ϕ̂t ) which are given by:

                                   ϕ̂t = αr̂tk + (1 − α)(Ŵt − P̂t + ν R̂tL ).                           (18)
The real marginal costs, and consequently the inflation, depend on the gross loan rate as
emphasized by the cost channel of monetary policy.
   The nominal wage inflation (∆Ŵt ) is given by:


  ∆Ŵt = βρ1 Et−1 ∆Ŵt+1 + ωw ρ1 ∆Ŵt−1 − βθw ρ2 Et−1 πt
                                                              + ρ2 πt−1 + κw Et−1 [M ˆRS t − Ŵt + P̂t ], (19)

where:
                                                         θw
                                      ρ1 =                               ,
                                             ωw + θw [1 − ωw (1 − βθw )]

                                                        7
                                                 ωw (1 − θw )
                                  ρ2 =                                ,
                                          ωw + θw [1 − ωw (1 − βθw )]
                                       (1 − θw )(1 − βθw )(1 − ωw )
                               κw =                                    .
                                  ωw + θw [1 − ωw (1 − βθw )](1 + ηφ)
Nominal wage inflation is determined by future expected and past nominal wage inflation,
by the current and past inflation rate and by the gap between the marginal rate of substitu-
tion (M ˆRS t ) and the real wage (Ŵt − P̂t ). The expression for M ˆRS t are:
                            η          αη                     σ
                   M ˆRS t =   Ŷt −       (ût + K̂t−1 ) +      (Ĉt − hĈt−1 ).               (20)
                          1−α         1−α                   1−h
   The dynamic of the gross loan rate is given by:
                                         
                      R̂tL = βυ1 Et R̂t+1
                                       FC                   FC
                                            + υ1 (1 − τ2 )R̂t−1 + υ2 R̂tM ,                     (21)
where:

                                                       τ1 (1 − τ2 )
                                            υ1 =                    ,
                                                        1 + βτ12
                                       (1 − βτ1 )(1 − τ1 )(1 − τ2 )
                                   υ2 =                             .
                                                1 + βτ 2
The loan rate is determined by the expected future loan rate, the past loan rate and the
money market rate. The immediate pass-through from changes in the money market rate
to changes in the loan rate becomes complete, if τ1 and τ2 goes to zero, which implies that
R̂tL = R̂tM .
     Equations (8) and (9) imply that the dynamic of aggregate free credit loan rate is given
by:
                                                 
                                              FC
                            R̂tF C = βι1 Et R̂t+1          FC
                                                    + ι1 R̂t−1 + ι2 R̂tM ,                (22)
where:
                                                           τ1
                                                ι1 =             ,
                                                        1 + βτ12
                                         (1 − βτ1 )(1 − τ1 )
                                         ι2 =                .
                                             1 + βτ12
   From equations (21) and (22), it follows that:

                                           R̂tL = (1 − τ2 )R̂tF C .                             (23)
    Finally, we close the model by specifying the reaction function of the central bank which
is described by the following log-linearized interest rate rule:

                                                 "3
                                                                                     #
                                               µπ X        µ
 R̂tM          M
        = µ1 R̂t−1        M
                   − µ2 R̂t−2 + (1 − µ1 − µ2 )       πt−s + Ŷ Et (Ŷt+1 + Ŷt+2 )
                                               4 s=0        2
                                                                             + µ∆Ŷ ∆Ŷt + ztM . (24)
The parameters µ1 and µ2 capture the degree of interest rate smoothing, µπ is the reaction
coefficient with respect to the present and past inflation rate, µŶ is the reaction coefficient
with respect to the expected future output gap, µ∆Ŷ is the coefficient of the change of the
output gap and ztM is the monetary policy shock.

                                                         8
3     Empirical Methodology
We estimate the log-linear version of the DSGE model described in the previous section for
the Brazilian economy in order to analyze the relevance of the cost channel of monetary pol-
icy, the interest rate pass-through and the directed credit. We apply the minimum distance
approach as in Christiano et al. (2005), Carrillo et al. (2007), Henzel et al. (2009) e Hülsewig
et al. (2009). This estimation method consists in two steps. First, a VAR model is specified to
generate the empirical impulse-response functions, in our case, to a monetary policy shock.
Second, the model parameters are estimated in order to aproximate, as close as possible, the
theoretical and empirical impulse-response functions.


3.1   Monetary Policy Shock and VAR Model
As Christiano et al. (2005), we define the monetary policy by the following equation:

                                              Rt = f (Φt ) + t ,                               (25)
where Rt is the short-term interest rate (monetary instrument), f is a linear function, Φt is
a set of information and t is the monetary policy shock. We assume that the central bank
allows money growth to guarantee that equation (25) holds in any circumstances and t is
orhtogonal to the elements in Φt .
    Considering the characterization of the monetary policy, the VAR model estimated for
the Brazilian economy has the following specification:

                                           Zt = A(L)Zt−l + εt ,                                 (26)
where Zt is the endogenous variables vector, A(L) is the parameters matrix and εt is the
errors vector that we assume to be white noise. The vector Zt is composed by:

                        Zt = (GDPt , IN Ft , W IN Ft , CP It , RMt , RLt ),                     (27)
where GDPt is the real product, IN Ft is the inflation rate, W IN Ft is the nominal wage
inflation rate, CP It is the commodities price inflation rate, RMt is the monetary policy rate
and RLt is the loan rate.
    The responses of the variables in Zt to a monetary policy shock are estimated by the
VAR model. The identification of the shock is made by applying the Choleski (recursive)
decomposition. The variables ordering implies that the real product, inflation rate, nomi-
nal wage inflation rate and the commodities price inflation rate are affected by a monetary
policy shock with a lag, while the monetary policy interest rate and the loan rate are contem-
poraneously affected. This identification scheme is debatable but the analysis is internally
consistent in the sense that we make the same assumptions in the theoretical model.


3.2   Minimum Distance Approach
We estimate part of model parameters by minimizing the distance between the empirical
and theoretical impulse response functions. The set of estimated parameters (%) are:

                       % = (h, θp , ωp , θw , ωw , µ1 , µŶ , µπ , τ, S̄ 00 , µ2 , µ∆Ŷ , ν).
The estimator minimize the following distance function (Christiano et al., 2005):

                                   J = (Γ̂ − Γ(%))0 V−1 (Γ̂ − Γ(%)),                            (28)


                                                         9
where Γ̂ is the empirical impulse-response function, Γ(%) is the theoretical function and V
is the weighting matrix, with the sample variances of Γ̂ on the diagonal. The weighting ma-
trix assures that those point estimates with a smaller standard deviation are given a higher
priority5 (Henzel et al., 2009).
    The other parameters are calibrated based on empirical evidence obtained from real
economy data and, in some cases, observed on previous studies. The calibration of a sub-
set of parameters is an usual practice in the case of the estimation of DSGE models because
some parameters cannot be identified by applying an unrestricted estimation strategy. The
decision of which parameters will be estimated is, on the other hand, rarely discussed and
vary among the studies. Our choose of calibrated parameters follows Hülsewig et al. (2009).
    According to Smets and Wouters (2003), the estimation of DSGE models by using a
method that aims to aproximate as close as possible the theoretical and the data moments,
as the minimum distance approach, has two advantages: these methods allows highlighting
the features of the data for which the model is more relevant; and, the moments estimators
frequently are more robusts than the maximum likelihood methods.
    Still, it is important to point out that the maximum likelihood methods can incur in the
problem of the stochastic singularity. More specifically, the DSGE models solutions deter-
mine identities that envolve the variables, and, if these identities is not satisfied by the data,
any attempt to adjust the model by using maximum likelihood methods won’t be success-
ful (Tovar, 2009). The stochastic singularity tend to occur when the number of theoretical
shocks is lower than the number of the observable endogenous variables (Boivin and Gian-
noni, 2006). Our model considers only one economic shock, therefore the minimum distance
approach is more properly to estimate the parameters.


3.3     Data
We use quartely data (2000:3 - 2013:4)6 of the log of the GDP chain index (IBGE), the inflation
measured by the annualized quarterly change of GDP deflator (IBGE), the nominal wage
inflation measured by annualized quarterly change of the usual nominal average income
of the main job index (IBGE), annualized quarterly change of the commodities price index
(FMI), short-term nominal interbank interest rate, Over-Selic (Central Bank of Brazil), and
the average bank lending rate for free credit (Central Bank of Brazil).


4       Results
4.1     Theoretical Model Estimation
Figure 1 shows the graphics of the impulse-response functions of each VAR model variable
to a monetary policy shock which is given by an increase of about 1.0 p.p. in the Selic interest
rate7 . The length of the responses is equal to 20 periods for all graphics. Real GDP decreases
    5
      As Hülsewig et al. (2009), we use the MATLAB routine fmincon to solve this mini-
mization problem, whch attempts to find a constrained minimum of a scalar function of
several variables starting at a initial estimate.             The vector of initial conditions is %0          =
(0, 5 0, 5 0, 5 0, 5 0, 5 1, 5 1, 5 1, 1 0, 5 2, 5 0, 5 1, 5 0, 5), which is the mean of the
lower %− = (0, 0 0, 0 0, 0 0, 0 0, 0 1, 0 0, 0 1, 0 0, 0 0, 0 0, 0 0, 0 0, 0) and upper bounds
%+ = (1, 0 1, 0 1, 0 1, 0 1, 0 2, 0 3, 0 2, 0 1, 0 5, 0 1, 0 3, 0 1, 0) of the constrained optimization.
    6
      We choose the data period based on Vasconcelos and Divino (2012). These authors argue that, starting
after the adoption of the inflation target regime by the Brazilian government in 1999, we avoid the inflationary
instability period.
    7
      The VAR model was estimated with two lags and three dummy variables. The first dummy is 1 in 2003:1
and 2003:2 that is the transition period between the governments of the presidents Fernando Henrique Cardoso


                                                      10
gradually until the second period after the shock when reaches a negative variation equal to
0.4%, then the shock tends to slowly dissipate. Inflation rate increases in the first period after
the shock, then gradually decreases until the seventh period, after this it tends to back to the
baseline. The first movement of inflation reflects the price-puzzle despite of the explicit
introduction of the inflation of the commodities price. Nominal wage inflation also presents
an positive variation in the first period after the shock but the confidence interval includes
negative values. Finally, loan rate behaves very similar to Selic8 .
    It is worth to stress that the variable dynamics is similar to that one reported by Hülsewig
et al. (2009) in a study for euro area in the case of real GDP, inflation and interest rates. There
is a difference in the behaviour of the nominal wage inflation that, in the referred study, do
not increase in the first period after the shock.




                                    Figure 1: Monetary Policy shock

Note: The horizontal axis is in quarters. The solid lines denote the impulse-responses which are calculated
as the mean derived from a bootstrap procedure with 2000 replications. The shaded areas are 95% confidence
intervals of the bootstrapped impulse-responses

    A subset of the model parameters was calibrated based on empirical evidences obtained
from Brazilian economy informations. The calibrated values are also in line with the values
used by other studies e.g. Christiano et al. (2005), Smets and Wouters (2003), Smets and
Wouters (2007), Rabanal and Rubio-Ramírez (2007), Hülsewig et al. (2009), Vereda and Cav-
alcanti (2010), Cavalcanti and Vereda (2011), Carvalho and Valli (2011) and Vasconcelos and
Divino (2012), the last four are specific to Brazil. Tabel 1 show the used values. Discount
factor β is equal to 0.99 which implies that the steady-state real interest rate is equal to 4%
in a quartely model. The utility function elasticities σ and η are equal to 2. The share of
capital in the output (α) is fixed to 0.3. Depreciation rate (δ) is equal to 0.025 which implies
an annual depreciation of capital equal to 10%. The parameters φ and  are equal to 11, im-
plying steady-state mark-ups of prices and wages equal to 10% in the steady-state. Capital
and Luís Inácio Lula da Silva and 0 otherwise. The second dummy is equal to 1 in 2002:2 and 0 otherwise to
deal with an outlier in nominal wage inflation data that is a result of a methodology change of the research.
Finally, the third dummy is 1 in 2008:4 and 2009:1 that is the peak of the effects of the last financial crisis in
Brazil and 0 otherwise. We perform VAR model specification tests, the results of these tests are in the appendix.
   8
     Once we consider the commodities price only as a control variable, its response was not reported in the
figure 1. As robustness analysis, the VAR model was estimated considering the commodities price as an
exogenous variable. The results were basically the same.


                                                       11
utilization elasticity ψ is set to 100. Finally, τ2 is equal to 0.4, implying that the proportion of
the banks that operate directed credit is 40% which is roughly the average proportion of the
volume of this modality of credit in Brazil during 2013.

                                   Table 1: Calibrated Parameters

          Parameter      Description                                                     Value
          β              Discount factor                                        0.99
          σ              Degree of risk aversion                                2.00
          η              Labor supply elasticity                                2.00
          φ              Households monopoly power                             11.00
          δ              Depreciation rate                                     0.025
          α              Output share of capital                                0.30
                        Firms monopoly power                                  11.00
          ψ              Capital utilization elasticity                       100.00
          τ2             Proportion of the banks that operate directed credit   0.40

    The remaining parameter of the model is estimated by the minimization of the distance
between the empirical and theoretical impulse-response functions. Figure 2 show the result
of this approximation procedure. The estimated model seems to be able to replicate the data
once the theoretical impulse-response functions lie inside the empirical confidence interval.
    Table 2 shows the estimates obtained to the parameters in vector % and their respective
standard deviation values. The degree of habit formation in consumption (h) is equal to
0.99, implying that the consumption response to a monetary policy is strongly driven by the
habits and the policy has a tiny direct effect. This value is greater than the values reported
in other studies for Brazilian economy e.g. Carvalho and Valli (2011) and Vasconcelos and
Divino (2012) that estimated something around 0.6, however it is more close to the 0.825
used by Vereda and Cavalcanti (2010).
    The estimate of the adjustment cost of investiment (S̄ 00 ) is 2.44. This value is close to the
2.35 estimated by Carvalho and Valli (2011) for Brazilian economy.
    The results also indicate a low degree of price rigidity. Parameter θp is equal to 0.18. On
the other hand, the share of the firms that adopt the indexation rule (ωp ) is significant being
equal to 0.35.
    Wage rigidity is high. The estimate of θw and ωw are equal to 0.98 and 0.80 respectively.
These results are in line with Vereda and Cavalcanti (2010), Cavalcanti and Vereda (2011),
Carvalho and Valli (2011) e Vasconcelos and Divino (2012).
    There is no strong evidence of incomplete interest rate pass-through once the parameter
τ1 is equal to 0.36 i.e. 36% of the free credit banks cannot re-adjust their loan rates. Therefore,
the financial market shows a low degree of rigidity in Brazil.
    The result for parameter ν is an evidence for the relevance of the channel cost of monetary
policy. This parameter is equal to 1.00 i.e. 100% of the firms depend on bank lending to
finance the production and, consequently, an increase of the interest rate promotes in an
increase of the production costs.
    Finally, the estimates for the Taylor rule parameter are the following: inflation coefficient
(µπ ) is equal to 1.05, output gap coefficient (µŶ ) is 0.02, growth rate of the output gap coef-
ficient (µ∆Ŷ ) is 0.68 and the degree of interest rate smoothing that is given by the difference
between the autorregressive coefficients (µ1 and µ2 ) is equal to 0.749 .
   9
     The smoothing degree value is similar to the ones estimated by Vereda and Cavalcanti (2010), Cavalcanti
and Vereda (2011), Carvalho and Valli (2011) e Vasconcelos and Divino (2012).



                                                    12
                                        Figure 2: IRFs Matching

Note: The horizontal axis is in quarters. The solid lines denote the impulse-responses which are calculated
as the mean derived from a bootstrap procedure with 2000 replications. The shaded areas are 95% confidence
intervals of the bootstrapped impulse-responses. The marked lines are the theoretical impulse-response func-
tions.

                                    Table 2: Estimated Parameters

             Parameter      Description                           Coefficient       Std. Dev.
             h              Habit formation                            0.99            0.21
             θp             Price stickiness                           0.18            0.60
             ωp             Degree of price indexation                 0.35            0.32
             θw             wage stickiness                            0.98            0.04
             ωw             Degree of wage indexation                  0.80            0.58
             S̄ 00          Investment adjustment costs                2.44            1.86
             µ1             Taylor rule: smoothing                     1.41            0.39
             µ2             Taylor rule: smoothing                     0.67            0.37
             µŶ            Taylor rule: output                        0.02            0.48
             µπ             Taylor rule: inflation                     1.05            0.39
             µ∆Ŷ           Taylor rule: growth                        0.68            0.13
             τ1             Loan rate stickiness                       0.36            0.43
             ν              Share of cost channel firms                1.00            0.61
             Note: the value of distance function is 46.28 with a probability of 0.99. The proba-
             bility is calculated by employing a χ2 distribution with 84 degrees of freedom. The
             number of degrees of freedom is calculated as the difference between the number
             of estimated observations on the impulse-response functions (97) and the number
             of estimated parameters (13). As the value of the distance function is bellow the
             1% critical value, the imposed overidentifying restrictions cannot be rejected.


4.2    Scenarios Analysis
We equal the proportion of firms that depends on credit to finance the production to zero
(ν = 0) in order to analyze the relevance of the cost channel. The other parameters of the
model still with the values previously estimated. Figure 3 shows the effects of this modifi-
cation in terms of the responses of the variables to a monetary policy shock. Marginal costs


                                                     13
and inflation do not increase after a monetary policy shock immediately after the shock
when ν = 0. It is not possible to notice by figure 3 that inflation in fact decreases a little
since the first period after the shock. The behaviour of the inflation is better depicted by
figure 4. This is an evidence that the cost channel plays a relevant role in the transmission
of the monetary policy in Brazil, helping to explain the price-puzzle observed in the VAR
model estimation. This result corroborates with Martins (2011), for Brazilian economy, and
the empirical evidence of other studies e.g. Barth and Ramey (2002), Gaiotti and Secchi
(2006), Christiano et al. (2005), Ravenna and Walsh (2006), Chowdhury et al. (2006), Till-
mann (2008), Hülsewig et al. (2009). On the other hand, the response of the GDP does not
present a significant change, implying, in this case, that the monetary policy works by the
demand side.




                    Figure 3: Monetary policy shock without Cost Channel

Note: Solid lines denote the responses of the model considering ν = 1.00 and the marked lines denote the
responses of the model considering ν = 0.




       Figure 4: Inflation Response to a Monetary Policy Shock without Cost Channel

    Figure 5 presents the model variable responses to a monetary policy shock in a scenario
of complete interest rate pass-through (τ1 = 0). The modification in the value of τ1 doesn’t
change the response of any variable significantly, except the loan rate that in this scenario
respond the shock in the same intensity of the Selic. Therefore, it seems that there is no
rigidity in the financial market in Brazil, at least in terms of free credit.


                                                  14
        Figure 5: Monetary Policy Shock with Complete Interest Rate Pass-Through

Note: Solid lines denote the responses of the model considering τ1 = 0.36 and the marked lines denote the
responses of the model considering τ1 = 0.


    Figure 6 shows the responses of the variables to a monetary policy shock in a scenario in
which there is no directed credit (τ2 = 0). The responses of real GDP, investment, inflation,
nominal wage inflation, marginal costs and rental rate are intensified. This result indicates
that the higher is the directed credit share, the lower is the influence of the monetary policy.
Again, the consumption response don’t change substantially, implying that its dynamics is
mostly determined by habit formation.
    Considering that there is no evidence of limited interest rate pass-through, at lower levels
of directed credit share, the monetary policy potentializes its effect on the credit conditions
because the free credit loan rate becomes more representative. More specifically, A contrac-
tionary monetary policy given by an increase in the interest rate promotes a more significant
increase in the loan rate. Then, the effect of the monetary policy in the financial costs of the
firms will also be intensified, increasing consequently the price-puzzle.
    This result corroborates the findings of Sato (2013) and Santin (2013). According to Sato
(2013), the monetary policy promotes significant change in the supply of credit in Brazil but
the impact of the credit conditions on production is reduced. To Santin (2013), the force of
the monetary policy decreases with the adoption of credit policies, specially, the inflation
rigidity becomes higher.


5    Conclusions
We aimed to analyze the cost channel of monetary policy in Brazil, highlighting the role
played by the banks. For that, we developed a DSGE New-Keynesian model in which: the
aggregate loan rate directly influences the cost of the firms; the interest rate pass-through
may be limited; and, part of the loans is made by directed credit.
    We estimate the model for Brazilian economy by using the Minimum Distance approach.
The results indicated that: there is a high level of price rigidity; there is no evidence of
interest rate incomplete pass-through; the cost channel is relevant to explain the inflation
dynamics (and the price-puzzle) after a monetary policy shock; and, the directed credit par-
ticipation reduces the monetary policy capacity of modifying the credit conditions.

                                                   15
                   Figure 6: Monetary Policy Shock without Directed Credit

Note: Solid lines denote the responses of the model considering τ2 = 0.40 and the marked lines denote the
responses of the model considering τ2 = 0.


References
Agénor, P.-R. and P. J. Montiel (2008, Setembro). Monetary Policy Analysis in a Small Open
 Credit-Based Economy. Open Economies Review 19(4), 423–455.

Arquete, L. C. and F. G. Jayme-Jr. (2003). Política monetária, preços e produto no Brasil
  (1994-2002): Uma aplicação de vetores auto-regressivos. In Anais do XXXI Encontro da
  ANPEC.

Barth, M. J. and V. A. Ramey (2002). The Cost Channel of Monetary Transmission. In B. S.
  Bernanke and K. Rogoff (Eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2001, Volume 16, pp. 199–
  240. MIT Press.

Boivin, J. and M. Giannoni (2006). DSGE Models in a Data-Rich Environment. NBER Working
  Paper Series (12772).

Calvo, G. A. (1983, Setembro). Staggered prices in a utility-maximizing framework. Journal
  of Monetary Economics 12(3), 383–398.

Carrillo, J. A., P. Fève, and J. Matheron (2007, jun). Monetary Policy Inertia or Persistent
  Shocks: A DSGE Analysis. International Journal of Central Banking 3(2), 1–38.

Carvalho, F. A. and M. Valli (2011). Fiscal Policy in Brazil through the Lens of an Estimated
  DSGE model. BCB Working Paper Series (240).

Cavalcanti, M. A. F. H. and L. Vereda (2011). Propriedades Dinâmicas de um Modelo DSGE
  com Parametrizações Alternativas para o Brasil. Texto para Discussão do IPEA (1588).

Céspedes, B., E. Lima, and A. Maka (2008). Monetary policy, inflation and the level of eco-
  nomic activity in Brazil after the Real Plan: stylized facts from SVAR models. Revista
  Brasileira de Economia 62(2), 123–160.



                                                   16
Chowdhury, I., M. Hoffmann, and A. Schabert (2006). Inflation dynamics and the cost chan-
 nel of monetary transmission. European Economic Review 50(4), 995–1016.

Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005, Fevereiro). Nominal Rigidities and
 the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy. Journal of Political Economy 113(1),
 1–45.

da Silva Guimarães, R. R. and S. M. M. Monteiro (2014). Monetary Policy and Regional
  Output in Brazil. Revista Brasileira de Economia 68(1), 73–101.

De Fiori, F. and O. Tristani (2013). Optimal Monetary Policy in a Model of the Credit Chan-
 nel. Economic Journal 123(571), 906–931.

Dedola, L. and F. Lippi (2005). The monetary transmission mechanism: Evidence from the
 industries of five OECD countries. European Economic Review 49(6), 1543–1569.

Fabiani, S., M. Druant, I. Hernando, C. Kwapil, B. Landau, C. Loupias, F. Martins, T. Mathä,
  R. Sabbatini, H. Stahl, and A. Stokman (2006, Setembro). What Firms’ Surveys Tell Us
  about Price-Setting Behavior in the Euro Area. International Journal of Central Banking 2(3),
  3–47.

Fernandes, M. and J. Toro (2005). O mecanismo de transmissão monetária na economia
  brasileira pós-plano Real. Revista Brasileira de Economia 59(1), 5–32.

Gaiotti, E. and A. Secchi (2006). Is there a cost channel of monetary policy transmission?
 An investigation into the pricing behavior of 2000 firms. Journal of Money, Credit and Bank-
 ing 38(8), 2013 – 2037.

Glen, J. and A. Singh (2004). Comparing capital structures and rates of return in developed
  and emerging markets. Emerging Markets Review 5(2), 161–192.

Henzel, S., O. Hülsewig, E. Mayer, and T. Wollmershäuser (2009). The price puzzle revisited:
 Can the cost channel explain a rise in inflation after a monetary policy shock? Journal of
 Macroeconomics 31, 268–289.

Hülsewig, O., E. Mayer, and T. Wollmershäuser (2009). Bank behavior, incomplete inter-
 est rate pass-through, and the cost channel of monetary policy transmission. Economic
 Modelling 26, 1310–1327.

Kawamoto, C. T. and J. L. Oreiro (2011). Reavaliando a Existência de um Price Puzzle no
  Brasil: Implicações para o Regime de Metas de Inflação. In Anais do XXXIX Encontro
  Nacional de Economia.

Malikane, C. (2012). Inflation dynamics and the cost channel in emerging markets. MPRA
 Paper (42688).

Martins, R. (2011). Cost-push channel of monetary policy: estimation and simulation. Mas-
 ter’s thesis, Faculdade de Economia, Administração e Contabilidade – USP.

Minella, A. and N. F. Souza-Sobrinho (2009). Monetary Channels in Brazil through the Lens
 of a Semi-Structural Model. BCB Working Papers Series (181).

Rabanal, P. (2007). Does inflation increase after a monetary policy tightening? Journal of
  Economic Dynamics & Control 31, 906–937.



                                              17
Rabanal, P. and J. F. Rubio-Ramírez (2007). Comparing New Keynesian Models in the Euro
  Area: A Bayesian Approach. Spanish Economic Review 10(1), 23–40.

Rabanal, P. and G. Schwartz (2001). Testing the effectiveness of the overnight interest rate as
  a monetary policy instrument. In IMF (Ed.), Brazil: Selected Issues and Statistical Appendix,
  Number 01/10 in IMF Country Report.

Ravenna, F. and C. E. Walsh (2006). Optimal monetary policy with the cost channel. Journal
  of Monetary Economics 53(2), 199–216.

Sales, A. and M. Tannuri-Pianto (2005). Mercado de reservas bancárias e identificação de
  choques de política monetária para o Brasil. In Anais do XXVII Encontro Brasileiro de
  Econometria.

Sales, A. S. and M. Tannuri-Pianto (2007). Identification of Monetary Policy Shocks in the
  Brazilian Market for Bank Reserves. BCB Working Papers Series (154).

Santin, R. R. M. (2013). Análise da Política de Crédito do BNDES em um Modelo DSGE.
  Master’s thesis, Escola de Economia da Fundação Getúlio Vargas (FGV), São Paulo.

Santos, F. G. (2011). Ensaios sobre macroeconometria bayesiana aplicada. Master’s thesis, Facul-
  dade de Economia, Administração e Contabilidade — Universidade de São Paulo.

Sato, C. Y. (2013). O canal de crédito na transmissão de política monetária: evidências para o
  Brasil. Master’s thesis, Escola de Economia da Fundação Getúlio Vargas (FGV), São Paulo.

Smets, F. and R. Wouters (2007). Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian
  DSGE Approach. American Economic Review 97(3), 586–606.

Smets, F. R. and R. Wouters (2003, Setembro). An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General
  Equilibrium Model of the Euro Area. Journal of the European Economic Association 1(5),
  1123–1175.

Tillmann, P. (2008). Do interest rates drive inflation dynamics? An analysis of the cost
  channel of monetary transmission. Journal of Economic Dynamics & Control 32, 2723–2744.

Tovar, C. (2009). DSGE Models and Central Banks. Economics: The Open-Access, Open-
  Assessment E-Journal 3(16), 1–31.

Vasconcelos, B. F. B. and J. A. Divino (2012). O desempenho recente da política monetária
  brasileira sob a ótica da modelagem DSGE. BCB Working Paper Series (291).

Vereda, L. and M. A. F. H. Cavalcanti (2010). Modelo Dinâmico Estocástico de Equilíbrio
  Geral (DSGE) para a Economia Brasileira: Versão 1. Texto para Discussão do IPEA (1479).




                                              18
Appendix A. VAR Model Series and Specification Tests




                            Figure 7: VAR Model Series


                       Table 3: VAR Model Specification Tests

                   Test                  Distribution    Test Statistic   P-Value
     Autocorrelation
                            LM[1]            χ2(36)        33, 87481      0, 57005
                            LM[4]            χ2(144)      152, 69269      0, 29413
       Normality
                       Doornik-Hansen        χ2(12)        8, 48423       0, 74624




                                        19
