Export Quality and the Dynamics of North-South Competition
                                         Jorge Chami Batista – Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro
                                                           Yan Liu* – Dalian Nationalities University


Abstract
This paper introduces and applies a new methodology to deal with competition among exporters of
vertically differentiated products and to address the following questions: Considering product markets are
segmented, to what extent have developed countries been losing market shares in international trade to
non-developed countries, the South, or to other developed countries, the North? And to what extent has
China been gaining market share from the North and the South? Imports of manufactured goods from
Japan at the most detailed level of classification are used to answer these questions.

Resumo
Este artigo introduz e aplica uma nova metodologia para lidar com a competição entre exportadores de
produtos diferenciados verticalmente e responder as seguintes questões: considerando que os mercados de
produtos são segmentados, em que medida os países desenvolvidos vêm perdendo participação no
comércio internacional para os países em desenvolvimento, o Sul, ou para outros países desenvolvidos, o
Norte? E em que medida a China vem ganhando participação do Norte e do Sul? Importações de bens
manufaturados do Japão ao nível mais detalhado de classificação dos produtos são usadas para responder
essas questões.

Keywords: quality; differentiated products; international trade; competition; developed countries;
developing countries.

Palavras-chave: qualidade; produtos diferenciados; comércio internacional; competição; países
desenvolvidos; países em desenvolvimento.

F12, F14, F16, O19, O33, O57




                                                                        ! "       #   $ %     "
Export Quality and the Dynamics of North-South Competition

        In the past two decades (1991-2011), the share of developed economies in world merchandise
trade fell approximately 20 percentage points (p.p.) 1 . Export revenue of the North, as developed
economies are often referred to in the literature, was down to slightly over half of world export revenues
(53%) in 2011. Considering all countries, the North’s loss corresponds to the South’s gain of market
share. The share of developed economies major exporters of manufactured goods fell even more, 22 p.p.
in the same period. The G-7 (the US, Germany, Japan, France, the UK, Italy, and Canada) accounted for
91% of the loss of market share of developed countries major exporters of manufactured goods. The main
gainers in the South were emerging economies led by China, which accounted for over 42% of the South
gains in world exports, Russia, India, Mexico, Vietnam, Brazil, Thailand and Turkey.
        As the South expanded its share in world exports, particularly in the 1990s and 2000s, empirical
research documented a new pattern of trade specialization. Large economies of the South export roughly
the same range of products as the North, but specialize in lower-price varieties of each of these products,
while high-income countries specialize in higher-price varieties (Schott, 2004; and Hummels and
Klenow, 2005).
        This new pattern of trade specialization raises important theoretical and empirical issues. Schott
(2004), for example, provides strong evidence that this vertically differentiated pattern of specialization
within products can largely be explained by the traditional factor proportion argument that the North
exports high-unit-value varieties, which are intensive in the region’s abundant capital and skills, while the
South exports low-unit-value varieties, which are intensive in the region’s abundant unskilled labour2.
        Bearing in mind the evidence of large differences in prices observed between varieties within
products defined at the most detailed level of classification, an interesting empirical issue is to what
extent exports from the North enter into direct competition with exports from the South. Fontagné et al.
(2008, p.54) suggest that they do not. Therefore, high-income countries would not have to worry so much
about the South’s rising share in world trade, as long as they kept their share in an expanding upmarket
segment. Without direct competition from the South, exports of high-price product varieties would sustain
employment and relative wages of skilled labour in the North.
        Fontagné et all (2008) also argue that Western Europe has been more resilient to competition from
the South than the US economy, just by examining their changes in market shares by segments between
1995 and 2004. The North as a whole can only gains from or lose to the South. However, a country or a
particular region in the North, such as Western Europe, may lose market share to the South as well as to
other Northern countries. A reduction in the market share of Western Europe does not say whether the
region is losing to the South or to other groups of countries in the North.
        The main objective of this article is to estimate the changes of market share of major exporting
countries or groups of countries of the North and the South in the past two decades, due to direct
competition, and uncover to whom each exporter of the North is losing market share on each segmented
product market. In addition to finding out whether the North is losing market share in the lower or upper
segments of the market, we shall be able to say if North America, for example, is losing market share to
developed countries of Western Europe or Asia, or to China and other developing countries, through
direct competition.
        To achieve this objective, we pioneeringly combine two existing methods. First, we segment the
import value of each product into three categories: low, medium and high segments, as in Fontagné et al
(2008). Then we apply a method of distributing the gains and losses of each exporting country to each of
its competitors in each product market, as in Chami Batista (2008). This latter method allows us to
estimate, for instance, how much a Northern country or region gained or lost to other Northern or
Southern countries or regions in a particular period.


1
  Unctad Database. The list of developed countries varies a little according to the source. For Unctad’s list see:
http://unctadstat.unctad.org/TableViewer/dimView.aspx (accessed 7 July 2012).
2
  The main contrast with the traditional factor argument is that specialization takes place within products rather than within
industries.

                                                                                                                                 &
        The combination of the two methods allows us to measure to what extent exports from the North
are in direct competition with exports from the South in different segments of the market and to test the
resilience of countries or regions of the North to South competition. It also allows us to test the sensitivity
of our results to changes in a particular parameter of the segmentation method that affects the size of each
segment, helping us to identify where product varieties of the North and the South enter into direct
competition.
        Chami Batista (2010) shows that his method of distributing exporters’ gains and losses among
competitors is consistent with the main theoretical models of competition. However, the method requires
that product markets are defined in such a way that the varieties exported by each exporting country
directly compete with or are substitutes of the varieties of all the other exporting countries in each product
market. These are the relevant product-variety markets. By computing the distribution of gains and losses
of each exporter among competitors with different degrees of product market segmentation, the combined
methods help to identify the relevant segmented product markets, thus improving both of them.
        We also test the two ways of calculating the gains and losses of market share due to direct
competition, using Laspeyres and Paasche indices, to provide more robust results.
        In addition to this introduction, the article is organized in three parts. Part I provides the
theoretical framework, main concepts, and methodology. It is divided in four sections as follows. Section
I.1 briefly reviews the literature on North-South models of trade and growth based on vertical
differentiation. Section I.2 presents the main concepts used in the article such as relevant product markets
and direct and indirect product competition. Section I.3 describes the segmentation method. Section I.4
describes the Constant Market Share Model (CMS) and the method of distributing the gains and losses of
market share of countries of the North and the South, due to direct competition, among their competitors.
Part II reports the empirical results and is divided in four sections. Section II.1 applies the segmentation
method and reports the changes in market shares and the revealed comparative advantages of the North
and the South in each segment and without any segmentation. Section II.2 presents the results of the CMS
model and the effect of segmentation on the direct competition. Section II.3 shows the gains and losses of
the main regions of the North to the South and among themselves. Section II.4 examines the gains and
losses of China to the main groups of countries of both the North and the South. Part III concludes.

I. Theoretical framework, main concepts and methodology
I.1 North-South models with vertically differentiated products
        Theoretically, North-South models based on specialization in vertically differentiated products has
a long tradition 3 , and the quality ladder family of endogenous growth models seems to capture the
fundamental characteristics of the recent North-South trade competition between varieties within
products: The North innovates by improving the quality of its product varieties, while the South imitates
and receives investment from Northern firms to produce product varieties first invented in the North4. The
trade models that emphasize product horizontal differentiation and economies of scale (as for instance,
Krugman, 1979) appear to be more relevant to explain trade and growth performances of individual
countries with different sizes within either the North or the South.
        Quality ladder models traditionally make the simplifying assumption that there is perfect
substitution between the vertically differentiated varieties within a product, so that the firm producing the
variety with the lowest quality-adjusted price5 will price out all competitors and become the sole producer
and exporter of the product. However, vertically differentiated varieties within a product may be weakly
substitutable or not substitutable at all, once we drop the assumptions that quality is unidimensional6 and
consumers are homogeneous. In fact, varieties may have different qualities and features (durability,
3
  See the pioneer works of Linder (1961) and Vernon (1966).
4
  Grossman and Helpman (1991) set up a North-South model that includes innovation and imitation, while the model
developed by Glass and Saggi (2002) also includes foreign direct investment of high-wage countries into low-wage countries.
5
  Innovation in quality ladder models can be modeled as a quality improvement as well as a cost reduction. In the first case,
quality rises while price remains constant, in the second quality remains constant while price is reduced. In any case, the
quality-adjusted price falls and the innovator becomes more competitive.
6
  Unidimensional means that quality can be measured in just one axis and there is no horizontal differentiation at all within
vertically differentiated varieties.
design, mobility, functionality etc.), consumers may have different income levels (Fajgelbaum, Grossman
and Helpman, 2009), and heterogeneous firms may have different preferences regarding their purchases
of intermediate and capital goods. Heterogeneous consumers may value different qualities differently
(Glass, 2001) and thus come up with very different quality-adjusted prices for each variety in the market.

I.2. Relevant product markets and direct versus indirect competition
        It has been well documented that countries export different varieties of the same product at very
different prices7 (Schott, 2004). It has also been well documented that higher per capita income countries
tend to export varieties of high unit values, while lower per capita income countries tend to export
varieties of low unit values (Schott, 2004; Hummels and Klenow, 2005).
        Therefore, countries at different levels of development that sell different varieties of the same
product may not be in direct competition, since they may be operating in different market segments. A car
that sells for $20k can hardly be a substitute for one that sells at $100k. The buyer of the cheaper (more
expensive) car is unlikely to buy the more expensive (cheaper) one because of a 10 or 20 per cent
discount.
        As pointed out by Fontagné et al. (2008), if countries like China and Germany sell the same
products, according to available classifications at the most disaggregated level, but are specialized in
different segments of each product market, they may not be in direct competition. As a result of little
direct competition between countries in the North and the South, they argue that there will be only a weak
link between trade and factor prices.
        Fontagné et al. (2008) propose a method to segment each product market in three different levels
(low, medium, high) based on relative unit values of the exporting countries8. They then show that the
similarity indices between higher and lower income countries are much smaller when products are
segmented than otherwise. Applying their segmentation method and comparing the export market share
of each main country/region, they conclude that Western Europe has been more resilient than other
developed countries to competition from the South.
        Two exporters are in direct competition when they export varieties of a product that are substitutes
to each other. The varieties that are substitutes define the relevant product market. If an exporting
country gains market (micro) share in a relevant product market, it does through direct competition with
other exporting countries.
        A country gains market (macro) share through indirect competition when its micro shares do not
change (no gains or losses in the relevant product markets), but its total market share rises or falls. This
occurs when the size of the product markets in which the country has higher/lower shares increase
relatively to the other product markets. Suppose that one country exports to two relevant product markets
A and B. Assume that it has 10% of A, 2% of B, and 3% of the two markets together, because market B is
larger than market A. Suppose now that, after some time, market A grows to become as large as B and the
country maintains the same share in both product markets. As a result, the overall share of the country
will rise from 3% to say 6%, although it did not gain market share through direct competition in any of
the two markets. It gained through indirect competition.
        Constant Market Share Models (CMS) split changes in overall (macro) market share into two
components: the competitiveness effect or the direct competition component; and the product
composition effect or the indirect competition component.

      I.3. Segmentation method
      In order to segment each product market we apply the same method as in Fontagné et al. (2008).
Each product market at the 9-digit level of Japan’s HS classification is divided into three segments: low,
medium and high, according to the relative unit value of the variety exported by each country.



7
  In fact, as prices are not directly observable in international trade statistics, empirical work use unit values, defined as the
ratio of the export value to quantities, as a substitute for prices.
8
  The segmentation method will be presented in Part II of this article.
                                                                                  r = UVhj / UVwj
          We denote the relative unit value ratio from country h for product j as hj              , where
UVhj                                                                        UVwj
        is the unit value of product j imported by Japan from country h and      is the trade weighted
                                                                                 r <1
(geometric) average of unit value over all flows to Japan for the product j . If hj     then the import value
                                         j
from country h to Japan for product is divided into low and medium ranges as follows: the share of low
         (1 − rhjα )                                                rα       r >1
range is             and the share in medium range is the complement hj ; if hj   then the import value from
                                     j
country h to Japan for product is divided into high and medium ranges as follows: share in top range is
(1 − 1 rhjα )                            1 rα     r =1
           and share in medium range is hj . If hj       , the whole flow is ascribed to the medium range.
        Since the method allocates each country’s export revenue of each product into two different
segments, it recognizes that each unit value represents the weighted average of some firms’ export prices,
during the course of one year, that are likely to be dispersed around that average. The parameter α
regulates the smoothness of the market segment allocation function. Fontagné et al. (2008) sets it equal to
four so as to make each segment equal to one third of world trade. We see no reason why to do the same
with Japan’s imports. Furthermore, it should be recalled that Fontagné et al. (2008) uses data at the 6-digit
level of classification. Since segmentation is very sensitive to the data level of aggregation and our study
uses a more detailed level of classification, a specific criterion should be found to justify the value of the
alpha parameter.

I.4. The CMS model and the distribution of market share changes
        The basic Constant Market Share (CMS) model breaks down the change in the aggregated market
share (or macro share) of a particular exporter into two main components: the direct competition, or
competitiveness effect, and the indirect competition, or the product composition effect.
        The micro share of country H in country L’s imports of product i in year t is defined as: aHLi (t)
  HLi
X (t) /MLi(t), where XHLi is country H’s exports of product i to country L and M is country L’s imports
of product i. Assuming there are n products, we may define the row vector of dimension n as:
aHL (aHL1, ... aHLi, ..., aHLn).
The macro share of country H in country L’s imports in year t is:
AHL(t)     iX
               HLi
                   (t)/ i MLi(t).
The macro share change of exporting country H to importing country L in the period between year 0 to
year t ( AHL) may be written as:
  AHL AHL(t)-AHL(0)                                                                    (1)
where AHL(t) is the inner product of the vector of H’s micro shares (aHL) and the vector of product shares
of country L (bL) in year t.
AHL(t) aHL(t)bL(t)                                                                     (2)
         L                                        L     L1      Li   Lm       Li
where b is the column vector of dimension m: b (b , …,b ,...,b ) and b              Li
                                                                                 M (t)/ i MLi(t).
        Combining identities (1) and (2), we have:
    HL
  A      aHL(t)bL(t)-aHL(0)bL(0)                                                       (3)
and,
  AHL [ aHL(t)-aHL(0)] bL(0)+aHL(t)[ bL(t)- bL(0)]                                     (4)
where the two terms on the right hand side of the identity are the direct and the indirect competition
components of the macro share change of exporting country H to importing country L in the period
between year 0 to year t.
Identity (4) may also be written as:
  AHL [ aHL(t)-aHL(0)] bL(t)+aHL(0)[ bL(t)- bL(0)]                                     (5)
        Therefore, the direct competition component of the macro share change may be calculated in two
different ways, one using initial-year weights (a Laspeyres index) as in identity (4), and the other using
end-year weights (Paasche index) as in identity (5).
        The method of distribution of market share changes due to direct competition in international trade
was developed in Chami Batista (2008) and its theoretical foundations were discussed in Chami Batista


                                                                                                            '
(2010). The method starts with the micro share change of exporting country H in importing country L of
commodity i in the period from year 0 to year t. We drop the superscripts L and i to ease the notation:
  aH (t)           HJ
            J H a (t)
                                  H J       J H
                           J H [ a a (t)- a a (t)]                                     (6)
                                                                              HJ
where J represents all countries competing with H in the i market and a is defined as the part of the
micro share change of H that is ascribed to the micro share change of J. It is assumed that the varieties
supplied by country H and countries J in the product market i are substitutable to each other. As a result
of identity (6), the sum of country H’s gains and losses to all competing countries J is identical to country
H’s net gain or loss. In addition to that, Chami Batista (2008) assumes that:
  aHJ = aH aJ - aJ aH = aH aJ ( aH/aH- aJ/aJ)                                          (7)
so that aHH = 0 (country H does not gain or lose market share to itself) and aHJ =- aJH (country H’s
gain from country J is equal to the loss of country J to country H). Summing up equation (7) across all
relevant markets i, we find the net gain or loss of exporting country H to exporting country J in the
importing country L in the period from 0 to t.

II. Empirics
         This study uses annual data on Japanese imports of manufactured products9. There were 6108
manufactured products at the 9-digit level of the harmonized System (HS) in 201010. The nine-digit HS
was introduced in 1988 and revised in 1992, 1996, 2002 and 2007. To trace each product category
consistently through time, we use the initial and end-year data of five sub-periods: 1988-1991, 1992-
1995, 1996-2001, 2002–2006 and 2007-2010.
         As a result, we have a much longer time period of analysis (1988-2010) and a much more detailed
product classification (the 9-digit level of the Harmonized System) than the period (1994-2005) and
product disaggregation (6-digit level) used by Fontagné et al (2008).
         Our data also differs from Fontagné’s, because it focuses only on Japan imports rather than on
world imports. Although we obviously lose in coverage, there are some advantages in focusing on Japan
only 11 : (i) since richer countries import more from countries that produce higher quality products 12 ,
differences in demand for quality across countries are removed when only one importing country is
considered; (ii) Japan is one of the largest trading partner of China, North America and Western Europe;
and (iii) Japan does not have trade agreements with none of these trading partners13.
         Countries are classified by region and income levels, according to the World Bank classification,
and are reported in the Appendix. According to their income levels, countries are classified in ascending
order as Low, Lower Middle, Upper Middle, and High. Countries are part of the North if they are
classified as High and are otherwise part of the South. Because relative unit values are related to the level
of development and we are interested in the dynamics of such a relation, we allow countries to change
their classification according to their per capita income between different sub-periods. Within each sub-
period, countries are classified at the initial year.

II.1 Market shares and trade specialization of the North and the South
       The top part of Table (1) shows that, without any segmentation, the share of the North in Japan’s
imports of manufactured goods declined drastically from 1988 to 2010, losing 25 percentage points (p.p.),
despite the fact that some countries moved up from the South to the North in the period14. The share of
the North falls in every sub-period analysed in this work and is smaller than the share of the South in
2010.
       The shares of developed North America (NA) and Western Europe (WE) increase from 1988 to
1991, but fall significantly from 1991 to 2010. NA loses 17 p.p. from 1988 to 2010 and WE loses 8 p.p.
9
  Data is from the Trade Statistics of Japan -Ministry of Finance (MOF)
10
   We only considered products HS 9-digit from chapter 28 to 96 (manufactured products), for which information on quantities
are available.
11
   Kiyota (2010).
12
   Hallak (2006).
13
   http://www.mofa.go.jp/policy/economy/fta/index.html (accessed 13 January 2013).
14
   South Korea, Macao, Portugal, Malta, Greece, Estonia, Croatia, Check Republic, Slovak Republic, and Slovenia are the
main countries that have made their way from the South to the North.

                                                                                                                          (
in the same period. The share of WE has become larger than the share of NA since at least 2006.
Therefore, the share of WE has generally been more resilient to competition in Japan than the share of
NA.
        The share of developed Asia goes up 4 p.p. from 1988 to 2010, but this is due exclusively to South
Korea entering the developed group in 1995/96. Without South Korea, the share of developed Asia would
have declined 1.6 p.p. in the period. The share of South Korea also falls 1.3 p.p. from 1988 to 2010.
        As the North’s share falls, the share of the South rises from 28% in 1988 to 55% in 2010. The
main driver of the rising share of the South has been the consistent and robust increase in China’s market
share during the whole period of 1988-2010. Excluding South Korea from the South, the Rest of
developing Asia (RoA) also gains market share in the period. It is worth noting that the share of all other
non-developed countries taken together falls in the period.
        Before segmenting the product markets, we tested the segmentation of both Japan’s total imports
of manufactured goods and of a quite homogeneous product for setting a reasonable range of possible
values for alpha. Chami Batista and Silveira (2010) show that the unit values of internationally traded tin
behave in a manner very close to what is theoretically expected from a homogeneous product. They use
monthly data on unit values from imports of the US and Japan at the most detailed level of classification
available in each country15.
        Table (2) reports the size of the medium segment for Japan’s imports of manufactured goods for
Japan’s imports of tin for different years in the period 1988-2010 and for different values of alpha. The
smaller is the alpha value, the larger is the size of the medium segment. We would like to choose a range
of values for alpha such that the size of the medium segment is significantly smaller than half of Japan’s
imports of manufactured goods, in order to capture a scenario in which Japan’s import market is quite
segmented. After all, we want to estimate the effects of direct competition among exporters under the
hypothesis that product markets are segmented. But we would also like to choose a value for alpha such
that a high percentage of the import value of tin is allocated to the medium segment, in order to reflect the
high degree of homogeneity of the product.
        As Tables (2) reveals, for alpha smaller than 3 the medium segment of Japan’s imports of
manufactured goods would not allow much segmentation, and for alpha greater than 5 the medium
segment of tin would be too small for a quasi-homogeneous good. We conclude that a range between 3
and 5 for alpha is quite appropriate for our sensitivity tests.
        When Japan’s import market of manufactured goods is segmented16, it is possible to observe on
the bottom part of Table (1) that the North suffers dramatic losses in the low and medium segments in the
1988-2010 period and in each and every sub-period. This is a clear evidence of the fierce price
competition from the South with which the North was confronted in these segments during this period. In
the early period of 1988-91, the North makes some gains in the high segment, but that is not enough to
offset the losses in the low and medium segments. In all the other sub-periods from 1992 to 2010, the
share of the North falls in the high segment17.
        Based on this surprising evidence and on North-South growth models, one could say that, during
this period, the rate of quality improvement applied to products produced in the North was lower than the
rate applied to products produced in the South through imitation and knowledge transferred from
Northern firms.
        China’s market share gains take place largely in the low and medium segments. In the low
segment, China’s share jumps from 9.8% in 1988 to reach a staggering 52% in 2006, remaining stable
after that. In the medium segment, the rise is continuous from 4.5% in 1988 to 42% in 2010. China’s
share in the high segment was about 1% from 1988 to 1996. After that, it rose continuously, and at a
faster rate than China’s shares in the other two segments, to reach 6.2% in 2010. The Rest of Asia, formed

15
   In the US tin is classified as HS 800110.0000 and in Japan is HS 800110.000.
16
   The figures presented in the analysis by segment are calculated with alpha equal to 4. Changing the parameter alpha of the
segmentation method to 3 raises the relative size of the medium segment, while changing it to 5 does the opposite. However,
the impact is quite small and has little effect on the dynamics described in this section.
17
   In fact, the share of the North rises between 1995 and 1996 (not shown), but this is exclusively due to South Korea leaving
the South and joining the developed North.

                                                                                                                                 )
by developing Asia countries other than China (RoA), also shows significant gains in market share in all
segments in the period 1988-2010, once South Korea is excluded.
        Given that South Korea is one of the few examples of a developing country that has moved up to
become a high-income economy, it is interesting to look into her changing shares by segment. Her share
in the low segment suffers a drastic fall, much like other developed countries of Asia, and in sharp
contrast with China and the RoA. However, in the high segment, South Korea does not show a definite
trend in her market share, showing some ups and downs. This is again in contrast with China and the RoA
in the South and also with developed Asia, as the shares of all these parts of Asia reveal a clear upward
trend in the high segment. South Korea seems to be positioned somewhere in between the performance of
the developed countries of the western world and the performance of other countries of Asia.
         The group of countries of the South classified as others show a fall in their market share in all
segments and periods, except in the high segment between 1995 and 2010, when it shows a rising trend. It
appears that these countries have been forced to improve the quality of their manufactured products and
compete in the upper market segment, given their difficulties in facing the price competition of China and
other non-developed Asian countries in the low and medium segments.
        Considering that the North still maintains 30% of the low segment in 2010, the South can still
make further gains. Low-income countries like Cambodia (L) and Bangladesh (L) and low-middle-
income countries like Vietnam (LM), Indonesia (LM) and the Philippines (LM), among others, have some
potential to increase their market share. On the other hand, China appears to face difficulties in further
raising her share in the low segment, having moved up from a low-income (L) in 1988 to a lower-middle-
income in 1997 and to an upper-middle-income (UM) economy in 2010.
        Table (3) reports the changes in the specialization index (Balassa’s revealed comparative
advantage) of the main groups of developed and developing countries during the period between 1988
and 2010.
        As expected, the North reveals comparative advantage in the high segment, while the South
reveals comparative advantage in the low and medium segments. More interestingly, while the North has
become more specialized in the upper market segment, the South has reduced its revealed comparative
advantage (RCA) in the lower market segment. In other words, the losses of the North in the high
segment were relatively smaller than in the low and medium segments. On the other end, the gains of the
South in the low segment were relatively smaller than in the medium and high segments.
        Western Europe has shown RCA in the high segment since the start of our period of analysis,
while North America, developed Asia and other developed countries have become specialized in the high
segment during our period of analysis. Western Europe has the highest RCA in the high segment and the
lowest in the medium segment. The RCA of North America has been similar to Western Europe’s in the
low segment, but it has been much higher in the medium segment and much lower in the high segment18.
Developed Asia has the highest RCA in the low segment and the lowest in the high segment among these
three main groups of the North.
        Within the South, China is more specialized in the low segment than the Rest of Asia (RoA) and
has become more specialized in the medium segment than the RoA within this period. On the other hand,
China has a much lower RCA in the high segment than the RoA, though both are not specialized in the
upper market segment. However, one can say that China is gradually rising in the quality ladder, given
her declining RCA in the low segment and her better performance in the medium and high segments since
the mid-1990s. Finally, it is noteworthy that the dynamics of the South specialization has been largely
influenced but what happens to China.

 II.2 Breaking down of the macro share changes into direct and indirect effects
        We have applied identities (4) and (5) of the Constant Market Share Model (CMS), which use
Laspeyres and Paasche indices, respectively, to breakdown the macro share changes into direct
competition (competitiveness) and indirect competition (composition) effects. Table (4) reports the direct

18
  North America was specialized in the medium segment from 1988 to 2007. The most specialized countries in the medium
segment tend to be large exporters of manufactured products that are intensive in natural resources, such as South Africa,
Chile, UAE, Russia, New Zealand, Australia, Indonesia, Brazil and Canada.

                                                                                                                             *
and indirect effects in the aggregated period of 1988-2010, without and with the segmentation of product
markets, assuming alpha equal to 4 for segmenting product markets19. These two identities were first
applied to each sub-period and then aggregated to sum up the changes in the eighteen years period
between 1988 and 201020.
        We can observe that the market share losses of the North and the gains of the South due to direct
competition are always smaller than the macro share changes, no matter if Laspeyres or Paasche indices
are used and if markets are segmented or not. This means that the low and medium segments of Japanese
imports of manufactures, in which the South is more specialized, were more dynamic than the high
segment, making the indirect competition (or composition) effects positive for the South and negative for
the North, hence making the South’s macro share gains and the North’s macro share losses larger than the
direct competition effect.
        Comparing the columns of direct competition effects with segmentation and with no segmentation
on Table (4), we can also conclude that if relevant product markets are segmented, assuming no
segmentation overestimates the direct competition effects. However, although this is true for the 18-year
period from 1988 to 2010, it was not true for the earlier sub-periods of 1988-91 and 1992-95.
        What is true for the North and the South in aggregate does not necessarily hold for the groups that
make up the North and the South. Using Laspeyres indices, the loss in the market share of NA due to
direct competition is much larger than Asia’s and WE’s losses with or without segmentation. WE’s loss
due to direct competition is slightly larger than Asia’s without segmentation, but it is much smaller with
segmentation. On the other hand, using Paasche indices and segmenting the product markets, the loss of
NA due to direct competition is the smallest of these three groups, the loss of WE is the largest, and
Asia’s is in between. Therefore, it is not possible to say which group of developed countries has been the
most or the least resilient to direct competition from both the North and the South together.
        As to the gains of the South, Table (4) shows that China’s gains due to direct competition are
smaller than her macro share gains and are even smaller with segmentation than without, regardless of
whether Laspeyres or Paasche indices are used. Without segmentation and using Laspeyres indices, the
macro share gains of RoA are due to indirect competition, since the direct competition effect is negative.
If product markets are segmented, the direct competition effect, based on Laspeyres indices, becomes
positive and quite large, hence the indirect effect is highly negative. On the other hand, using Paasche
indices, the direct competition effect is positive and smaller than the macro share change with or without
segmentation.
        The more segmented the market, that is, when the parameter alpha is increased from zero (no
segmentation) to 3, 4 and 5, the losses of the North and the gains of the South and China are reduced,
regardless of which index is used. However, the effects of increasing segmentation on the direct
competition of other developed or developing countries depend on which index is used and are, therefore,
ambiguous.

III.3 North-South and North-North Direct Competition
        Table (5) sums up the direct competition gains and losses of the main groups of the North to both
the South and the North in the period 1988-2010, using Paasche and Laspeyres indices and alpha equal to
four for segmenting product markets.
North-South Direct Competition
        The North loses market share in direct competition with the South in each and every segment
(low, medium and high) and in each and every sub-period from 1988 to 2010, except in the earliest sub-
period of 1988-1991 when it was still gaining from the South in the high segment. This quite
extraordinary result is robust to alpha equal to 3, 4, and 5, and to Laspeyres and Paasche indices21.

19
   Changing alpha to 3 or 5 does not change our conclusions in this section.
20
   Recall that the changes between 1991 and 1992, 1995 and 1996, 2001 and 2002, and 2006 and 2007 were not calculated
because of changes in product definitions of the Harmonized System of classification at the 9-digit level in these pairs of years.
Therefore, 1988-2010 macro market share changes exclude the changes in the above sub-periods.
21
   All statements thereafter are valid for both Paasche and Laspeyres methods and all three levels of market segmentation used
(alpha 3, 4, and 5), unless clearly stated otherwise.

                                                                                                                                +
        It is true, however, that most of the North’s direct loss to the South took place in the low and
medium segments, which accounted for between 80% (P5) and 86% (L3) of the total direct loss to the
South in the period 1988-201022.
        Considering the average annual losses of the North in each period, we observe that the bulk of
these losses took place in the sub-periods between 1992 and 2006. The average annual loss of the North
was much smaller in the sub-period 2007-2010 and even smaller in the sub-period 1988-1991. More
interestingly, the North gained in the high segment in the earliest period (1988-1991), mitigating the large
losses in the low and medium segments, whereas, in the latest sub-period (2007-2010), the high segment
accounted for between 34% (P3) and 45% (L5) of the North’s direct losses to the South. This is a clear
indication of the deteriorating capacity of the North to compete even in the upper product markets.
        The North’s loss to the South is largely due to the gains of China and other non-developed
countries of Asia (RoA). Aggregating all segments and all sub-periods, China accounts for between 54%
(L5) and 61% (P3) of the North’s loss to the South, while the RoA accounts for between 30% (L3) and
32% (P5). However, again, this distribution is uneven by segments. While China accounts for between
68% (L3) and 77% (P5) of the North’s loss to the South in the low segment, she accounts for only
between 15% (L3) and 23% (P5) in the high segment. The developing countries of the RoA, on the other
hand, accounts for between 19% (P5) and 27% (L3) of the North’s loss to the South in the low segment,
but accounts for between 58% (L5) and 75% (P3) in the high segment23. Therefore, China has shown to
be very competitive against the North in the lower markets, while the RoA has shown to be quite
competitive against the North in the upper markets.
        Developed Asian countries are the big losers to the South, accounting for half of the North’s
overall loss to the South (P3=49%; L4=50%) in the period 1988-2010. But developed Asia’s loss to the
South is heavily concentrated in the low and medium segments, whereas NA and WE explain between
76% (L5) and 90% (P3) of North’s losses in the high segment in this 18-year period. Although developed
Asia is the least resilient group of the North to South competition in the 3 segments taken together, it is
the most resilient in the high segment, regardless of whether Laspeyres or Paasche is applied.
        However, the resilience of NA and WE to direct competition from the South depends on whether
Laspeyres or Paasche is applied. Using Laspeyres indices, WE is the group of developed countries most
resilient to South competition in the 3 segments taken together and in the low and medium segments,
followed by NA and Asia. In the high segment, WE follows Asia, as the second most resilient group of
developed countries to South direct competition. Using Paasche indices, on the other hand, NA is the
most resilient group of developed countries in the 3 segments taken together, followed by WE and Asia.
NA is the most resilient in the low segment, WE is the most resilient in the medium segment, and Asia is
the most resilient in the high segment.
        Therefore, Fontagné’s, Gaulier’s and Zignago’s thesis that WE is more resilient than NA to South
competition, considering just the effects of direct competition, cannot be confirmed for Japan’s imports. It
should be stressed that the methodology of Fontagné et al (2008), which just look into the changes of
market shares by segment, is not appropriate to address the question of competition between the South
and groups of developed countries of the North.
North-North Competition
        Developed Asia gains market share through direct competition from all the groups of the North in
all three segments in the period 1988-2010, regardless of the index applied and for any value of alpha in
the 3 to 5 range. Using Laspeyres index, developed WE also gains market share through direct
competition from the North taken together and in direct competition with NA in the low, medium and
high segments. On the other hand, using Paasche indices, WE loses market share in all the segments to all
the regions of the North, including NA.


22
   P5 and L3 stand for Paasche with alpha equal to 5 and Laspeyres with alpha equal to 3, respectively. Pα and Lα, for
α=3,4,5, define the minimum and the maximum of the range of possible shares and any other Pα or Lα will be inside that
range.
23
   Note that using Laspeyres or Paasche indices can make significant differences, but changing alpha in the range of 3 to 5
typically makes very little difference.
II.4 China’s Gains through direct competition
        As seen on Table (4), China made substantial overall gains of market share through direct
competition in the 18-year period from 1988 to 2010. Overtime, China’s average annual gains through
direct competition in the earliest period of 1988-1991 are 11% (for any L or P          =3, 4, or 5) of the
sum of the average annual gains of all five sub-periods, rise to between 20% (L5) and 31% (L3) in the
three intermediate sub-periods, and fall to between 8% (L5) and 12% (P5) in the latest sub-period of
2007-2010. Therefore, the bulk of China’s gains take place in the three sub-periods between 1992 and
2006.
        Table (6) reports the results of the distribution of China’s gains and losses, through direct
competition, among exporting competitors in the period 1988-2010. It shows that approximately two
thirds of China’s total gains come from direct competition with the North and one third come from the
South, largely from the RoA, regardless of whether Laspeyres or Paasche index is used and the applied
degree of segmentation (alpha from 3 to 5). Overtime, however, China’s gains from the South, which
account for between 55% (P5) and 57% (L5) of the total in the earliest sub-period of 1988-1991 sub-
period, fall drastically in the 1990s and 2000s, and in the latest sub-period of 2007-2010 it is the North
that account for between 82% (P5) and 100% (L5) of China’s gains.
        The low and medium segments account for the bulk of China’s total gains in the period 1988-
2010, while the high segment accounts for between just 3.6% (L3) and 7.0% (P5) of them. There is not
much difference in the importance of each segment when China’s gains from direct competition with the
South are compared with the North.
        More telling is the evolution of China’s gains by segment overtime. In the earliest sub-period of
1988-1991, China’s gains in the low segment accounted for between 66% (L3) and 87% (P5) of China’s
total gain. The share of China’s gains in the low segment went down in the 1990s and 2000s to reach
between 17% (P3) and 20% (L5) in the sub-period 2007-2010. On the other hand, the share of China’s
gains in the medium segment went up to between 46% (L5) to 63% (P3) in the sub-period 2007-2010
from between 12% (P5) and 32% (L3) in the sub-period 1988-1991. As a result, the share of the high
segment in China’s gains went up from between 1% (P3) and 3.4% (L5) in 1988-91 to between 19% (P3)
and 37% (L5) in 2007-10. This is a clear evidence of China’s increasing capability to directly compete in
upmarket products.
        The gains of China from direct competition with the South, which accounted for over half of
China’s total gains in the low segment in the three earliest sub-periods, went down to 30% in 2002-2006.
In 2007-10 China lost market share in direct competition with the South in the low segment, both to the
RoA and to the group of other developing countries.
        Therefore, as China’s per capita income gradually made its way up from low (1988-1996) to
lower-middle (1997-2009), and upper-middle (2010), her gains drastically fell in the low segment. The
potential for new gains in the low segment appears to be fading away as China begins to lose through
direct competition with other competitors of the South. This is a clear evidence of China’s immense
difficulties in further penetrating the low-end of product markets.

III. Conclusions
        The North lost market share, both in general as well as in direct and indirect competition with the
South, in each and in all of the three segments (low, medium and high) and in each and every sub-period
from 1988 to 2010, except in the high segment in the 1988-1991 sub-period. Considering the North-South
models in which the North innovates, the South imitates and Northern firms can transfer technology to the
South, our results suggest that imitation and technology transfers to the South have been faster than
innovation in the North in this period. As a result, gains in cost efficiency of firms in the South appear to
have made the quality-adjusted prices of their product varieties more competitive than those produced by
firms in the North in each and every segment. The South’s gains in direct competition with the North in
each of the three segments and the possible greater technological progress of the South, for such a long
period, are quite extraordinary phenomena, unlikely to have been observed in the post-war North-South
trade relations.
        Most of the North’s direct loss to the South took place in the low and medium segments and China
and other developing countries of Asia accounted for most of the South’s direct gains. Overtime,
however, there is a significant increase in the gains of the South in the high segment. China accounts for
most of the South direct gains in the low segment, while the rest of developing countries of Asia accounts
for most of the South gains in the high segment.
        The direct competition gains of the South and the direct competition losses of the North are
reduced the more segmented product markets are assumed to be in the 1988-2010 period, but the gains
and losses of particular groups of countries in the North and South are not necessarily inversely related to
the level of segmentation. Fontagné’s, Gaulier’s and Zignago’s thesis that WE is more resilient than NA
to South competition, considering the effects of direct competition at the most detailed level of product
classification, cannot be confirmed for Japan’s imports.
        Although segmentation reduces the importance of high-income countries direct competition with
China, North-South competition accounted for the bulk of China'      s gains and losses. As China relative per
capita income rose and moved from a classification of low income to lower-middle and to upper-middle
income, China’s immense difficulties in further penetrating the low-end of product markets and China’s
increasing capability to directly compete in upmarket products became quite evident.
        However, to move into the club of high-income countries, China will have to keep raising her
share in the segment of high price varieties at the expense of the North. Developed countries can make
entry in the North more difficult to all upper-middle-income countries, China in particular, if they are able
to raise their rate of innovation relatively to imitation and to the transfer of technology to the South. This
is likely to make South-South competition fiercer in the low and medium price variety markets, as lower-
income countries will try to increase their share in the low and medium price variety segments at the
expense of China’s. As revealed in this paper, this has already been happening in a yet small scale.

References
Chami Batista, J. (2008), Competition between Brazil and Other Exporting Countries in the US Import
   Market: A New Extension of Constant-Market-Shares Analysis, Applied Economics, 40, 2477-2487.
Chami Batista, J. (2010), Theoretical Basis for a Method of Distribution of Market Share Changes in
   International Trade, Revista de Economia Contemporânea, 14, 499-514.
Chami Batista and G.B. da Silveira (2010), Trade Costs and Deviations from the Law of One Price,
   American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 92, 1011-1023.
Fajgelbaum, P.D., G.M. Grossman and E. Helpman (2009), Income Distribution, Product Quality, and
   International Trade, NBER Working Paper No. 15329, (Cambridge, MA: NBER).
Fontagné L., G. Gaulier and S. Zignago (2008), Specialization across Varieties and North–South
   Competition, Economic Policy, 23, 51.
Glass, J.A. and K. Saggi (2002), Intellectual Property Rights and Foreign Direct Investment, Journal of
   International Economics, 56, 387–410.
Glass, J.A. (2001), Price Discrimination and Quality Improvement, Canadian Journal of Economics 34,
   549-569.
Grossman, G. and E. Helpman (1991), Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy, Cambridge and
   London: MIT Press.
Hallak, J.C. (2006), Product Quality and the Direction of Trade, Journal of International Economics, 68,
   238-265.
Hummels, D. and P. Klenow (2005), The Variety and Quality of a Nation'         s Exports, The American
   Economic Review, 95, 704-723.
Kiyota K. (2010), Are US Exports Different from China’s Exports? Evidence from Japan’s Imports, The
   World Economy, 33,1302-1324.
Krugman, P. (1979), Increasing Returns, Monopolistic Competition, and International Trade, Journal of
   International Economics, 9, 469-479.
Linder S. (1961), An Essay on Trade and Transformation, Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell.
Schott, P. (2004), Across-Product versus Within-Product Specialization in International Trade, The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 647-678.

                                                                                                            &
Vernon, R. (1966), International Investment and International Trade in the Product Cycle, The Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 80, 2, 190-207.
'
(
)
                                                    APPENDIX
World Bank Analytical Classifications - GNI per capita in US$ (Atlas methodology)
Data for calendar year :                  1988           1996           2002            2007           2010
Low income (L)                           <= 545         <= 785         <= 735          <= 935        <= 1,005
Lower middle income (LM)                546-2,200     786-3,115       736-2,935      936-3,705     1,006-3,975
Upper middle income (UM)              2,201-6,000 3,116-9,645        2,936-9,075    3,706-11,455   3,976-12,275
High income (H)                          > 6,000       > 9,645         > 9,075        > 11,455       > 12,275
Afghanistan                                 L              L              L               L              L
Albania                                     ..            LM             LM             LM             UM
Algeria                                    UM             LM             LM             LM             UM
American Samoa                              H            UM              UM             UM             UM
Andorra                                     ..             H              H               H              H
Angola                                     LM              L              L              LM             LM
Antigua and Barbuda                        UM            UM               H               H            UM
Argentina                                  UM            UM              UM             UM             UM
Armenia                                     ..             L             LM              LM             LM
Aruba                                       H              H              H               H              H
Australia                                   H              H              H               H              H
Austria                                     H              H              H               H              H
Azerbaijan                                  ..             L              L              LM            UM
Bahamas, The                                H              H              H               H              H
Bahrain                                     H            UM               H               H              H
Bangladesh                                  L              L              L               L              L
Barbados                                   UM            UM               H               H              H
Belarus                                     ..            LM             LM             UM             UM
Belgium                                     H              H              H               H              H
Belize                                     LM             LM             UM             UM              LM
Benin                                       L              L              L               L              L
Bermuda                                     H              H              H               H              H
Bhutan                                      L              L              L              LM             LM
Bolivia                                    LM             LM             LM              LM             LM
Bosnia and Herzegovina                      ..             L             LM              LM            UM
Botswana                                   LM             LM             UM             UM             UM
Brazil                                     LM            UM              LM             UM             UM
Brunei Darussalam                           ..             H              H               H              H
Bulgaria                                    ..            LM             LM             UM             UM
Burkina Faso                                L              L              L               L              L
Burundi                                     L              L              L               L              L
Cambodia                                    L              L              L               L              L
Cameroon                                   LM              L              L              LM             LM
Canada                                      H              H              H               H              H
Cape Verde                                 LM             LM             LM              LM             LM
Cayman Islands                              ..             H              H               H              H
Central African Republic                    L              L              L               L              L
Chad                                        L              L              L               L              L
Channel Islands                             H              H              H               H              H
Chile                                      LM            UM              UM             UM             UM
China                                       L              L             LM              LM            UM
Colombia                                   LM             LM             LM              LM            UM
Comoros                                     L              L              L               L              L
Congo, Dem. Rep.                            L              L              L               L              L
Congo, Rep.                                LM              L              L              LM             LM
Costa Rica                                 LM             LM             UM             UM             UM
Côte d'Ivoire                              LM              L              L               L             LM
Croatia                                     ..           UM              UM             UM               H
Cuba                                        ..            LM             LM             UM             UM
Curaçao                                     ..             ..             ..              ..             H
Cyprus                                      H              H              H               H              H
Czech Republic                              ..           UM              UM               H              H
Denmark                                     H              H              H               H              H
Djibouti                                    ..            LM             LM              LM             LM
Dominica                                   LM             LM             UM             UM             UM
Dominican Republic                         LM             LM             LM              LM            UM

                                                                                                                  *
Ecuador                LM    LM    LM    LM    UM
Egypt, Arab Rep.       LM    LM    LM    LM    LM
El Salvador            LM    LM    LM    LM    LM
Equatorial Guinea       L     L     L     H     H
Eritrea                 ..    L     L     L     L
Estonia                 ..   LM    UM     H     H
Ethiopia                L     L     L     L     L
Faeroe Islands          H     H     H     H     H
Fiji                   LM    LM    LM    UM    LM
Finland                 H     H     H     H     H
France                  H     H     H     H     H
French Polynesia        ..    H     H     H     H
Gabon                  UM    UM    UM    UM    UM
Gambia, The             L     L     L     L     L
Georgia                 ..   LM     L    LM    LM
Germany                 H     H     H     H     H
Ghana                   L     L     L     L    LM
Greece                 UM     H     H     H     H
Greenland               H     H     H     H     H
Grenada                LM    LM    UM    UM    UM
Guam                    H     H     H     H     H
Guatemala              LM    LM    LM    LM    LM
Guinea                  L     L     L     L     L
Guinea-Bissau           L     L     L     L     L
Guyana                  L     L    LM    LM    LM
Haiti                   L     L     L     L     L
Honduras               LM     L    LM    LM    LM
Hong Kong SAR, China    H     H     H     H     H
Hungary                UM    UM    UM     H     H
Iceland                 H     H     H     H     H
India                   L     L     L    LM    LM
Indonesia               L    LM     L    LM    LM
Iran, Islamic Rep.     UM    LM    LM    LM    UM
Iraq                   UM    LM    LM    LM    LM
Ireland                 H     H     H     H     H
Isle of Man             H    UM     H     H     H
Israel                  H     H     H     H     H
Italy                   H     H     H     H     H
Jamaica                LM    LM    LM    UM    UM
Japan                   H     H     H     H     H
Jordan                 LM    LM    LM    LM    UM
Kazakhstan              ..   LM    LM    UM    UM
Kenya                   L     L     L     L     L
Kiribati               LM    LM    LM    LM    LM
Korea, Dem. Rep.        ..   LM     L     L     L
Korea, Rep.            UM     H     H     H     H
Kosovo                  ..    ..    ..    ..   LM
Kuwait                  H     H     H     H     H
Kyrgyz Republic         ..    L     L     L     L
Lao PDR                 L     L     L     L    LM
Latvia                  ..   LM    UM    UM    UM
Lebanon                LM    LM    UM    UM    UM
Lesotho                 L     L     L    LM    LM
Liberia                 L     L     L     L     L
Libya                  UM    UM    UM    UM    UM
Liechtenstein           ..    H     H     H     H
Lithuania               ..   LM    UM    UM    UM
Luxembourg              H     H     H     H     H
Macao SAR, China       UM     H     H     H     H
Macedonia, FYR          ..   LM    LM    LM    UM
Madagascar              L     L     L     L     L
Malawi                  L     L     L     L     L
Malaysia               LM    UM    UM    UM    UM

                                                    +
Maldives                          L    LM    LM    LM    UM
Mali                              L     L     L     L     L
Malta                            UM    UM     H     H     H
Marshall Islands                  ..   LM    LM    LM    LM
Mauritania                        L     L     L     L    LM
Mauritius                        LM    UM    UM    UM    UM
Mexico                           LM    UM    UM    UM    UM
Micronesia, Fed. Sts.             ..   LM    LM    LM    LM
Moldova                           ..    L     L    LM    LM
Monaco                            ..    H     H     H     H
Mongolia                          ..    L     L    LM    LM
Montenegro                        ..    ..    ..   UM    UM
Morocco                          LM    LM    LM    LM    LM
Mozambique                        L     L     L     L     L
Myanmar                           L     L     L     L     L
Namibia                           ..   LM    LM    LM    UM
Nepal                             L     L     L     L     L
Netherlands                       H     H     H     H     H
New Caledonia                    UM     H     H     H     H
New Zealand                       H     H     H     H     H
Nicaragua                        LM     L     L    LM    LM
Niger                             L     L     L     L     L
Nigeria                           L     L     L     L    LM
Northern Mariana Islands          ..    H    UM     H     H
Norway                            H     H     H     H     H
Oman                             UM    UM    UM     H     H
Pakistan                          L     L     L     L    LM
Palau                             ..   UM    UM    UM    UM
Panama                           LM    LM    UM    UM    UM
Papua New Guinea                 LM    LM     L     L    LM
Paraguay                         LM    LM    LM    LM    LM
Peru                             LM    LM    LM    LM    UM
Philippines                      LM    LM    LM    LM    LM
Poland                           LM    UM    UM    UM     H
Portugal                         UM     H     H     H     H
Puerto Rico                      UM    UM     H     H     H
Qatar                             H     H     H     H     H
Romania                          UM    LM    LM    UM    UM
Russian Federation                ..   LM    LM    UM    UM
Rwanda                            L     L     L     L     L
Samoa                            LM    LM    LM    LM    LM
San Marino                        ..    ..    H     H     H
São Tomé and Principe             L     L     L     L    LM
Saudi Arabia                      H    UM    UM     H     H
Senegal                          LM     L     L     L    LM
Serbia                            ..    ..    ..   UM    UM
Seychelles                       UM    UM    UM    UM    UM
Sierra Leone                      L     L     L     L     L
Singapore                         H     H     H     H     H
Saint Maarten (Dutch part)        ..    ..    ..    ..    H
Slovak Republic                   ..   UM    UM     H     H
Slovenia                          ..   UM     H     H     H
Solomon Islands                  LM    LM     L     L    LM
Somalia                           L     L     L     L     L
South Africa                     UM    UM    LM    UM    UM
South Sudan                       ..    ..    ..    ..    ..
Spain                             H     H     H     H     H
Sri Lanka                         L     L    LM    LM    LM
St. Kitts and Nevis              UM    UM    UM    UM    UM
St. Lucia                        LM    UM    UM    UM    UM
St. Martin (French part)          ..    ..    ..    ..    H
St. Vincent and the Grenadines   LM    LM    LM    UM    UM
Sudan                             L     L     L    LM    LM

                                                               &
Suriname                                     UM              LM               LM               UM                UM
Swaziland                                     LM             LM               LM               LM                 LM
Sweden                                         H              H                H                H                  H
Switzerland                                    H              H                H                H                  H
Syrian Arab Republic                          LM             LM               LM               LM                 LM
Taiwan, China                                  H              H                H                H                  H
Tajikistan                                     ..             L                L                L                  L
Tanzania                                       L              L                L                L                  L
Thailand                                      LM             LM               LM               LM                UM
Timor-Leste                                    ..             ..               L               LM                 LM
Togo                                           L              L                L                L                  L
Tonga                                         LM             LM               LM               LM                 LM
Trinidad and Tobago                          UM             UM                UM                H                  H
Tunisia                                       LM             LM               LM               LM                UM
Turkey                                        LM             LM               LM               UM                UM
Turkmenistan                                   ..            LM               LM               LM                 LM
Turks and Caicos Islands                       ..             ..               ..               ..                 H
Tuvalu                                         ..             ..               ..               ..                LM
Uganda                                         L              L                L                L                  L
Ukraine                                        ..            LM               LM               LM                 LM
United Arab Emirates                           H              H                H                H                  H
United Kingdom                                 H              H                H                H                  H
United States                                  H              H                H                H                  H
Uruguay                                      UM             UM                UM               UM                UM
Uzbekistan                                     ..            LM                L                L                 LM
Vanuatu                                       LM             LM               LM               LM                 LM
Venezuela, RB                                UM              LM               UM               UM                UM
Vietnam                                        L              L                L                L                 LM
Virgin Islands (U.S.)                          H              H                H                H                  H
West Bank and Gaza                             ..            LM               LM               LM                 LM
Yemen, Rep.                                   LM              L                L                L                 LM
Zambia                                         L              L                L                L                 LM
Zimbabwe                                      LM              L                L                L                  L
Note: Income classifications are set each year on July 1 for all World Bank member economies, and all other
economies with populations of more than 30,000. These official analytical classifications are fixed during the World
Bank' s fiscal year (ending on June 30), thus economies remain in the categories in which they are classified irrespective
of any revisions to their per capita income data. The historical classifications shown are as published on July 1 of each
fiscal year. http://data.worldbank.org/about/country-classifications/a-short-history (accessed 5 January 2013).




                                                                                                                             &
