                HETEROGENEOUS EXPECTATIONS IN
                GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM MODEL WITH
                    COLLATERAL AND MONEY




                    Aloisio Araujoa,b , Liev Maribondoa , Susan Schommerc



                                  a           b             c
                                      IMPA,       FGV-RJ,       UERJ



Resumo:
Este artigo analisa o impacto da polı́tica monetária não-convencional aplicada pelo Banco Central
americano durante a crise de 2008-2010 em economias com agentes otimistas/pessimistas. Os resul-
tados numéricos insinuam que agentes otimistas tendem a ser ativos na restrição do tipo leverage
e os pessimistas tendem a ser ativos na restrição do tipo short sale. Além disto, a presença de
otimistas potencializa os efeitos da polı́tica não-convencional aumentando a região de melhoria de
Pareto.

Palavras-chave: equilı́brio geral, otimismo, polı́tica monetária não-convencional




Abstract:
This paper analyzes the impact of the unconventional monetary policy applied by the US Federal
Reserve during the 2008-2010 crisis in economies with optimistic/pessimistic agents. The numerical
results suggests that optimistic agents tend to be leverage constrained and pessimistics tend to be
short sale constrained. Furthermore, the presence of optimistic agents potentiates the effects of the
unconventional monetary policy by increasing the region of Pareto improvement.

Keywords: general equilibrium, optimism, unconventional monetary policy




                                           Rio de Janeiro
                                                2017
1    Introduction
The last major economic crisis of 2008-2010 has boosted new efforts in the economic literature in
order to understand its causes and consequences, but it especially driven interest in new ways of
regulation to prevent crisis or to mitigate its effects. Indeed, since the usual regulatory means, such
as the standard interest rate, showed ineffective during the crisis, the authorities ventured with new
policies whose effects were initially unknown, such as the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP)
implemented by the US Treasury.
    In recent literature, Geanankoplos (2009) analyzed the role of optimistic agents in a general
equilibrium model with collateral and two or three periods, modeling crisis as the occurance of a
bad state in the subsequent period and associating the behavior of the agents in a crisis cycle with
the level of leverage of the assets. A quotation of this paper is presented below:

      “To reverse the crash once it has happened requires reversing the three causes. [...]
      Third, the lost buying power of the bankrupt leveraged optimists must be replaced.
      This might entail bailing out crucial players or injecting optimistic capital into the
      financial system.” (Geanakoplos, 2009,p. 4)

    The study of optimism in a context of crisis is still of interest in literature, as the recent un-
published work of Tsomocos and Yan (2016), in which a variant of Geanakoplos’ model with three
period and bayesian update is analyzed, shows. Finally, the work of Araujo et al. (2015) presents
a thorough analysis of the unconventional monetary policy used by the US Federal Reserve during
the crisis. This policy involved the direct purchase of durable assets by the Central Bank in order
to complement the usual monetary policy. The authors used a model in the same framework of
Geanakoplos but included money and the unconventional regulation. However, all the analysis is
done in economies with agents with homogeneous beliefs.
    In this paper the concept of optimism of Geanakoplos is combined with new regulatory policy
analyzed by Araujo et al. (2015) in order to give an overview of the effect of this new policy in
economies with heterogeneous beliefs. Thus, the basic methodology adopted here is to use the
Araujo et al. (2015) model as basic landmark, introduce heterogeneous belief to the agents, produce
numerical examples and then analyze the results.
    The aim is to assess the impact, effects and relations between the unconventional monetary
policy and different expectations of the agents. The analysis shows that the collateral constraint of
the agents are key to understand the relation of the beliefs and the unconventional policy. In terms
of transference of wealth to the states of the next period, the collateral constraint is divided into two
constraints: short sale constraint and leverage constraint. The examples numerically implemented
suggests that the optimistic agents tend to be leverage constrained and the pessimistic short sale
constrained. Also, the presence of optimistic agents in the economy potentiates the good effects of
the unconventional monetary policy by increasing the Pareto improvement region.
    The remainder of this work ir organized as follows: section 2 presents the general equilibrium
model with collateral, money and unconventional monetary policy with its main theoretical prop-
erties; section 3 presents the numerical results and finally section 4 concludes. The appendix shows
the equations and inequations used to compute equilibrium.



                                                   2
2     Model
2.1   Unconventional Monetary Policy
The main theoretical structure of the model in Araujo et al. (2015) is a general equilibrium model
with financial markets and collateral from Geanakoplos and Zame (2014). The main novelty of
their model, in comparison with the standard and well known general equilibrium model with
incomplete markets, is the collateral associated with each financial contract. The intuition is that
the institutions behind the financial contracts, like the legal enforcement structure, impose that the
agents should back their promises with a collateral when issuing an asset. In the general equilibrium
with incomplete markets model the promises made by the agents when issuing an asset should be
fulfilled. In this case, those institutions and the law enforcement are supposed to perfectly oblige
all agents to deliver exactly what was promised. In the collateral model this unreal hypothesis
of perfect law enforcement is relaxed and the agents are allowed to default. If a promise is made
today, tomorrow the agent is allowed to choose what is better to deliver: the promise made or the
collateral. The agent always chooses to deliver what is worth least, so the real delivery of the asset
in the next period is the minimum between the value of what was promised and the value of the
collateral used to back it. Conceptually, this is a literature of lack of commitment or commitment
limited by the collateral.
    The process of backing the promises with a collateral imposes a friction in the financial markets,
which is translated into the model as a new constraint in the household’s budget set, called collateral
constraint. It says that the agent must hold at least the amount of collateral associated with all
assets issued by him in the first period. This new constraint has some intuitive implications on
the inefficiency of the equilibrium. Indeed, in a general equilibrium with incomplete markets model
some desirable allocations of the economy may demand a transfer of wealth not allowed by the
financial structure, i.e., an allocation outside the span of the return of the assets. In the presence
of collateralized promises, the scarcity of the collateral may impose additional restriction on the
possible allocations on the economy in the sense that some allocations inside the span may not be
reachable due to a high amount of collateral demanded to back the corresponding financial position.
    Formally, the basic framework is the general equilibrium with collateral and money. It has two
periods with one state in the first period and S ∈ N states in the second period. The symbol
S ∗ = S + 1 will denote all states in the economy. There are H ∈ N agents, L ∈ N goods and J ∈ N
assets in the economy. The preferences of the agents are incorporated in their utility functions uh (·).
    In the analysis developed here, as well as in Araujo et al. (2015), the amount of good will be
restricted to three, being goods 1 and 2 perishable and good 3 durable. The agents obtain utility
only from goods 1 and 2. The durable is used either as a collateral to the assets issued or to
enjoy its service. In this sense, the durable good in this economy acts like a risky asset, paying its
value ps3 x03 in each state of the second period, which tipically will be different in each state. Each




                                                   3
household face the following maximization problem.1

                     max            uh (xh )
           xh ,ψ h ,ϕh ,µh ,xh
                             3 ≥0

    s.t.
        p0 · (xh0 − eh0 ) − p02 xh03 + q · (ψ h − ϕh ) + µh − mh ≤ 0
           2
           X                                                                   X
                 psl (xhsl − ehsl ) + ps3 (xhs3 − ehs3 − xh03 ) − ps2 xhs3 −    (ψjh − ϕhj ) · min{1, ps3 Cj }+
           l=1                                                                  j
                 h                                                   h
        + θ (1 + i)[(p03 − p02 )ωe03 + m] − (1 + i)µ                     ≤ 0 ∀s = 1, . . . , S
              X
        xh0 −   ϕhj Cj ≥ −δ h
                     j

    where e0,3 = h eh0,3 and m = h mh .2
                  P                  P

    The good one is an ordinary perishable good, such as food, and the good 2 is also perishable but
in a special way, it is the service of a durable good, represented by good 3. So, in this model the
durable is split into two goods, one is perishable and gives utility to the agents and the other one
is the durable itself, which carries value over time but yelds no utility to the agents. An example
would be a house. The owner of a house can rent it to some other person. The agent actually
enjoying the house and taking utility from it is the one paying the rent, not necessarily the owner.
Even if one lives in its own house, it is theoretically possible to split this relation making him pay
a rent to himself. That is why the term −ps2 xhs3 , s = 1, . . . , S, appears in the budget set. Once the
agent chooses the amount of durable xhs3 in state s, he will be able to use this durable to rent and
therefore receive the value −ps2 xhs3 .
    A reasonable hypothesis on the endowments is ehs2 = 0 for all s and h, because an endowment of
service would be economically meaningless. Furthermore, in this model there will be no endowment
of durable in the first period, that is, ehs3 = 0 for s = 1, 2 and for all h. The durable in the first
period will be only those carried from s = 0. From the first order conditions (FOC) it is true that
ps2 = ps3 for s = 1, 2 in equilibrium.3 Thus, the problem faced by the agent can be written in a

   1
     The initial model presented here is slightly different from the one presented in Araujo et al. (2015) because in
their paper they chose to ignore the variables xh03 , xh13 and xh23 , even in the definition of equilibrium, because they
are not actually important for the equilibrium since they give no utility for the agents. Indeed, in this model there is
multiplicity of equilibria because the amount of durable held by each agent can change and still be compatible with
the same equilibrium, that is, the same equilibrium prices and the same amount of xh that affects the agent’s utility.
The xhs3 acts much more as another asset, just like assets j.

   2
     Note about the notation: the symbol · represents the inner product and the subindex of the variables refers to
states and goods (xhsl , psl ).

   3
      In the next paragraphs the differentiability hypothesis of uh (·) will be stated, as well as the strict convexity
and strong monotonicity. In this setting, the first order condition of xhs3 in the first period (s = 1, 2) imply that
µhs (ps3 − ps2 ) = 0 for all h, all s ∈ S. Since µhs > 0, then ps3 = ps2 . Recall that µhs is the marginal variation of
the value function v h (c) of the agent’s optimization problem (indirect utility function) due to a marginal relaxation
of the s budget constraint. In other words, µhs ∈ ∂v h (c), where ∂ is the supergradient of value function v h (c) and c
is a vector of constants in the constraints. Since uh (·) is strongly monotone, a collateral relaxation of the s budget
constraint would lead to an increase in v(c), hence µhs > 0.


                                                                 4
more simple way:

                     max               uh (xh )
              xh ,ψ h ,ϕh ,µh ,xh
                                3 ≥0

       s.t.
          p01 (xh01 − eh01 ) + p02 (xh02 − xh03 ) + p03 (xh03 − eh03 ) + q · (ψ h − ϕh ) + µh − mh ≤ 0
                                                    X
          ps1 (xhs1 − ehs1 ) + ps2 (xhs2 − xh03 ) −    (ψjh − ϕhj ) min{1, ps3 Cj }+
                                                  j

          + θh (1 + i)[(p03 − p02 )ωe03 + m] − θh ps3 ωe03 − (1 + i)µh ≤ 0
                 X
          xh0 ≥      ϕhj Cj
                         j

    One of the distinctive feature of this model is the presence of an equivalent of money, which can
be thought as a risk-free bond paying 1 + i non-contingent in the second period for each unit of
bond hold. At state zero the agents have an endowment mh of money and chooses µh . Any agent
holding µh units of money at s = 0 will receive (1 + i)µh at any state s of period 1. The Central
Bank is present in the model, not as a maximizer agent, but as an accounting equality that must
hold. When he does the non-conventional monetary policy he buys an amount ωe0,3 of durable at
the price p03 − p02 and therefore increases the amount of money in a total of (p03 − p02 )ωe03 . The
term ω represents the fraction of durable bought buy the Central Bank (CB). Since the CB cannot
buy more than the aggregate amount of durable, ω should be between 0 and 1. Hence, the total
amount of money in the economy is M = m + (p03 − p02 )ωe03 , composed by the total endowment
of money m plus the money issued by the CB. Note that p03 − p02 is the price of the durable out of
the rental income that will be received by the CB while he owns this good. All this money should
be redeemed by the CB at period 1 to clean the economy. This operation may result in loss or
profit to the CB, but it will be anyway distributed across the households as lump-sum transfers with
proportions θh . In period 1 the amount M of money will value (i + 1)M and the amount ωe03 of
durable bought by CB must be returned to the market for the value ps2 ωe03 (recall that ps2 = ps3 ).
Thus, the net lump-sum tax obligation of agent h in period 1 should be θh [(1 + i)M − ps2 ωe03 ] in
state s. The non-conventional monetary policy can therefore be summed up in setting/changing
the parameter ω in view of desired objectives.
    The financial market of this economy follows the standard general equilibrium model with in-
complete markets and collateral. The last inequality is the collateral constraint. In this model,
the financial assets are nominal, that is, asset j promises to deliver the one unit non-contingent
and demands the issuer a collateral Cj ∈ RL to back it. The actual delivery of asset j in state
s = 1, . . . , S, however, will be min{1, ps Cj }. When the agents delivers ps,3 Cj in state s it is said
that they default.4 . Therefore, the assets differ from each other only in the amount of collateral
used to back them. The agents are free to choose the amount of collateral requirement of the assets
actually traded. In this sense, the collateral requirement is determined by the market. This is called

   4
     Note that given an asset j with its collateral Cj , the default is not an agent’s decision. The condition to default
is purely determined by market conditions, that is, the determination of ps3 . This is why either all agents default or
no agent default.




                                                           5
endogenous collateral in the literature. It can be be proved5 that the agents trade at most S assets,
with collateral requirement defined by:

                                             Cj = 1/pj3 with j = 1, . . . , S

   Based on this information, it is possible to rank the states by the durable price so that Cj =
1/pj3 < 1/pj+1,3 = Cj+1 . Note that, with this ranking, the asset 1 has the lowest collateral
requirement, given by C1 , which gives default in all states, and the asset S has the highest collateral
requirement, given by CS , which never defaults, that is, always pays the promise in every state.
Hence, from now on the asset 1 will be called suprime asset and the asset S will be called prime
asset.
   Next follows the definition of equilibrium of this economy.

Definition 1. Let (uh (·), eh ) be the economy defined previously with monetary specification (i, {ps1 }s∈S ).
The equilibrium for this economy is a vector ((x∗ , {x∗s3 }s∈S ∗ , ψ ∗ , ϕ∗ ), µ∗ , p∗ , q ∗ ) consistent with the
monetary policy specification such that:
             ∗      ∗           ∗    ∗
   (i) (xh , {xhs3 }s∈S ∗ , ψ h , ϕh ) solves the optimization problem above given prices (p∗ , q ∗ ) for all h;
               h∗
       PH             PH h
  (ii)   h=1 x01 =        h=1 e01 ;

               h∗
       PH             PH h
 (iii)   h=1 x02 =        h=1 e03 ;

               h∗
       PH             PH h
  (iv)   h=1 x03 =        h=1 e03 ;

               h∗
       PH             P   H     h
   (v)   h=1 xs1 =        h=1 es1 for s ∈ S;

               h∗
       PH             PH h
  (vi)   h=1 xsl =        h=1 e03 for s ∈ S and l = 2, 3;

                 h∗ − ϕh∗ ) = 0;
       PH
 (vii)   h=1 (ψ

               h∗ = m
       PH
(viii)   h=1 µ

    The item (iv) is justified by the fact that when CB buys durable in s = 0, he sticks with his
position and do not trade the durable bought anymore. However, the service of the durable is still
tradeable because the durable is still in the economy. Analogously, the item (viii) of the definition
of the equilibrium requires that the aggregate amount of money chosen by the agents in s = 0 equal
the total amount of money available at this state.
    In the following subsection the main properties of this model is presented.

2.2       Theoretical properties
The most important theoretical properties of the model is presented below. The proofs can be found
in Araujo et al. (2015). An asset j is called “inessential” when the same allocation and prices of
equilibrium can be obtained with another portfolio such that ψjh = ϕhj = 0 for all h, that is, as if the
market of asset j were closed. The concept of inessentiability translates the idea that the economy

    5
        For more details on this result see Araujo et al. (2012) and Araujo et al. (2015).


                                                             6
has non-financial objects that mimics the role of some financial asset. The main role of the financial
assets is to give the agents the opportunity to transfer wealth between states. The durable in this
model, for example, since does not give utility to the agents, in some sense also has this property.
Holding one unit of durable in s = 0 means receiving ps3 in state s of period 1. The money also has
similar property. The next two lemmas shows the conditions in which the subprime and the prime
are inessential in this model.

Lemma 1. Suppose ((x∗ , {x∗s,3 }s∈S ∗ , ψ ∗ , ϕ∗ ), µ∗ , p∗ , q ∗ ) is an equilibrium to the economy previously
defined. Then:

(a) If asset 1 is transacted, then q1∗ = (p∗0,3 − p∗0,2 )C1

(b) If asset S is transacted, then qS∗ =           1
                                                  1+i
                                                        h       h
(c) Asset 1 is inessential if, and only if, x∗0,3 ≥ ϕ∗1 C1 for all agents

(d) If one of the following items is satisfied:
            h          h
       • µ∗ ≥ ϕ∗S           1
                           1+i   for all agents
       • qS∗ >    1
                 1+i

    then asset S is inessential

   In the numerical analysis the model will be simplified and restricted for two states in period 1
(S = 2), with subjective probability of occurance given by phs , and the same utility function for all
agents:
                       U h (xh ) = u(xh01 , xh02 ) + ph1 u(xh11 , xh12 ) + ph2 u(xh21 , xh22 )
    where xh = (xh01 , xh02 , xh11 , xh12 , xh21 , xh22 ) and u(·, ·) is a function that does not depend on the
states or on the agents. This is done to simplify the analysis and make the agent’s choice on the
demand depend exclusively on the endowment distribution. Hence, different demand choices would
be due different endowment position. As a consequence, since there are only two states in period
2, there are also only two financial assets, prime and subprime.
    The technical hypothesis over u(·, ·) are: continuity, strictly increasing, strictly concave and
homothetic. These hypotheses and the first order conditions of the optimization problem of the




                                                            7
                         xh                                                        ps2
agents imply that         s1
                         xh
                               is uniquely determined by                           ps1   due to following equality6 :
                          s2


                                                            ∂2 u(1, r(ps2 /ps1 ))   ps2
                                                                                  =
                                                            ∂1 u(1, r(ps2 /ps1 ))   ps1
                               xh                                                                      ps2
      Once the fraction         s1
                               xh
                                     is uniquely determined as a function of                           ps1   and is equal to every agent h,
                                s2
because they are subject to the same utility function u(·, ·) in every state, then in equilibrium the
relative prices pps2
                  s1
                     must be determined from the aggregate endowment of the economy7 through the
following equation;
                                             ∂2 u(1, ees2
                                                       s1
                                                          )  ps2
                                                      es2 =
                                             ∂1 u(1, es1 )   ps1
                  P h
    where esl = h esl for l = 1, 2.
    Considering this discussion, the first order conditions implies that ps2 = ps3 for all s = 1, · · · , S.
Additionally, the Central Bank can guarantee the value of the money in the first period, thus he
can normalize the prices in state s = 1, · · · , S by fixing ps1 = 1 for all s = 1, · · · , S. Since, as
argued above, ps2 /ps1 is fixed for all s, then ps2 is also known and there is no price left to determine
in the first period. In s = 0 the price of the money is not normalized and also the first order
conditions does not imply anymore that p02 = p03 . Therefore, the only prices in the economy left
to be determined is p01 and p03 because p02 /p01 is still fixed in the state 0.
    In the standard Arrow-Debreu model the wealth of the agents is completely determined by the
value of their endowments. In models with financial markets and the possibility to transfer wealth
between states, like the one presented here, the wealth available at state s is determined not only by
the endowments but also by the vector of transferences chosen by the agent h. These transferences
are the possibility that agents have to carry resources from one state to another, between states of
period 1, from period 1 to state 0 or the other way around. As previously mentioned, the agent
must use some instrument (financial or not) that in some way allows this transference. It can be a
financial asset, that promises resources in each state of period 1 or it can be a non-financial object,
such as the durable, that “survives” until the period 1 and in this way carry its value to its owner.
The agent’s optimization problem of this model can be rewritten in a more simple way in terms of

 6
X From
     X the appendix hit can be seen that the first order condition for l = 1, 2 in s = 0 is ∂0l uh (xh ) − µh0 p0l +
   h
 µs                                        h
       Ysll0 psl0 + col µl = 0 ∀h =⇒ ∂0l u (xh ) − µh0 p0l = 0, because Ysl,l0 = col µhl = 0 for l = 1, 2, and for
s=1       l0
s = 1, . . . , S the first order condition becomes ∂sl uh (xh ) − µhs psl + x µhsl = 0 =⇒ ∂sl uh (xh ) − µhs psl = 0 because
   h                                                                                    h
x µsl = 0 for l = 1, 2 for at least one agent due to market clearing (therefore xs3 > 0 for some h). Therefore, the
             ∂2 u(xh )                                                                                             xh     xh
equality     ∂1 u(xh )
                       = pps2
                           s1
                                holds. The uniqueness can be formalized in the following way. If another xs1        h  6= xs1
                                                                                                                           h  exists,
                                                                                                                    s2     s2
                  h    h            h    h
each point (xs1 , xs2 ) and (xs1 , xs2 ) belongs to a different ray passing through the origin. If, without loss of generality,
u(xhs1 , xhs2 ) > u(xhs1 , xhs2 ), one can use a standard argument with continuity and strongly increasing to conclude that
exists t ∈ R+ such that u(xhs1 , x!      h          h      h
                                                           s2 ). The homothetic property implies that ∂i u(·, ·) is homogeneous of
                                         s2 ) = u(txs1 , tx!
                                 xh                        txh
                         ∂2 u 1, s1               ∂2 u 1,    s1
                                xh   s2                    txh
                                                             s2           ps2
zero degree, therefore          x    h
                                          !   =            txh
                                                                  !   =   ps1
                                                                              .   The same marginal utility of substitution at different points
                         ∂1 u 1, s1
                                  h               ∂1 u   1, s1
                                 xs2                       txh
                                                             s2
over the same indifference curve is incompatible with the strict concavity.

                xh                                                                                                          eh
                                                                                                                        P
      7                                  P h         P h          P h         P h                                                               ps2
    Indeed, if xs1
                 h = c for all h, then     h xs1 = c   h xs2 =⇒     h es1 = c   h es2 =⇒ c =
                                                                                                                        Ph h s1
                                                                                                                                ,   where c =   ps1
                 s2                                                                                                       h es2
and the first implication is true only in equilibrium due to the market clearing.


                                                                                   8
vector of transferences of wealth. It follows the definition of transference to state s of period 1, in
units of perishable:
                                                  i p  h
                  h     1+i h h             h     h         s3
                                                                                        i
                 ys =                   1
                                 µ + 1+i (ψ2 − ϕ2 ) +             xh03 + (ψ1h − ϕh1 )C1
                         ps1                               ps1
     The first part of the sum is the effective position in cash, that is, the total amount of the prime
asset and its “equivalent”, the money. Analogously, the second part of the sum is the effective
position in risky durable, that is, the total position in subprime and in its “equivalent”, the durable.
The ysh represents the purchase power carried by agent h to state s and it can be negative, which
would mean that agent h is bringing resources from state s of the first period to s = 0.
     Since the durable is one of the objects used to define the agent’s transference vector y h = (y1h , y2h ),
it is plausible to think that the collateral constraint would also impose some constraint over the set
of y h available to agent h. Araujo et al. (2015) found this relationship and here this is adapted for
the presence of the regulation δ h . Next lemma summarizes this.

Lemma 2. In the economy defined above, the following equivalence holds:
                                                 (
                                                   p21 y2h ≤ p11 y1h
                       xh03 ≥ ϕh1 C1 + ϕh2 C2 ⇐⇒
                                                   y2h ≥ 0

     Since the original utility function uh (·) of each agent is separable in each state, it is possible to
substitute each component u(xhs , xhs ) by the corresponding indirect utility function ũ(chs ), where chs
is the total wealth available at that state. And the total wealth available at each state depends on
the choice of transferences y h by the agents, that can increase or decrease the total wealth available
at some state. Using the definition of transference of wealth ysh , the previous lemma, the state prices
a1 , a2 from the non-arbitrage conditions and some basic algebra, the original agent’s optimization
problem can be rewritten in the following way:

                        max ũ(ch0 (y h )) + 12 ũ(ch1 (y h )) + 12 ũ(ch2 (y h ))
                      y1h ,y2h ∈R

               s.t.
                   p21 y2h ≤ p11 y1h
                   y2h ≥ 0
                                                                                      h
where ch0 (y h ) = eh +a1 f1h +a2 f2h −a1 y1h −a2 y2h ; chs (y h ) = gsh +ysh − pθs1 [(1+i)(p03 −p02 )ωe03 −p12 ωe03 ];
e03 = h eh03 ; eh = eh01 + pp02  eh ; fsh = ( pps2 )eh03 + ( 1+i      h   h      h      h        m         h
     P
                               01 03            s1            ps1 )m ; gs = es1 − θ (1 + i) ps,1 ; and ũ (·) is the
indirect utility function of uh (xhs1 , xhs2 ) subject to the constraint xhs1 + pps1 xs2 ≤ chs .
                                                                                  s2 h


      Note that the two constraints that remains are due to the collateral constraint because the
budget constraint at each state are already incorporated in the indirect utility function through
chs . The first constraint, p21 y2h ≤ p11 y1h is called short sale constraint and the second one y2h ≥ 0 is
called leverage constraint.
      However, this presentation has the disadvantage that the non-conventional monetary policy,
given by ω, affects the indirect utility function. With a change in the variable it is possible to see
the effect of the unconventional policy only in the constraints over the transferences. Define
                                                   θh
                                    ỹsh = ysh −   ps1 [(1   + i)(p03 − p02 )ωe03 − ps2 ωe03 ]

                                                                   9
Finally, the agent’s optimization problem becomes:

                 max ũ(eh + a1 f1h + a2 f2h − a1 ỹ1h − a2 ỹ2h ) + 12 ũ(g1h + ỹ1h ) + 12 ũ(g2h + ỹ2h )
               ỹ1h ,ỹ2h ∈R

        s.t.
           p21 ỹ2h ≤ p11 ỹ1h − (p12 − p22 )θh ωe03
           ỹ2h ≥ −θh φ(a1 , a2 )ωe03

                               a1 (p12 −p22 )
where φ(a1 , a2 ) =            a1 p2,1 +a2 p11   > 0.
    Thus, the problem now depends only on the transference choices ỹ h , already considering the
Central Bank non-conventional monetary policy, with all the policies and regulatory instruments
explicitly appearing in the collateral constraint, so making explicit their relationship as constraints of
the set of possible transferences. Also that the commodities or asset prices are no longer important
to the problem, since the terms still appearing are known. So, given state prices (a1 , a2 ), the
problem is well defined and a maximizer (ỹ1h , ỹ2h ) can be found. Finally note that when CB does
an unconventional monetary policy with ω > 0, it tightens the short sale constraint and relaxes the
leverage constraint.
    Thus, the equilibrium in this reformulated problem also changes in the following way:

Definition 2. In an economy with two states in the first period the previous properties of the utility
function, given the policy (p11 , p21 , i, ω), an equilibrium is a vector of state prices and transferences
(a1 , a2 , ỹ1h , ỹ2h ) such that

    (i) for each h, ỹ h maximizes the last optimization problem

 (ii) for each s = 1, 2
                                                            H
                                                            X                H
                                                                             X
                                                                  ỹsh   =       fsh
                                                              h              h

   The terms fsh can be interpreted as the initial transferences of each agent for each asset, given
by their initial endowments endowments.


3      Numerical Results
In this section a particular framework of the economy previously described will be defined for the
numerical analysis. There will be no calibration to represent any specific society, the objective is
to offer a conceptual and pictorial description of some characteristics of the economy related to
the regulation of the collateral constraint proposed. In this sense, the purpose is to conceptually
analyse the effects of the regulation in economies with certains endowment distribution generically,
without refering to any real distribution in particular. The analysis involves computing the equilibria
of several economies, for different values of the regulatory parameter, and see the impact of this
instrument on the endogenous variables and on the welfare of the agents. The computation of the
equilibria follows Schommer (2013), which uses KKT conditions to characterizes the equilibrium as a




                                                                  10
system of equations and then implements it in the software ALGENCAN8 . Such characterization is
possible because each agent’s optimization problem will be convex. This program uses a Lagrangean
Augmented method as described in Andreani et al. (2008).9
    All the agentes have the same cobb-douglas utility function, but with different subjective prob-
ability:                               X               X X
                              uh (x) =    log(xh0l ) +  phs   log(xhsl )
                                                        l              s          l

    The aggregate endowment will remain fixed along the entire analysis: e0 = h eh0 = (7, 0, 7),
                                                                                     P

e0 = h eh1 = (15, 0, 0), e0 = h eh2 = (6, 0, 0). Note that state s = 1 can be interpreted as the
      P                          P

good state since it has more aggregate endowment of perishable. Analogously, s = 2 is interpreted
as the bad state.
    One important consequence of the logarithm in the utility function is that all equilibrium relative
prices of the states s = 1, 2 are previously known and depends only on the proportion of aggregate
                                                               h
                                                     p∗sl   x∗sl0
                                            P h
                                              h esl0
endowments of the corresponding goods: P h = ∗ = ∗h ∀h. 10 Therefore, in this model:
                                               h esl psl0   xsl

                     p∗11                                                  p∗21
                                P h                                                   P h
                                   e         7                                           e         7
                     p∗12   =   Ph 12
                                    h    =   15   = 0.46666666   and       p∗22   =   Ph 22h   =   6   = 1.16666666
                                 h e11                                                 h e21


    The next three subsections organize the presentation of the numerical results:

    • Fixed endowments in the states of period 2 and varying probabilities phs ;

    • Fixed probabilities phs and varying endowments in second period;

    • Fixed endowments and fixed probabilities, changing ω ranging from 0 to 1

    In the first two cases it will be analyzed the utility and the constraints of the agents, and in the
last case only the utility of the agents will be analyzed.
    The next graphics, from Araujo et al. (2015), will be used as a reference point in the analysis of
the numerical results.

    8
        See TANGO project (2013).

    9
    It was used a Macbook Pro with an Intel Core i7, 2.5GHz and 16 GB 1600 MHz DDR3 for the computations.
The tolerance in all cases was 10−10 .

                                                                                      h
   10
     Indeed, since the utility function is logarithm, it is known that x∗ >> 0 for all h. Thus, x µhsl = 0 ∀h, ∀s ∈
                                                                                      h
{2, 3}, ∀l. By the first order condition detailed in the appendix, then ∂sl uh (x∗ ) − µhs p∗sl = 0 ∀h, ∀s, ∀l. Fixing
                                  h                                 h               h                   h
                        ∂sl uh (x∗ )                     ∂s,l uh (x∗ )   ∂sl0 uh (x∗ )       ∂s,l uh (x∗ )   p∗
h and s, this becomes         ∗
                                      =  µ h
                                           s  ∀l  =⇒            ∗
                                                                       =       ∗
                                                                                        =⇒             ∗h
                                                                                                           = ∗sl ∀l, l0 .
                             ps,l                              psl            psl0                 h
                                                                                             ∂sl0 u (x )     psl0
                                                   h
                 h      1              x∗sl0    p∗sl       ∗h        p∗sl ∗h      P ∗h       p∗s,l P ∗h
Using ∂sl uh (x∗ ) =
                                                                                                             P h
                         ∗h
                            it follows   ∗h
                                             =   ∗
                                                     =⇒   xsl 0 =
                                                                       ∗
                                                                           xsl =⇒  h x sl0 =
                                                                                               ∗    h xsl =⇒  h esl0 =
                      2xsl             xsl     p   0                 p sl0                   p sl0
                                             P slh                 h
p∗sl P h                                         e 0   p∗       x∗ 0
      h esl   [using market clearing] =⇒ Ph sl       = ∗sl = sl         ∀h.
p∗sl0                                              h
                                               h esl  psl0         h
                                                                x∗sl




                                                                 11
   Figure 1: Agent’s utilities and constraints with homogeneous expectations (phs = 0.5 for all h and s)

                     (a) Agent’s utilities                         (b) Poor’s constraints




                                      Source: Araujo et al. (2015)



    where s111 = e111 / h eh11 ∈ [0, 1] and s221 = e121 / h eh21 ∈ [0, 1]. In the left figure, for each
                       P                                 P

economy of the box, the equilibrium was calculated first with ω = 0 and second with ω = 0.001.
The symbol ++ indicates that, in the economies of that region, the utility of both agents increase
when ω increases. The symbol −+, for example, indicates that agent 1 loses and agent 2 gains. In
the right figure, the symbols LC 1 , SC 1 and AD indicates which constraint of the agent is binding
with ω = 0. Generally, LC h means that the leverage constraint of agent h is binding, SC h is
defined in an analogous way and AD stands for “Arrow-Debreu”, meaning that in those economies
none of the constraints of the agents are binding and therefore the equilibrium is equivalent to an
Arrow-Debreu equilibrium since the markets are complete. Note that there is Pareto improvement
in the economy only when agent 1 is leverage constrained. The rich’s constraints are not binding
in the entire box.




                                                    12
3.1    Fixed probabilities and various endowments distributions

                          Figure 2: Fixed probabilities and endowments varying

         (a) Fixed probabilities                              (b) Endowments varyies




The endowment distribution in s = 0 is asymetric on the durable, representing a moment of crisis
with high inequality. Generally, since the agents are equal except for the endowments and prob-
abilities, the endowment distribution will typically induce the roles of the agents in the financial
markets. The variables x and y in the endowments of the agents indicates the methodology to
create the figures. The x-axis will represent the proportion of perishable owned by the poor in state
1 (i.e., x = e111 / h eh11 ∈ [0, 1]) and the y-axis will represent the proportion of perishable owned by
                   P

the poor at state 2 (i.e., y = e121 / h eh21 ∈ [0, 1]). The probability is fixed in p11 = 0.9 and p21 = 0.1,
                                      P

as represented in the blue dot, which means that the poor is optimistic and the rich is pessimistic.
This can be interpreted as the case in which the optimistic become poor right after the crash due
to frustrations from the crisis. The red dot highlight the case with homogeneous expectation which
was analyzed in Araujo et al. (2015).
    Figure 3 (a), for probabilities p11 = 0.9 and p21 = 0.1, shows that the Pareto improving (++)
region increases, following the increasing of the leverage constrained region of the poor agent, which
is depicted in 3 (b). It suggests that the more the poor/borrower agent is optimistic, the more he
becomes leverage. This numerical fact supports the intuition that optimistic agents tend to leverage
more. Indeed, the optimistic agent thinks that the good state s = 1 is more likely to happen and,
symmetrically, that the bad state is not going to occur. Therefore, he wants to bring the maximum
wealth possible from the poor state s = 2 to the good state s = 1. The need to accomplish this kind
of transference makes him more prone to be leverage constrained, making y21 = 0 and not short sale
constrained because he will probably choose y11 > y21 . The constraints for the pessimistic rich agent
has a symmetric analysis. Since he is pessimistic, he wants to bring wealth for the poor state and
therefore will probably have y22 > 0, thus not leverage constrained, and also y22 = y12 , thus short
sale constrained, because he is decreasing the wealth transfered to good state y1h and in contrast
increasing the transference y22 to the bad state. This is depicted in Figure 4 (b). Finally, in Figure
4 (a) it is shown the vector of transferences of both agents. The rich agent has higher transferences,
hence his choices of transferences are depicted in the straight segment at a level higher than 5. Note


                                                    13
that he is short sale constrained for some chosen transferences, because they are over the line with
slope 1. And the poor agent has his transferences in lower levels, most of them over the line of level
0, which is the region where the agent becomes leverage constrained.

                  Figure 3: Agent’s utilities and constraints with p11 = 0.9 and p21 = 0.1

                    (a) Agent’s utilities                          (b) Poor’s constraints




                  Figure 4: Agent’s utilities and constraints with p11 = 0.9 and p21 = 0.1

                    (a) Agent’s utilities                          (b) Rich’s constraints




3.2   Fixed endowments and various probabilities distributions
In this case the endowment distribution is fixed for the analysis of various probabilities distribution:




                                                    14
                                        Figure 5: Fixed endowment




           Fixed endowment


    This endowment distribution is exactly in the middle of the box in figure 1, which is in the border
of almost all regions. The probabilities will vary as in the box of figure 2 (a). The graphic in figure
6 (a) shows that, for this endowment distribution, there will be Pareto improvement whenever the
poor is more optimistic than the rich. This result is related with figure 3 (a) because it suggests that
if the poor is more optimistic than the rich, then the region of Pareto improvement will probably
increase. Note that in figure 1 (a) the economy with this endowment distribution is in the frontier
of the Pareto improving region, whereas in figure 3 (a), with probabilities (p11 , p21 ) = (0.9, 0.1), this
economy is in the interior of the Pareto improving region.
    Figure 6 (b) shows that for this endowment distribution, which is symmetric in the second
period, the relative optimism is crucial to determine which constraint will be binding for the poor
agent. When he is more optimistic than the rich, he will be leverage constrained, and when he is
more pessimistic than the rich he will be short sale. This result reinforces the interpretation that
more optimism tends to lead to leverage constrained agents and more pessimism tends to lead to
short sale constrained agents.
    In figure 7, pane (a) shows that agent 1 is almost always constrained, either in the short sale or
in the leverage, and also that agent 2 is almost always not constrained. However, note that panel
(b) shows that even the rich may be short sale constrained in the cases he is extremely pessimistic,
in tune with the explanations of the previos subsection.

                       Figure 6: Agent’s utilities and constraints with x = y = 0.5

                    (a) Agent’s utilities                         (b) Poor’s constraints




                                                    15
                    Figure 7: Agent’s transferences and constraints with x = y = 0.5

                 (a) Agent’s transferences                      (b) Richs’s constraints




3.3   Fixed endowment and fixed probabilities
Finally, an endowment distribution is fixed as in the picture below and three probability distributions
were chosen, depicted in blue in the picture below, in order to analyze the utility of the agents for
ω ∈ [0, 1]. The case with homogeneous expectation were also computed for comparison purposes.

                           Figure 8: Fixed endowment and fixed probabilities

                     (a) Fixed endowment                                  (b) Probabilities analyzed




   Inside each chart of figure 9 below there is the indication of the value of ω where the maxi-
mum Pareto improvement gain occurs. The percentages shows the relative gain of each agent in
comparison with the initial ω = 0 case. Generally speaking, figure 9 shows that the poor agent
gains more when he is optimistic and the rich is neutral. When approaching (p11 , p21 ) = (1, 0.5), the
improvement in agent’s 1 utility increases, being 38,69% in the case (0.9,0.5) and only 5.14% in the


                                                  16
homogeneous case. The rich’s gain also increases in this line, from 0.039% in the case (0.5,0.5) to
0.18% in the case (0.9,0.5). However, in the case (0.9,0.1), where the poor is optimistic and the rich
pessimistic, although everyone still gains, the poor gains less than in the homogeneous case and
the rich gains more than if he is neutral. It seems that the interaction between the rich pessimistic
and the poor optimistic seems to cancel those high benefitis of the poor of the cases (0.75, 0.5) and
(0.9, 0.5). And this benefits the rich.
    Note also that the range of Pareto improvement in ω changes depending on the beliefs of the
agents. It is higher in the case (0.75, 0.5), with the interval [0, 0.53].

                                         Figure 9: Utility of the agents
                          case (p11 , p21 ) = (0.5, 0.5)        case (p11 , p21 ) = (0.75, 0.5)




                          case (p11 , p21 ) = (0.9, 0.5)        case (p11 , p21 ) = (0.9, 0.1)




4    Conclusions
In this paper it was studied the relation between the heterogeneous beliefs of the agents and the
unconventional monetary policy in a general equilibrium model with collateral and money. This
relationship is missing in Araujo et al. (2015). The contribution is not only in filling these gaps but
also advancing the study and understanding of the role of the agents with heterogeneous beliefs in
moments of crisis. The role played by optimistic agents in the economy in general, and in moments
of crisis in particular, is still of interest in the literature, especially after the recent financial crisis
of 2009, which can be seen in works such as Geanankoplos (2009) and Tsomocos and Yan (2016).
    The numerical findings suggests that the presence of optimism/pessimistic agents in the economy
may affect the regulatory policy, increasing or decreasing its effects. It was found that when the
borrower is optimistic the unconventional monetary policy is more effective in the sense that the
set of economies with Pareto improvement increases. In this sense, it can be summarized saying
that the optimism potentiates the effect of the unconventional monetary policy and in contrast,
the pessimism softens the effect. The theoretical reason behind this is that the unconventional
monetary policy can only favor with a Pareto improvement in economies with leverage constrained
agents. And the optimism tends to make the agents leverage constrained.

                                                           17
    The numerical results also showed that the optimism/pessimism affects the room for the un-
conventional monetary policy in the sense that it allows for Pareto improvement even for higher
levels of purchase of durable by the Central Bank. And it was found that the maximum gains in
the utilities happens in the region where the poor is more optimistic and the rich is neutral.
    Geanankoplos (2009)


5     Appendix: details of the implementation
The complete system of equalities and inequalities implemented in ALGENCAN is depicted below.
Recall the notation: m = h mh and e03 = h eh03 .
                         P                  P

Inequality consumption t = 0 (collateral constraint):
                                          X
                                  −xh0l +     ϕhj Clj ≤ 0 ∀h, ∀l
                                                          j

Inequality to r:                              X              X
                               2rsj − 1 −              psl               Ysll0 Cl0 j ≤ 0 ∀s ∈ S, ∀j
                                                   l           l0
First-order condition of x in t = 0:
                                               X               X
                   ∂0l uh (xh ) − µh0 p0l +              µhs              Ysl0 l psl0 + col µhl = 0 ∀h, for l = 1, 2
                                                   s=1              l0
                 α01
              =⇒     − µh0 p0l + col µhl = 0 ∀h, for l = 1, 2
                 x01
and
                                                             X                 X
               ∂03 uh (xh ) − µh0 (p03 − p02 ) +                         µhs        Ysl0 3 psl0 + col µh3 = 0 ∀h, for l = 3
                                                         s=1                   l0
           =⇒ −    µh0 (p03   − p02 ) +        h
                                          col µ3   +    h
                                                       µs ps3            = 0 ∀h, for l = 3

First-order condition of x in t = 1:

                               ∂sl uh (xh ) − µhs psl + x µhsl = 0 ∀h, ∀s ∈ S, ∀l = 1, 2
                                        h
                                prob(s)αsl
                          =⇒         h
                                           − µhs psl = 0 ∀h, ∀s ∈ S, ∀l = 1, 2
                                   xsl
and

                            ∂s3 uh (xh ) − µhs (ps3 − ps2 ) + x µhs3 = 0 ∀h, ∀s ∈ S, l = 3
                        =⇒ − µhs (ps3 − ps2 ) = 0 ∀h, ∀s ∈ S, l = 3

Budget constraint at t = 0:
                X                                   X
                    p0l (xh0l − eh0l ) − p02 xh03 +   qj (ψjh − ϕhj ) + µh − mh = 0 ∀h
                    l                                                j

Budget constraint at t = 1:
                          X                                    X                                       X
                                     psl (xhsl − ehsl −                   Ysll0 xh0l0 ) − ps2 xhs3 −    (ψjh − ϕhj )rsj +
                                 l                              l0                                      j


                                                                          18
             +θh (1 + i)[(p03 − p02 )ωe03 + m] − θh ps3 ωe03 − (1 + i)µh = 0 ∀h, ∀s ∈ S

First-order conditions of ψ:
                                                     X
                                          h
                                       ψ µj     +            µhs rsj − µh0 qj = 0 ∀h, ∀j
                                                     s

First-order conditions of ϕ:
                                       X                              X
                            h
                         ϕ µj      −           µhs rsj + µh0 qj −                 h
                                                                             col µl Clj   = 0 ∀h, ∀j
                                       s                                 l

First-order conditions of µ:
                                                     S
                                                     X
                                       −µh0      +           µhs (1 + i) + µ µh = 0 ∀h
                                                     s=1

Market clearing for x at t = 0:
                                                     X
                                                              (xh01 − eh01 ) = 0     (l = 1)
                                                         h
                                                     X
                                                              (xh02 − eh03 ) = 0     (l = 2)
                                                         h
                                       X
                                        (xh03 − (1 − ω)eh03 ) = 0                    (l = 3)
                                           h

Market clearing for x at t = 1:
                                                X
                                                 (xhs1 − ehs1 ) = 0 ∀s ∈ S, (l = 1)
                                                 h
                           X
                                   (xhsl   − ehs3 − Ys33 eh03 ) = 0 ∀s ∈ S, (l = 2, 3)
                               h

Market clearing for ψ and ϕ:                         X
                                                             (ψjh − ϕhj ) = 0 ∀j
                                                     h

Market clearing for the money µh :
                                               X
                                                     µh = m + (p03 − p02 )ωe03
                                                h

Boundary conditions:
                                                    h h
                                                 x µsl xsl     = 0 ∀h, ∀s, ∀l
                                                     h h
                                                 ψ µj ψj       = 0 ∀h, ∀j
                                                     h h
                                                 ϕ µj ϕj       = 0 ∀h, ∀j
                                                     h h
                                                  µµ µ         = 0 ∀h
                                           X
                         h    h
                    col µl (−x0l       +         ϕhj Clj ) = 0 ∀h, ∀l
                                           j



                                                                    19
Portfolio condition or ortogonality of ψ and ϕ:

                                          ϕhj ψjh = 0 ∀h, ∀j

Price normalization at t = 1:
                                              ps1 = 1 ∀s ∈ S
Equality for rsj :                        X          X
                        (rsj − 1)(rsj −        psl        Ysll0 Cl0 j ) = 0 ∀s ∈ S, ∀j
                                          l          l0


References
Andreani, R., Birgin, E. G., Martı́nez, J. M., and Schuverdt, M. L. (2008). On Augmented La-
 grangian Methods with General Lower-Level Constraints. SIAM Journal of Optimization, 18
 (4):1209–1230.

Araujo, A., Kubler, F., and Schommer, S. (2012). Regulating Collateral-requirement when Markets
  are Incomplete. Journal of Economic Theory, 147:450–476.

Araujo, A., Schommer, S., and Woodford, M. (2015). Conventional and Unconventional Monetary
  Policy with Endogenous Collateral Constraints. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
  7 (1).

Geanakoplos, J. and Zame, W. (2014). Collateral Equilibrium, I: a basic framework. Economic
 Theory, 56:443–492.

Geanankoplos, J. (2009). The Leverage Cycle. NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 24 (1):1–66.

Schommer, S. (2013). Computing General Equilibrium with Incomplete Markets, Collateral and
  Default Penalties. Annals of Operations Research, 206:367–383.

TANGO project (2013).       ALGENCAN software, Version 3.0.0.                            Freely available at
 http://www.ime.usp.br/ egbirgin/tango/downloads.php.

Tsomocos, D. and Yan, J. (2016). Mortgage, Financial Intermediation and Optimism. Unpublished.




                                                          20
