HOW TO INDIRECTLY MEASURE MARKET TRANSACTION COSTS
                                            Felippe Cauê Serigati1
                                       Paulo Furquim de Azevedo2


Abstract
         This paper proposes a procedure to indirectly measure the variable market
transaction costs using threshold cointegration models to operationalize concepts of
Institutional Economics. Among the advantages, the proposed procedure measures the
exchange costs by means of widely applied cointegration models, decomposes those costs
into transaction and transportation costs, requires only simple and generally available data,
and its results are easy to interpret. Applying this procedure on the international market of
ethanol, we found that the transaction costs incurred to export this biofuel from Brazil to
United States range from US$ 0.55/gallon to US$ 0.63/gallon. The proposed procedure
may be applied to different markets and it is potentially a useful tool for evaluating policies
to increase market efficiency.

Keywords: transaction costs, measurement, threshold cointegration, biofuels, market
efficiency.

Resumo
        Este artigo propõe um procedimento estatístico para mensurar indiretamente os
custos de transação variáveis. O procedimento proposto combina os modelos de
cointegração com threshold com os conceitos teóricos da literatura da Nova Economia
Institucional. Entre as vantagens do modelo proposto, merece destaque (i) a mensuração
dos custos de comercialização (exchange costs) por meio de modelos de cointegração que
já são amplamente utilizados, (ii) a decomposição desses custos em custos de transação e
de transporte, (iii) a necessidade de dados simples e geralmente facilmente disponíveis, e,
por fim, (iv) e a obtenção de resultados cuja a interpretação é fácil e direta. Aplicando este
procedimento ao mercado internacional de etanol, verificou-se que os custos de transação
incorridos para exportar esse biocombustível do Brasil para os Estados Unidos variam de
EUA $ 0.55/galão para EUA $ 0.63/galão. O procedimento proposto pode ser aplicado a
diferentes mercados e é, potencialmente, uma ferramenta útil para a avaliação de políticas
para aumentar a eficiência do mercado.

Palavras-chave: custos de transação, mensuração, cointegração com threshold,
biocombustíveis, eficiência de mercado.

Área de interesse: Área 11 - Economia Agrícola e do Meio Ambiente
JEL Code: Q13 - Agricultural Markets and Marketing, Cooperatives, Agribusiness




1
    Sao Paulo School of Economics - EESP/FGV
2
    Sao Paulo School of Economics - EESP/FGV

                                                                                             1
1. Introduction
         Markets are organizations created to facilitate exchange. This is possible because a
market comprises a set of institutions developed primarily to reduce a particular type of
transaction costs: the market transaction costs. Those costs are important not assess market
efficiency, but also to understand how and in which circumstances two or more markets
are interconnected.
         There is an abounding literature exploring the degree of integration between
markets and trying to measure market transaction costs, among which the cointegration
analyses is one of the most popular.. One important shortcoming of this literature is the
entanglement of exchange, transportation and transaction costs, due to the inaccuracy
about how these concepts are defined. This imprecision has induced the misleading
assumption of transportation costs as a synonymous of transaction costs and, consequently,
has yielded an inaccurate measurement of the latter. Actually, the lack of a standardized
transaction costs definition is a shortcoming of many attempts in different research fields
that have already tried to quantify them.
         By means of cointegration models, this paper suggests a procedure to indirectly
measure market transaction costs in currency values that requires only simple and available
date, and can be easily replicated to different markets. This procedure also allows to
measuring the exchange and transportation costs associated with a transaction. As an
illustration, we apply this procedure to measure the exchange, transportation and
transactions costs incurred to export ethanol from Brazil to United States using the current
characteristics of the international market of this biofuel.
         This paper is organized as follow. The next section describes the limitations and
shortcoming of the main attempts to measure the market transaction cost. Since an accurate
definition of a variable is a necessary condition for its measurement, we dedicate special
attention to the problems associated to the absence of a consensus definition of transaction
costs. The third section clarifies the differences between exchange, transaction and
transportation costs, and analyzes how the entanglement of those concepts has misled the
efforts of the cointegration literature to measure transaction costs. In the fourth section, we
present the procedure to indirectly measure the exchange costs in currency values,
decomposing transportation and market transaction costs. In the next section we apply this
procedure to measure the market transaction costs incurred to export ethanol from Brazil to
United States using the international market of this biofuel in its current characteristics.
Finally, in the sixth section, we present our concluding remarks.


2. Measuring transaction costs: attempts and limitations

    2.1. Main attempts
        Transaction costs are the key-variable to understand efficiency in economic
organizations. Transaction costs literature has been widely applied in many different
research fields, such as development, finance, industrial organization, agricultural
economics and natural resource economics, among others3. Despite this recognition,
measuring transaction costs is still a challenging task. As Allen (2006, p. 6) states, if
transaction costs could be measured with reasonable accuracy, the theory would become


3
    See Richman and Macher (2006) and Wang (2003) for a review.

                                                                                             2
more valuable. On the other hand, if those costs are measured improperly (e.g. adding
transportation costs), the conclusions would be misleading.
         Most of the empirical literature on transaction costs has focused on the choice of
governance structures (e.g. market, hierarchy, or hybrid arrangement). According to
Richman and Macher (2006), usually the governance structure is the dependent variable
whereas transactional characteristics, as well as other control variables, are the explanatory
variables. The probability of observing more or less integrated forms of organization
depends on the underlying properties of the transaction. More integrated governance
modes are associated with a higher degree of relationship-specific assets, greater
uncertainty, more complex transactions, or more frequent exchange. Among the most
studied transactional properties, Richman and Macher (2006, p. 5) argue that asset
specificity has been the key variable and has received great attention of the empirical
literature.
         Among the empirical methods applied, Richman and Macher (2006, p. 8) indicate
(i) the qualitative case studies, (ii) quantitative single industry studies, and (iii)
econometric analyses. In the econometric analyses, two methods were preferred: (a) two
stage estimation procedures; and (b) panel data estimation. The advantage of the first
method is the possibility of correcting the selection bias associated with estimating the
effect of organizational mode on performance (Masten, 1993, p. 16)4. The panel data
models are useful because they offer many procedures to control unobservable
components5. Despite the effort, in those studies, the absolute amount of transaction costs
does not matters; they are interested in a relative ranking of transaction costs associated
with different governance structure or contractual choices (Wang, 2003, p. 4).

     2.2. Main obstacles and limitations
         The most important restrictions measure transaction costs are: (i) data is barely
available and most of them are not comparable6; (ii) many important characteristics of the
transactions are not observable – actually many important transactions are unobservable;
(iii) the lack of a consensus definition of transaction costs. Transaction data is usually
collected by mail surveys, interviews or firm visits. Despite the advantage of knowing in
details the object of study, according to Richman and Macher (2006, p. 8), these data are
subject to the general limitations of survey collection because “they are based on
respondents’ stated beliefs rather than non-subjective valuations. Definitional differences
and potential subjectivity across survey respondents mean inter-industry comparisons, and
sometimes even inter-firm comparisons, are difficult and therefore must be made with
caution.”
         Because transaction costs are one important element influencing what goods are
traded in which contractual form or in which governance structure, sometimes those costs
are so high that the transaction simply does not take place. That means, sometimes it is
difficult, or even impossible, to measure, or even to identify, the ‘other side’, the relevant
alternative to the realized transaction (Allen, 2006, p. 7-9). Benham and Benham (2001, p.

4
  Some examples: Macher (2001), Masten et al. (1991), Nickerson and Silverman (2000), Poppo and Zenger
(1998), Sampson (2006), and Saussier (2000).
5
  Soma examples: Gonzalez-Diaz et al. (2000), Ohanian (1994), Park and Russo (1996), Silverman et al.
(1997), and Ngwenyama and Bryson (1999).
6
  The analyses of transaction costs in financial markets are one of the rare exceptions: the data in this field is
abundant and, consequently, there are many proxies and indexes measuring transaction costs.

                                                                                                                3
3) indicate other difficulty: estimation is also tough because production and transaction
costs are jointly determined, leading to serious endogeneity problems.
         Finally, the absence of a standard definition of transaction costs is also an obstacle
to measure them (Benham and Benham, 2001; Wang, 2003). There are several different
and sometimes contradictory definitions of transaction costs and this mess disturbs the
identification of what really is being measured:
         • According to Williamson (1996, p. 379), transaction costs are “the ex-ante costs
            of drafting, negotiating, and safeguarding an agreement and, more especially,
            the ex-post costs of maladaptation and adjustment that arise when contract
            execution is misaligned as a result of gaps, errors, omissions, and unanticipated
            disturbances”;
         • More concisely, North (1990, p. 27) defines transaction costs as the “costs of
            measuring attributes of what is being exchanged and the costs of protecting
            rights and policing and enforcing agreements”;
         • In a similar vein, for Barzel (1997, p. 4), transaction costs are “the costs
            associated with the transfer, capture, and protection of rights”;
         • Eggertsson (1990, p. 14) explains that when “information is costly, various
            activities related to the exchange of property rights between individuals give
            rise to transaction costs”
          Despite there is no clear-cut definition of transaction costs, most of those
definitions relate those costs to the expenses incurred to establish and protect economic
property rights. For Allen (2006, p. 3), this relation is important because is central to the
Coase’s idea of transaction costs. Economic property rights are the ability of someone to
freely exercise a choice and transaction costs are the costs incurred to establish and
maintain those property rights. In a world with perfect property rights (i.e. property rights
well established and protected), the transactions costs are zero –the Coase’s theorem
applies. However, since property rights are imperfect delineated, it is necessary to incur in
costs, the transaction costs, to protect them.
         Transaction costs are not homogenous. They can differ depending on which
‘environment’ the transaction takes place. Furubotn and Richter (2005, p. 51) classify
transaction costs in three large groups: (i) market transaction costs: the transaction costs of
using the market (the price mechanism); (ii) managerial transaction costs: the costs of
exercising the right to give others within the firm; and (iii) political transaction costs: the
array of costs associated with the running and adjusting of institutional framework of a
polity. The procedure this paper proposes measures specifically the market transaction
costs, that is, the type of transaction costs closest to the idea Coase discussed in 1937: the
costs of using the market mechanism.
         Finally, for any of those types of transaction costs, they can be either fixed or
variable. The fixed transaction costs represent the specific investments made in setting up
institutional arrangements, and the variable ones are the transaction costs that depend on
the number or volume of transactions (Furubotn and Richter, 2005, p. 51). As will be clear
later, the difference involving fixed and variable transaction costs is central in our
proposed procedure to estimate them.




                                                                                             4
3. Measuring market transaction costs

    3.1. Transportation, transaction, and exchange costs
        Exchanging a good is a costly activity. As well as it is necessary to incur expenses
to produce a good, it is also necessary to allocate resources to market it. According to
Coase (1988, p. 7), market is an institution that exists “to facilitate exchange”, that is, it
exists “in order to reduce the cost of carrying out exchange transactions”. Thus, we
assume for now on that market is an organization created to facilitate the exchange. It is
possible because a market is composed of a set of institutions that reduce the market
transaction costs. Those costs are associated with the necessary activities to elaborate and
to enforce the contract that will intermediate the exchange7.
        The literature that has tried to measure market transaction costs frequently has
considered those costs synonymous to transportation costs. However, transportation and
transaction costs represent costs of different origins; while transportation costs represent
the costs of transfer physically a good from one market to another, taking into account fuel,
freight, taxes, tariffs, wages, fares, etc., market transaction costs are linked essentially to
information and bargaining costs. Moreover, combined the market transaction costs and
the transportation costs form the exchange costs. This idea is reflected in Benham and
Benham (2001) definition of exchange costs: “the opportunity cost faced by an individual
to obtain a specified good using a given form of exchange within a given institutional
setting” (p. 3).
        Higher exchange costs make the trading process more expensive. Actually, they
can even insulate markets. Markets for the same good can be in equilibrium with different
prices because it is costly to ship products from one market to another to take advantage of
arbitrage opportunities triggered by a price difference. It is worth to highlight it is not any
price difference that can consolidate a profitable arbitrage opportunity; this difference must
be higher than (or at least equal to) the exchange costs. Therefore, ceteris paribus, the
higher the exchange costs, the lower is the probability of different markets be integrated.
According to Fackler and Goodwin (2001, p. 978), “market integration is best thought of
as a measure of the degree to which demand and supply shocks arising in one region are
transmitted to another region”8.
        A market reduces exchange costs primarily because it makes the information
disclosure process less costly. As information becomes a cheaper asset, become easier to
indentify possible gains from arbitrage opportunities taking advantage of the price
difference in the two or more markets. Thereby better information flow improves the
degree of integration between different markets. In sum, both transportation and market
transaction costs (i.e. the exchange costs) influence decisively the degree of integration
between different markets. Thus, it is necessary to take them into account to analyze
empirically the connection of two or more markets.



7
  According to Furubotn and Ritcher (2005, p. 324), those activities can be organized in three categories: (i)
pre-contractual activities (search and inspection); (ii) contract formation (bargain) activities; (iii) post-
contractual activities (execution, control, and enforcement).
8
  It is important to clarify that market integration is different from economic integration. As Fackler and
Goodwin (2001, p. 979) explain “economic integration means that there is no border restrictions restricting
the flow of goods, but an specific market can be not integrated, i.e. it is possible to see two regional and
insulated markets”.

                                                                                                            5
    3.2. The cointegration analysis
        Many empirical procedures have been applied to study market integration but the
cointegration analysis has been one of the most popular approaches. This literature
assumes the degree of price transmission as a proxy for the level of market integration
because it can ‘measure’ the market efficiency in taking advantage of possible arbitrage
opportunities. Interestingly, Marshal’s (1920) market definition gives support to this
assumption: similar goods belong to the same market whenever their prices converge. For
the cointegration literature there is convergence when the prices of those goods share the
same long-run stochastic trend. This convergence means the existence of a long-run
equilibrium influencing the prices behavior in the short run. In this situation, according to
Fackler and Goodwin (2001, p. 973), market integration is usually a measure of the degree
of price transmission between different markets and market efficiency is used to denote a
situation in which the agents have left no arbitrage opportunities.
        There is an important assumption in the linear cointegration models: the prices in
the short run adjust to any deviation in the long-run equilibrium, do not matter how small
this change is. It is a strong assumption because, as we have already discussed previously,
the arbitrage opportunity is profitable only if the price difference is higher than the
exchange costs. Meyer and von Cramon-Taubadel (2004) also criticize the assumption of
linear and symmetric adjustment in cointegration models. According to them, the
asymmetric price transmissions are more frequently than the symmetric ones due to the
presence of: market power, political intervention, inventory management, adjustment costs
(menu costs), and asymmetric information (different search costs among the agents
involved in the transaction) (p. 586). Curiously, although Meyer and von Cramon-
Taubadel (2004) list two important market transaction costs (adjustment and search costs),
they do not employ the term transaction costs.
        Actually, the cointegration literature has already developed non-linear models that
incorporate asymmetric adjustments and exchange costs in its analyses9. Enders and
Granger (1988) is one of the first papers to suggest an approach to evaluate price
transmission equation with asymmetric price adjustments. Balke and Fomby (1997)
suggest a method to incorporate transaction costs in the cointegration models; those
models are known as the threshold cointegration models. Briefly, the threshold
cointegration models incorporate the transaction costs10 including nuisance parameters
linking the equations of the system. Those nuisance parameters are called thresholds and
they allow splitting the system in different regimes. With different regimes, it is possible to
evaluate empirically in which situations the prices are linked (i.e. in which situations the
markets are integrated), how strong this connection is in each regime, and what the trade
flow direction is. Moreover, the value of each threshold is read as a measure of the
transaction costs.
        Meyer (2004) proposes a procedure to measure indirectly the transaction costs in
currency values using the threshold influence on the price transmission equation. With the
variables in natural log, the threshold represents how much, in percentage, the deviation
has to be above or below the long-term equilibrium to trigger the regime change. This
9
   Asymmetry and exchange costs are not the same thing. The presence of exchange costs can cause
asymmetric adjustments, but not all asymmetry is a consequence of exchange costs. However, both can be
modeled using the threshold cointegration models.
10
   It is important to highlight that the cointegration literature employs imprecisely the term transaction costs
as a synonymous to transportation costs or to exchange costs. In the following paragraphs we maintain this
terminology to preserve the original idea of this literature but later we discuss this point in details.

                                                                                                              6
long-term equilibrium is calculated substituting the variables in the cointegration vector by
their respective sample mean.11
         Despite the popularity of the cointegration models, this approach presents several
limitations12. In the next paragraphs we focus on the misled concept of transaction costs
applied in this literature. There are also two conceptual inaccuracies in this literature:
         • it has employed the concept of transaction costs improperly: what they have
             named transaction costs are better expressed by the term exchange costs, the
             combination of transportation costs and variable market transaction costs;
         • besides using the concept of transaction costs far from the Coase’s idea, this
             literature use almost only examples of transportation cost to justify the existence
             of a persistent price difference. Transportation and transaction costs capture
             different aspects of an exchange; they are not synonymous13.
         It is possible to cite many examples. Bekkerman et al. (2013) employ a definition
of transaction costs close to the idea of exchange costs: “the cost required to transfer a
good from one market to another” (p. 2713). However, when they model those transaction
costs, they select only variables associated with transportation costs like fuel costs and
seasonality components (p. 2706). The same approach is observed in Campenhout (2007)
who use transportation variables (steep passes, road bad conditions, heavy traffic, number
of police check posts, bribes, and costs of living) as proxies for transaction costs. Perhaps
‘bribes’ can be a reasonable proxy for transaction costs, but his idea about this concept is
clearly far from Coase’s idea: “as expected, the estimated transaction costs are generally
proportional to the distance between two markets” (p. 123).
         Stephens et al. (2012) and Goodwin et al. (2002) justify a threshold effect in the
price transmission because they analyze perishable goods. This is a good proxy for
transaction costs; it can be classified as temporal asset specificity. However, Stephens et al
(2012, p. 460) empirically use only transportation costs variables (fuel prices and bus
fares) as proxies for the exchange costs.
         There are also papers that justify the existence of transaction costs due to market
characteristics, even when those features are not clearly transaction costs. Rapsomanikis
and Hallam (2006, p. 2) suggest that adjustment costs in the sugar-ethanol processing
industry and technical factors (the substitution possibilities between ethanol and oil)
explain the existence of transaction costs. Among the market characteristics, Park et al.
(2002) cite as transaction costs variables that are not all really transaction costs (trade
restrictions, infrastructure bottlenecks, managerial incentive reforms, traders skill, market
institutions, the lack of influence of future markets, bribes, and productions specialization
policies). But at least they recognize that markets do not emerge overnight; it can be a long
and costly process (p. 68).
         Many papers, like Serra et al. (2008) and Serra et al. (2006) model possible
transaction costs without justifying why can be reasonable to consider them. On the other
hand, Balcome et al. (2007) do not present a definition about those costs, but recognize

11
   See Mayer (2004, p. 332) for an example.
12
   See Fackler and Goodwin (2001) and Meyer and von Cramon-Taudabel (2004) for a review.
13
   It is important to highlight that this confusion is not recent neither exclusive to this literature. In 1979,
Dahlman had already criticized the usage of transportation costs as a proxy of transaction costs: “a trade may
be costless to carry through, but may still require resources to organize: there may be setup costs associated
with each exchange” Dahlman (1979, p. 146). Such a cost is no longer proportional to the trade itself, and
can be even a fixed cost independent of the amount exchanged.

                                                                                                              7
that transportation and transaction costs are expenses with different origins. Moreover,
they also recognize the existence of fixed and variable exchange costs (p. 308).
         In sum, despite all the efforts, there are some conceptual inaccuracies when the
cointegration analysis literature tries to incorporate the exchange costs in its models. What
it has been named transaction costs is better expressed by the concept of exchange costs.
Furthermore, although this literature has employed the expression transaction costs, it
seems that, in realty, this literature has the transportation costs in mind. The point is:
definition matters; it is impossible to measure anything accurately without identifying
properly what is to be measured14.
         Finally, perhaps as a consequence of an inaccurate concept of transaction costs,
Meyer and Cramon-Taudabel (2004, p. 599) also criticize that the cointegration literature
has rarely interpreted the magnitude of the measured thresholds in an economic sense.
Meyer (2004, p. 329) also points out, in most analyses, no explicit justification is provided
for the number of thresholds applied. Accordingly, Allen (2006) makes the same critique
arguing it is important to determine what is driving the price spread to get a better estimate
of the transaction costs.
         Considering all those difficulties, in the next section we propose an approach to
measure indirectly the variable market transaction costs that overcome some of the
problems just mentioned.


4. Proposed procedure
        Measuring transaction costs is a challenging task. We discussed previously some
attempts and their limitations. In this section, we propose a procedure to measure the
variable market transaction costs using the already developed cointegration techniques.
Because there are exchange costs, not all price difference between two markets triggers
profitable arbitrage opportunities. Thus it is possible to measure those exchange costs
identifying what is price difference that turns the arbitrage opportunity profitable. Once the
exchanges costs can be decomposed in transportation and market variable transaction
costs, if it is possible to measure the former, the difference between exchange and
transportation costs yields the latter.
        The following steps describe in details the proposed procedure for a system with
time series of the prices of two markets whose market transaction costs are to be measured:
        • With the prices in the same units (e.g. currency/weight or volume), perform unit
           root, cointegration and non-linearity tests. The cointegration tests must impose
           that the cointegration vector be equal to one (with or without a constant). This
           specification reflects exactly the idea of price difference ( P1 − P2 = c + ε ),
           where P1 and P2 are the prices, c is a constant that can be set as zero, and ε is
           the error. The nonlinear tests, such as Hansen (1999), Hansen and Seo (2002),
           and Seo (2006)15, are applied to evaluate if nonlinear cointegration
           specifications is preferred to linear ones. If it is not possible to reject the desired


14
   Actually, transaction costs definition is not an exclusive problem of the cointegration literature. See
Richman and Macher (2006) and Allen (2006).
15
   It is important to recognize that Hansen (1999) alone does not guarantee that the series and cointegrated,
Hansen and Seo (2002) can be applied only after the estimation of the threshold cointegration model, and Seo
(2006) is restricted to the case with two thresholds (three regimes).

                                                                                                           8
            properties (non-stationarity of P1 and P2 , and stationarity and nonliearity of ε ),
            the next steps should be followed;
         • Estimate a threshold cointegration model. The values of the thresholds represent
            the exchange costs that trigger the arbitrage opportunities. Because thresholds
            are the price difference that become the arbitrage opportunity profitable, they are
            in line with the Benham and Benham (2001) exchange costs definition: “the
            opportunity cost faced by an individual to obtain a specified good using a given
            form of exchange within a given institutional setting”;
         • To decompose the exchange costs in transportation and variable market
            transaction costs, it is necessary to measure directly at least one of them. We
            suggest quantifying directly the transportation costs because, usually, they have
            larger fractions of observable costs than the transaction costs. Traditional data
            collection, as interviews, firm visits, and mail surveys, can provide average
            values of the transportation costs. Furthermore, data collection like interviews is
            also important because:
             o to measure the transaction costs precisely, it is necessary to specify
                 thoroughly the characteristics of (i) the involved agents, (ii) the marketed
                 good, (iii) the from of exchange, (iv) the institutional setting, as well as, (iv)
                 the time and the money incurred when the transaction takes place (Benham
                 and Benham, 2001, p. 5); and
             o determining what is driving the price difference is important to get a better
                 measure of the transaction costs because the price spread can arise over a
                 number of issues and some of them may not be the Coase’s transaction
                 costs (Allen, 2006, p. 10).
         • Finally, after quantifying directly the transportations costs, the difference
            between exchange costs (obtained in the second step) and transportation costs
            (measured in the third step) yields a good proxy of the variable market
            transaction costs. We are labeling the latter costs as ‘variable’ because the price
            difference (i.e. the exchange costs) does not necessarily include some important
            fixed market transaction costs, like all the expenses incurred to create the
            institutional setting required to make the transaction feasible. Actually, it also
            important to highlight that “as long as the exchange costs are not a constant
            share of the total transaction costs, considering the former as a proxy for the
            latter is either misleading or uninformative” (Allen, 2006, p. 11-2).
         This proposal represents an effort to present a standardized procedure that can be
applied to quantify the variable market transaction costs incurred transfer a good from one
market to another. Its main advantages can be summarized in: (i) it is not necessary to
develop new statistical procedure because it uses the models the cointegration analysis
literature has already developed; (ii) it is not data hungry; (iii) the results are easy to
interpret; (iv) it breaks the exchange costs in transaction and transportation costs; and (iv)
those measured costs are consistent with the concepts and recommendations from the
institutional economics literature.
         Obviously, this approach also has some limitations and it is important to highlight
them: (i) it can capture the exchange costs only when the prices series are cointegrated;
otherwise, the cointegration models cannot be applied; (ii) it cannot measure the fixed
transaction costs; because it focuses on the average exchange costs incurred to make one
transaction, it sizes mainly the variable costs. Because this procedure combines the


                                                                                                 9
developments of the cointegration analysis literature with the theoretical framework
established by the new institutional economics literature, necessarily, it also combines the
weakness of both literatures: (iii) all the statistical problems associated with the
cointegration tests and with the relationship among price transmission, arbitrage
opportunity, and market integration; and (iv) the arbitrariness of the chosen transaction
costs definition.
        In the next section we present an empirical example of how this procedure can be
used to measure the exchange, the transportation, and the transaction costs incurred to
export ethanol between Brazil and United States.

5. Empirical example
        From the analysis of the previous sections, one of the main reasons insulating two
markets is a price difference lower than the exchange costs incurred to bring the goods
from one market to another to take advantage of an arbitrage opportunity. Those exchange
costs can be any transportation costs, trade barriers, taxes or transaction costs. In the
ethanol trade involving Brazil and United States, there are good reasons to believe that the
exchange costs are substantial, higher than only the transportation costs16.
        Most of the ethanol exported from Brazil to United States in the last three years is
from a variety labeled advanced. Its main difference from the conventional ethanol
(formally called renewable ethanol) is its lower greenhouse gas emissions and there is a
premium price for that characteristic. Despite this higher price, however, exporting the
advanced ethanol is costly; it is required a substantial paperwork to prove the desired
attributes of this variety. To demonstrate the imported ethanol can be classified as
advanced, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) requires a long list of documents
(more than 50) that is neither easy nor cheap to obtain17.
        Despite those substantial exchange costs, the international market for ethanol or the
trade between Brazil and United States has been incorporated in many models that try to
evaluate the impacts of the ethanol production on other crops or food prices, land use, or
water resources without considering the associated transaction costs. Some papers have
assumed a well developed international market for ethanol or a direct link between Brazil
and Unites States (Chen et al., 2012; Fabiosa et al., 2010; de Gorter and Just, 2008). Others
have recognized some friction in those markets primarily because of the American trade
barriers or the exchange rate (Crago et al., 2010; Elobeid and Tokgoz, 2008). As an
example, Elobeid and Tokgoz (2008, p. 923) propose a price transmission equation
including the trade barriers and the transportation costs, but assuming there are no
transaction costs18:


16
   Although, if one plots the ethanol price series of those markets or performs a cointegration analysis, he
finds a reasonable connection between those markets, Serigati (2013) shows that those results are mislead by
the oil price that influences both autarchic prices and create the false idea of a market linkage.
17
   This is list can be assessed in EPA (2010, p. 14888-9).
18
   Actually, there is an intriguing situation in Elobeid and Tokgoz (2008) because, despite they do not
consider the transaction costs in the price transmission equation, they incorporate them implicitly in the
equation setting the volume of imported ethanol from CBI countries. The transaction costs are incorporated
in lower transmission coefficients. In their own words: this transmission coefficients "are included to
account for the transaction costs between firms, the time lag between contracts and delivery, and the daily
volatility in ethanol prices that are not captured in the annual price data" (Elobeid and Tokgoz, 2008, p.
923).

                                                                                                         10
                                  (           )                              (
                       PEUS = PEW 1 + τ 0 + tc if PEEndogenous > PEW 1 + τ 0 + tc )
                            US
                       PE = PE
                                   Endogenous
                                                                             (
                                                if PEEndogenous < PEW 1 + τ 0 + tc )
where
                   PEUS = American domestic ethanol price
                   PEW = World ethanol price
                   PEEndogenous = the insulated American domestic ethanol price
                   τ 0 = tariff rate
                  tc = transportation costs
        Although Serigati (2013) rejects a strong and direct connection between those two
markets, in the last years there were significant export flows between Brazil and United
States. Since 2007, Brazil has exported more than 5.6 billions liters of ethanol to United
States, mainly in 2007, 2008 and 2012. Conversely, United States have exported to Brazil
more than 3.5 billions liters of ethanol since 2007, where 2.2 billions liters were traded
only in 2011 and 2012. If there were those exports, it is reasonable to assume that there
was a price difference sufficiently high to compensate all the exchange costs. However,
because those exports represent a tiny fraction of the domestic production (Figure 1), could
have this price difference triggered the connection between those markets?

Figure 1 – American Corn Ethanol Export and Import as Share of the domestic
Production
        13.5%

                                                                                    8.6%
                      6.7%         6.0%                                                        5.6%
                                                                                           3.6%
                                                    1.7%                         1.0%
            0.0%          0.0%          0.0%            0.0%      0.1%0.0%

           2006         2007           2008           2009          2010          2011      2012

                                              US Imports   US Exports

Source: RFA

         In sum, motivated (i) by the last question, by the fact that (ii) a lot of paperwork is
required to export the advanced ethanol from Brazil to United States, (iii) the literature
hasn’t considered the associated transaction costs incurred to trade ethanol among those
countries, and (iv) assuming that those markets are not directly connected, but there were
some periods that arose some window of arbitrage that became profitable to exports
ethanol, it is important to measure what the price difference is that offset exchange costs
or, at least, trigger the conditions to integrate those markets.

     5.1. Data and model
                                                                                  ~      ~
         Setting the ethanol price difference between United States and Brazil as PUSt − PBRt ,
it is profitable to trade ethanol among those countries when the window of arbitrage is
bind; that is, when the absolute value of the price difference is higher than the exchange


                                                                                                      11
                                                          ~     ~
costs ( δ ) incurred to make this transaction (i.e. when PUSt − PBRt > δ ). When this window
                                                    ~   ~
of arbitrage opportunity is not bind (i.e. when PUSt − PBRt ≤ δ ), it is not profitable to make
a trade transaction involving those locations and the markets are insulated. Once we have
measured the exchange costs, if we subtract from it the transportation and the shipment
costs, we can, finally, compute the variable market transaction costs incurred in trading the
ethanol between Brazil and United States.
         To measure the exchange costs we need to use the price series in nominal values
(US$/gallon) without any log transformation. We used the same data employed the
monthly price series of the Brazilian sugarcane ethanol and the American corn ethanol in
their respective spot markets, from November of 2002 to January of 2013, comprising 123
observations. Those price series can be considered both non-stationary and cointegrated
with each other19.
         It is important to highlight that to model this window of arbitrage, we need to
impose a restriction on the cointegration vector ( β = −1 ). Otherwise, there is no guarantee
that the estimated β is statistically equal to one and, consequently, we can find a price
difference weighted by a β that does not represent a window of arbitrage opportunity
  ~      ~
(                  )
  PUSt − PBRt > δ . Because the cointegration tests above cannot guarantee that a
cointegration vector where β = −1 yields a stationary relationship, it is necessary to test if
                    ~      ~
the combination PUSt − PBRt generates a stationary result. It is possible to reject the
                                                  ~      ~
hypothesis of non-stationarity of the difference PUSt − PBRt 20.
        To evaluate if it is possible to consider a cointegration relationship with more than
one regime to those series, we applied the Hansen (1999) test. In this test, Hansen (1999)
proposes a three steps procedure to evaluate (i) if a linear cointegration is preferable to a
system with two regimes (i.e. one threshold), (ii) if a linear cointegration is preferable to a
system with three regimes (i.e. two thresholds), and, finally, (iii) if a system with two
regimes is preferable to a system with three regimes.
        Depending on the number of regimes, each system can model different situations.
With three regimes, it is possible to have: (i) a regime where the price difference makes
profitable to export ethanol from Brazil to United States (i.e. the American ethanol price is
higher enough than the Brazilian ethanol price compensating the exchange costs); (ii) a
regime where the price difference is lower than the exchange costs, making the trade
unprofitable; and (iii) a regime where the price difference makes profitable to export
ethanol from United States to Brazil (i.e. the Brazilian ethanol price is higher enough than
the American ethanol price compensating the exchange costs21).
        When the system contains only two regimes, it is possible to have (i) one regime
for each trade flow (Brazil to United States or United States to Brazil) or (ii) one regime
when the markets are insulated and the other when the window of arbitrage is bind but, in


19
   Results available upon request.
20
   Results available upon request.
21
   The exchange costs associated with the first regime does not need to be equal to the exchange costs related
to the third regime. It is possible (even reasonable) to expect that the exchange costs to export ethanol from
United States to Brazil be different of the exchange costs to export ethanol from Brazil to United States.

                                                                                                          12
this situation, only one trade flow is modeled22. Finally, a system with only one regime
suggests that the relationship between those markets did not change along all the analyzed
period.
        All the three specifications are possible because, as the Figure 2 depicts, there are
some moments (most of them) where the American ethanol prices were higher than the
Brazilian ones, and there are also some moments (notably between Set/2009 and Jun/2012)
where the opposite were observed. Despite there were moments with a price difference
favoring each trade flow, there is no guarantee that this price difference was higher enough
to compensate the exchange costs neither lasted long enough to connect those markets.23

Figure 2 – Monthly Anhydrous Ethanol Prices: United States (NE) x Brazil (SP)




        Assuming a delay parameter as one, that is, the regime change in t depends on the
t-1 value of the deviation from the long-run equilibrium, and a trim parameter of 0.05, we
estimated two set of the Hansen (1999) test: the first modeling the equations with two lags
in level; and the second modeling the same equations with three lags in level. We choose
those numbers of lag because they are suggested by the lag length criteria tests (AIC,
Schwarz, Hannan-Quinn, and FPE). Tables 1 and 2 present the results.




22
   For Meyer (2004), in a situation with one thereshold (two regimes) and exchange costs, it is reasonable to
expect the trade flow in only one directon: "if price adjustment in the presence of significant transaction
costs is expected to occur in only one direction, a threshold error correction model with only one threshold
could be appropriate. Under such circumstances we would expect price adjustment due to deviations from
equilibrium in the other direction to be insignificant." (p. 329)
23
   According to Coleman (2007, p. 2), “if there is trade with a third city, estimating exchange costs from the
price transmission involving only two markets can be misled. One way to circumvent this problem is to use
trade data in conjunction with price data.” Fortunately, according to the trade data, there is no a third
important final destination involving the ethanol trade between Brazil and United States.

                                                                                                          13
Table 1 – Hansen (1999) test with two lags in level
                    Regimes Test statistic       pvalue         10%         5%          1%
                      1vs2      37.75             0.005         18.22      22.96       31.33
                      1vs3      49.98             0.118         52.42      62.21       90.15
                      2vs3       9.32             0.666         26.64      22.96       31.33

                                       Thresholds
                    Models           th1           th2
                    Setar(2)       -0.625           -
                    Setar(3)       -0.566         0.512


Table 2 – Hansen (1999) test with three lags in level
                    Regimes Test statistic       pvalue         10%         5%          1%
                      1vs2      52.44             0.017         23.98      34.82       61.31
                      1vs3      57.80             0.233         79.17      95.71      136.11
                      2vs3       3.73             0.996         29.01      34.82       61.31

                                       Thresholds
                    Models           th1           th2
                    Setar(2)       -0.656           -
                    Setar(3)       -0.625         0.519


        According to both Hansen (1999) tests, a system with three regimes (i.e. two
thresholds) must be rejected favoring either a linear cointegration model or a system with
two regimes. Both tests also reject the hypothesis that a linear cointegration model is
preferable to a system with two regimes. Therefore, the tests suggest that it is not possible
to reject the hypothesis of a nonlinear dynamic involving the Brazilian sugarcane and the
American corn ethanol prices and a system incorporating both series should be modeled
with two distinct regimes. The Equation 1 represents this model.

Equation 1 – The general model

  
                       (
  Lower regime PUS − βPBR ≤ θ
                          t         t
                                             )
   ∆PUS  α low                             p −1  low      low
                                                      γ 11,i γ 12,     ∆PUSt − i 
                                                                    i 
                                                                                                    uˆUSlow
                                                                                                              
       t
            = 
                 US
                           (
                 low  US t −1
                       P       −  βP  BRt −1 )
                                             + ∑      low      low              + C low
                                                                                            D t +    low 
                                                                                                            t


  ∆PBRt  α BR                              i =1 γ 21,i  γ 22,i  ∆PBRt −i                   uˆ BRt 
                                                                                                               (6)
   Upper  regime   P  (
                      US t  − βP BRt   >   θ )
  
   ∆PUSt  α US
                 up
                                              p −1  up       up
                                                      γ 11,i γ 12,    ∆PUSt − i 
                                                                   i 
                                                                                                 uˆUS up
                                                                                                            
             =
  ∆P   up  USt −1 P   (   − βP   BRt −1)+ ∑     up       up               + C up
                                                                                          D t +   up 
                                                                                                          t


   BRt  α BR                              i =1 γ 21,i  γ 22,i  ∆PBRt − i                uˆ BRt 
where:
       • the α matrix contains the coefficients representing the short-run adjust from the
          deviations of the long-run equilibrium ( PUSt − βPBRt );
         • the set of parameters (Γ1∆yt-1+...+Γp-1∆yt-p+1) capture the short-run dynamic,
                       PUS 
           where yt =  t  ; and
                       PBRt 



                                                                                                               14
              • the deterministic terms (CDt) are included in the model to capture possible linear
                trends, outliers, and structural breaks.

    5.2. Results
        We estimated the Equation 01 with different specifications and applying the
estimation procedure suggested by Hansen and Seo (2002). Before imposing the restriction
 β = −1 , we estimated an unrestricted model with two regimes, one lag in the short-run
structure, and a trim = 0.05. The model with this specification generates residuals serially
correlated, with heteroskedastic variance conditional and problems of non-normality.
Therefore, we estimated a model with the same specification but considering two lags in
the short-term structure (Model 1).

Model 1 – Constant, two lags, and trim = 0.05
Lower regime (y t -1 ≤ 1.058)

                 0.020
∆PUS t  - (-0.646)                     0.418 - 0.003  ∆PUSlow  - 0.197 - 0.005  ∆PUSlow  0.024                                              uˆUS     
      low                                                                                                                                                       low

  
 ∆P low   = 
                0.109
                          [1 - 1.067 ] +     (4.091)
                                             0.247     -
                                                          (-0.060)
                                                          0.150
                                                                     
                                                                              t −1
                                                                                    +   (-2.104)
                                                                                         0.028     -
                                                                                                      (-0.087)
                                                                                                      0.198
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                         t−2
                                                                                                                              +   (1.316)
                                                                                                                                   0.005
                                                                                                                                            [const low
                                                                                                                                                        +]     low 
                                                                                                                                                                  t


                                                                                                                                                          uˆ BRt 
                                                                           low                                         low
                                                                        ∆P                                          ∆P
 BRt   (1.943)                     (1.423)                BRt −1   (0.170)
                                                          (-1.494)                                              BRt − 2   (0.171) 
                                                                                                      (-2.028) 

Upper regime (y t -1 > 1.058)
             - 4.955                   1.303 - 3.219  ∆PUSup   3.810 - 2.506  ∆PUSlow   4.479 
 ∆PUS t  =  (-2.711) [1 - 1.067] +  (2.855)                                                                                                           uˆ up t 
      up

     up 
∆PBR   0.769 
                                                         (-3.264)
                                                                     upt −1  +  (2.380)          (-2.351)
                                                                                                                                                 [        ]
                                                                                                                 lowt − 2  +  (2.656)  const up +  US      up 
      t     (0.243)                  0.077
                                              (0.098)
                                                       0.656  ∆PBR  - 0.657 0.432  ∆PBR  - 0.717
                                                         (0.387)           t −1      (-0.237)    (0.234)           t−2     (-0.246)                uˆ BRt 
(t − value)

AIC = -646.0 BIC = -576.3 obs lower reg. = 93.3% obs upper reg. = 6.7%


        According to the Model 1, only when the price difference is higher than 1.058
(upper regime), there is a clear connection between the American and the Brazilian market.
                                                                                          low
In the other regime, the lower one, both loading coefficients are not significant (i.e. α US
       low
and α BR    are not statistically different from zero). That means, the window of arbitrage is
bind only when the price difference is higher than US$ 1.06/gallon and this value
represents the exchange costs incurred to trade ethanol involving Unites States and Brazil.
Actually, because the markets are connected only when the American ethanol price is
higher than the Brazilian ethanol price, it is possible to associate the value of US$
1.06/gallon to the average exchange costs incurred to export ethanol from Brazil to United
States. Finally, specification tests suggest this new specification fixed the problem of
residuals serially correlated, but the non-normality and the ARCH structure persist24.
         Interestingly, the estimated β is almost equal to -1 ( βˆ = −1.067) . Because the
cointegration vector is not estimated but established by a grid search procedure, it is not
possible to test if the β̂ can be considered statistically equal to -1. Therefore, we estimated
a model with the same specification but imposing the restriction of β = −1 on the
cointegration vector (Model 3.05). The conclusions are the same obtained in the last model
and the estimated coefficients are also very close. Only the threshold is slightly higher than
the previous one, meaning that, according to Model 2, the average exchange costs to export
ethanol from Brazil to United States is US$ 1.14/gallon. Unfortunately, because the
threshold is also established by a grid search procedure, it is not possible to test if both

24
     Results available upon request.

                                                                                                                                                                 15
values are statistically equal. Lastly, the residuals of the Model 2 also exhibit problems of
non-normality and ARCH structure, but they are not serially correlated25.
        After all, there are two models (Models 1 and 2) suggesting two values for the
exchange costs: δ 1 = US$ 1.06/gallon and δ 2 = US$ 1.14/gallon. We use those values to
calculate the variable market transaction costs incurred to export ethanol from Brazil to
United States. Considering that (i) the costs to bring the ethanol from the distillery (south-
central average) to the port (Santos) are US$ 0.26/gallon (road freight + storage + loading
costs + fees), (ii) the shipment costs (sea freight + ad valorem tariff) are US$ 0.25
(anhydrous ethanol), and (iii) the variable market transaction costs are the difference
between the exchange costs and the above transportation costs, the variable market
transaction costs range from US$ 0.55/gallon (1.06 – 0.26 – 0.25) to US$ 0.63/gallon (1.14
– 0.26 – 0.25).

Model 2 – Constant two lags, trim = 0.05, and restriction β = −1
 Lower regime (y t -1 ≤ 1.145)
 
                  0.027 
  ∆PUSt  - (-0.775)                0.419       - 0.006  ∆P low  - 0.195 - 0.006  ∆P low   0.028                                  uˆ lowt 
        low

  ∆P low  =  0.116 [1 - 1] + 0.246
                                          (4.075)     (-0.106)
                                                                 USlowt −1  +  (-2.071) (0.115)
                                                                                                       USlowt −2  +  (1.409)  const low +  US
                                                    - 0.150 ∆PBR   0.024 - 0.198 ∆PBR  - 0.009
                                                                                                                                  [             ]   low 
   BRt   (1.913)               (1.416)     (-1.493)        t −1     (0.150)  (-2.028)        t −2     (-0.268)             uˆ BRt 
 
  Upper regime (y t -1 > 1.145)
              - 3.331             0.913         - 2.745  ∆P up   2.687 - 1.580  ∆P up   3.218 
   ∆PUSt  =  (-2.437) [1 - 1] +  (2.543)                                                                                               uˆ up t 
        up

           
  ∆PBR   0.145 
                                                     ( −3.036)
                                                                 USupt −1  +  (2.029)  ( −1.914)
                                                                                                                                 [          ]
                                                                                                       USupt −2  +  (2.370)  const up +  US up 
                                     0.216         0.376  ∆PBR  - 0.133 0.094  ∆PBR  - 0.154                                      uˆ BRt 
        up
        t    (0.062)                (0.349)      (0.243)        t −1     (-0.058)  (0.066)        t −2     (-0.066) 
 (t − value)

 AIC = -644.3 BIC = -574.7 obs lower reg. = 93.3% obs upper reg. = 6.7%

        As a final comment, it is important to point out some caveats in interpreting those
numbers. Because in the analyzed period Brazil exported both conventional and advanced
ethanol, those values represent a average of the exchange and the transaction costs.
Unfortunately, it is not possible to identify the exported volume of each variety; therefore,
it is not possible to guess the weight of each one on the above averages. Moreover, the
American ethanol pays a premium for the advanced ethanol. Thus, the model can be
underestimating the price difference necessary to trigger the window of arbitrage. We hope
more comprehensive data are made available to make this analysis more accurate.

6. Concluding remarks
       Marketing a good is a costly activity and those costs are named exchange costs.
Markets are organizations created to reduce those costs, facilitating exchange. The
exchange costs can be decomposed into transportation and market transaction costs, and
markets make an exchange less costly because they reduce the latter. The exchange costs
also exert important influence on the degree of integration between markets. The higher
those costs, the higher a price difference need to be to turn profitable an arbitrage
opportunity.
       Despite the importance of the exchange costs, measuring them properly is still a
challenging task. Cointegration analysis is one of the most popular approaches applied to
evaluate the degree of integration between two or more markets. This literature has also
developed a procedure that incorporates the exchange costs in its models. However, despite
25
     Results available upon request.

                                                                                                                                                       16
all efforts, this literature has quantified the transaction costs imprecisely. One of the main
problems is the misuse of the concepts of exchange, transportation and transaction costs.
This literature does not differentiate transportation from transaction costs; it even uses
variables of the former as proxies for the latter. This paper argues that transportation and
transaction costs are essentially different, and that exchange costs are the sum of both.
         Problems with the definition of transaction costs is not an exclusive shortcoming of
the cointegration literature; it is a frequent weakness in many attempts to measure those
costs. We propose a procedure to measure the exchange, the transportation, and the
variable market transaction costs. The procedure comprises three steps. First, we quantify
exchange costs in monetary terms, by means of threshold cointegration models. Second,
the transportation costs are estimated by means of data collection that describes in details
all the process involved performing the exchange. Finally, the difference between the
exchange costs and transportation costs is an indirect measure of variable market
transaction costs.
         We applied this procedure to the international market of ethanol. There is a vast
literature, aiming to evaluate the influence of the ethanol markets on other agricultural
markets or on other variables (e.g. land allocation, water resources uses, deforestation,
etc.), that assumes the existence of a well developed international market of ethanol. This
literature has not considered the transaction costs incurred to trade in this market and there
is anecdotal evidence that those cost are substantial. Appling the proposed procedures in
the ethanol trade between Brazil and United States, we measured the variable market
transaction costs ranging from US$ 0.55/gallon to US$ 0.63/gallon. Because we calculated
the transportation costs as US$ 0.25/gallon, in our most conservative results, only when the
price difference between those two markets is, in average, higher than US$ 1.06/gallon, it
is profitable to export this biofuel from Brazil to United States. Bellow this threshold in
average the price difference does not compensate the exchange costs incurred to export
ethanol from one country to another.
         The procedure proposed in this paper uses a widely applied statistical method
(threshold cointegration analyses) to operationalize concepts from Institutional Economics
that are not easily observed. As shortcomings, the proposed procedure inherits most of the
statistical and theoretical problems of the cointegration models and is sensitive to the
transaction costs definition. But it advances offering a method to indirectly measure the
market variable transaction costs in currency values.


7. References
Allen, Douglas W. (2006). Theoretical Difficulties with Transaction Cost Measurement.
Division of Labor & Transaction Costs (DLTC), Vol. 2, No. 1, pp. 1-14.
Balcombe, Kelvin; Alastair Bailey; Jonathan Brooks (2007). Threshold Effects in Price
Transmission: The Case of Brazilian Wheat, Maize, and Soya Prices. American Journal of
Agricultural Economics, Vol. 89, No. 2, pp. 308-23.
Balke, Nathan S.; Thomas B. Fomby (1997). Threshold Cointegration. International
Economic Review, Vol. 38, No. 3, pp. 627–45.
Barzel, Yoram (1982). Measurement cost and organization of markets. Journal of law and
economics. Vol. 25. No. 1 April – pp. 27-48.


                                                                                           17
Bekkerman, Anton; Barry K. Goodwin; Nicholas E. Piggott (2013). Applied Economics,
Vol. 45, No. 19, pp. 2705-14.
Benham, Alexandra; Lee Benham (2001). The Costs of Exchange. Ronald Coase Institute,
Working Paper Series, No 1, July.
Campenhout, Bjorn van (2007). Modelling trends in food market integration - Method and
an application to Tanzanian maize markets. Food Policy, Vol. 32, No. 1, pp. 112–27.
Chen, Xiaoguang; Madhu Khanna; Haixiao Huang; Hayri Önal (2012). Meeting the
Mandate for Biofuels: Implications for Land Use, Food, and Fuel Prices. NBER Working
Paper W16697. The Intended and Unintended Effects of U.S. Agricultural and
Biotechnology Policies, pp. 223-267.
Coase, Ronald H. (1988). The Firm the Market and the Law. Pp 1-31 in The Firm, the
Market and the Law, by Ronald H. Coase. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Coleman, Andrew (2007). The pitfalls of estimating transactions costs from price data.
Discussion Paper Series, DP2007/07. Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
Crago, Christine L.; Madhu Khanna; Jason Barton; Eduardo Giuliani; Weber Amaral
(2010). Competitiveness of Brazilian Sugarcane Ethanol Compared to U.S. Corn Ethanol.
Energy Policy, Vol. 38, No. 11, pp. 7404–15.
de Gorter, Harry; David R. Just (2008). The Economics of U.S. Ethanol Import Tariffs
with a Consumption Blend Mandate and Tax Credit. Working Paper (WP 2007-21),
Department of Applied Economics and Management, Cornell University.
Eggertsson, Thrainn (1990). Economic behavior and institutions. Cambridge University
Press.
Elobeid, Amani; Simla Tokgoz (2008). Removing distortions in the U.S. ethanol market:
what does imply for the United States and Brazil? American Journal of Agricultural
Economics, Vol. 90, No. 4, pp. 918-932.
Enders, Walter; Clive W. J. Granger (1998). Unit-Root Tests and Asymmetric Adjustment
with an Example Using the Term Structure of Interest Rates. Journal of Business and
Economic Statistics, Vol. 16, No. 3, pp. 304-311.
EPA (2010). Regulation of Fuels and Fuel Additives: Changes to Renewable Fuel Standard
Program; Final Rule. Environmental Protection Agency, Federal Register, Vol. 75, No. 58,
pp. 14669–15320.
Fabiosa, Jacinto F.; John C. Beghin; Fengxia Dong; Amani Elobeid (2010). Land
Allocation Effects of the Global Ethanol Surge: Predictions from the International FAPRI
Model. Land Economics, Vol. 86, No 4, pp. 687-706.
Fackler, Paul L.; Barry K. Goodwin (2001) Spatial price analysis. In Gardner, Bruce L.,
Gordon C. Rausser. Handbook of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 1B, ed. B. Amsterdam:
Elsevier. Chapter 17, pp. 971-1024.
Furubotn, Erik G.; Rudolf Richter (2005). Institutions and Economic Theory: The
Contribution of the New Institutional Economics. The University of Michigan Press, Ann
Arbor, Michigan.



                                                                                     18
Gonzalez-Diaz, Manuel; Benito Arrunada; Alberto Fernandez (2000). Causes of
Subcontracting: Evidence from Panel Data on Construction Firms. Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization, Vol. 42, No. 2, pp. 167-87.
Goodwin, Barry K.; Thomas J Grennes; Lee A Craig (2002). Mechanical Refrigeration and
the Integration of Perishable Commodity Markets. Explorations in Economic History, Vol.
39, No. 2, pp. 154–82.
Hansen, Bruce E. (1999). Testing for Linearity. Journal of economic Surveys, Vol. 13, No.
5, pp. 551–576.
Hansen, Bruce E.; Byeongseon Seo (2002). Testing for two-regime threshold cointegration
in vector error-correction models. Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 110, No. 2, pp. 293–318.
Macher, Jeffrey T. (2001). Vertical Disintegration and Process Innovation in
Semiconductor Manufacturing: Foundries vs. Integrated Producers. McDonough School of
Business Working Paper, Georgetown University.
Marshall, Alfred (1920). Principles of Economics. Eighth Edition, The Macmillan
Company. London.
Masten, Scott E.; Edward A. Snyder (1993). United States Versus United Shoe Machinery
Corporation: On the Merits. Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 36, No. 1, pp. 33-70.
Masten, Scott E.; James W. Meehan; Jr., Edward A. Snyder (1991). The Costs of
Organization. Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, Vol. 7, No. 1, pp. 1-25.
Meyer, Jochen (2004). Measuring market integration in the presence of transaction costs -
a threshold vector error correction approach. Agricultural Economics, Vol. 31, No. 2-3, pp.
327-34.
Meyer, Jochen; Stephan von Cramon-Taubadel (2004). Asymmetric Price Transmission: A
Survey. Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 55, No. 3, pp. 581-611
Ngwenyama, Ojelanki K.; Noel Bryson (1999). Making the Information Systems
Outsourcing Decision: A Transaction Cost Approach to Analyzing Outsourcing Decision
Problems. European Journal of Operational Research, Vol. 115, No. 2, pp. 351-67.
Nickerson, Jack A.; Brian S. Silverman (1999). Why Aren't All Truck Drivers Owner-
Operators? Asset Ownership and the Employment Relation in Interstate For-Hire
Trucking. Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, Vol. 12, No. 1, pp. 91-118.
North, Douglass (1990). Institutions, institutional change and economic performance.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ohanian, Nancy K. (1994). Vertical Integration in the U.S. Pulp and Paper Industry 1900-
1940. Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 76, No. 1, pp. 202-7.
Park, Albert; Hehui Jin; Scott Rozelle; Jikun Huang (2002). Market Emergence and
Transition - Arbitrage, Transaction Costs, and Autarky in China’s Grain Markets.
American Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 84, No. 1, pp. 67–82.
Park, Seung H.; Michael V. Russo (1996). When Competition Eclipses Cooperation: An
Event History Analysis of Joint Venture Failure. Management Science, Vol. 42, No. 6, pp.
875-90.



                                                                                        19
Poppo, Laura; Todd Zenger (1998). Testing Alternative Theories of the Firm: Transaction
Cost, Knowledge-Based, and Measurement Explanations for Make-or-Buy Decisions in
Information Services. Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 19, No. 9, pp. 853-77.
Rapsomanikis, George; David Hallam (2006). Threshold cointegration in the sugar-
ethanol-oil price system in Brazil: evidence from nonlinear vector error correction models,
FAO commodity and trade policy research working paper No. 22, September.
Richman, Barak D.; Jeffrey Macher (2006). Transaction Cost Economics: An Assessment
of Empirical Research in the Social Sciences. Duke Law School Faculty Scholarship
Series. Paper 62.
Sampson, Rachelle C. (2006). R&D Alliances and Firm Performance: The Impact of
Technological Diversity and Alliance Organization on Innovation. Academy of
Management Journal, Vol. 50, No. 2, pp. 364–86.
Saussier, Stéphane (2000). Transaction Costs and Contractual Incompleteness: The Case of
Electricite de France. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, Vol. 42, No. 2, pp.
189–206.
Seo, Myunghwan (2006). Bootstrap testing for the null of no cointegration in a threshold
vector error correction model. Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 127, No. 1, pp. 129–50.
Serra, Teresa; David Zilberman; José M. Gil; Barry K. Goodwin (2008). Nonlinearities in
the US corn-ethanol-oil price system. Selected Paper prepared for presentation at the
American Agricultural Economics Association Annual Meeting, Orlando, FL, July 27-29.
Serra, Teresa; José M. Gil; Barry K. Goodwin (2006). Local polynomial fitting and spatial
price relationships: price transmission in EU pork markets. European Review of
Agricultural Economics, Vol. 33, No. 3, pp. 415–36.
Serigati, Felippe C. (2013). How to Indirectly Assess Transaction Costs to Evaluate
Market Integration: evidence from the International Ethanol Market. Ph.D. Dissertation.
Getulio Vargas Foundation, Brazil.
Silverman, Brian. S.; Jack A. Nickerson; John Freeman (1997). Profitability, Transactional
Alignment, and Organizational Mortality in the U.S. Trucking Industry. Strategic
Management Journal, Vol. 18, No. S1, pp. 31-52.
Stephens, Emma C.; Edward Mabaya; Stephan von Cramon-Taubadel; Christopher B.
Barrett (2012) Spatial Price Adjustment with and without Trade. Oxford Bulletin of
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 74, No. 3, pp. 453-69.
Wang, Ning (2003). Measuring Transaction Costs: An Incomplete Survey. Ronald Coase
Institute, Working Paper Series, No. 2, February.
Williamson, Oliver E. (1996). The Mechanisms of Governance. New York and Oxford:
Oxford University Press.




                                                                                        20
