    THE INVENTORS' GAINS PERCEPTION IN PATENTS COLLABORATION: THE CASE OF
                      BRAZILIAN NETWORK OF INVENTORS 1

                                                                                       Alexandre Novaes Mejdalani2a
                                                                                               Eduardo Gonçalves3b


Resumo: As invenções cada vez mais formam complexas redes de cooperação entre indivíduos. Embora a
literatura tenha explorado estas redes sob diferentes óticas, sua topografia, distribuição espacial e os fatores
que motivam sua formação continuam sendo um tema em aberto. O objetivo deste artigo é identificar como
os inventores percebem as informações dos parceiros na rede para formar seu portfólio de laços potenciais.
Para isto, utiliza-se os dados de patentes do Brasil e os microdados pessoais da RAIS, de 2000 a 2011, para
investigar como os inventores criam seu sistema de percepção e, em particular, o que procuram em uma
parceria. As principais contribuições são (1) a proposição de um coeficiente de dominância decomposto
para examinar a percepção de cada indivíduo com base na hierarquia não-explícita do laço e (2) a
identificação dos elementos que os inventores observam e como os usam para formar expectativas de
ganhos das parcerias.
Palavras-Chave: parcerias inventivas; percepção de ganhos; redes de copatentes; Brasil

Abstract: Inventions are increasingly becoming a product of cooperation and forming complex networks
of co-invention. Although the literature has explored the many faces of these networks, their topography
and spatial distribution, the driving factors that form them remain an on-going theme. This article aims to
identify how inventors perceive partners’ information to build their own portfolio of potential ties. The
paper combines Brazil's patent database and personal microdata with confidential information, from 2000
to 2011, to find how inventors build their perception system and in particular what they seek in a
partnership. Our main contributions are (1) using a dominance coefficient decomposition to examine the
perception of each individual based on the non-explicit hierarchy of the link, and (2) finding that inventors
build their perception system based on the expectations of gains from a partnership.

Keywords: inventive partnerships, gains perception, co-patents network, Brazil

JEL: L14; O31; O33.

Área ANPEC: Área 9 - Economia Industrial e da Tecnologia




1
 Os autores agradecem o suporte financeiro do CNPq, FAPEMIG, Capes e à equipe de profissionais do Instituto Nacional de
Propriedade Intelectual (INPI), sem os quais esse trabalho não seria possível.

The authors thank the financial support provided by the CNPq, FAPEMIG and Capes and the staff of the National Institute of
Intellectual Property (INPI), without whom this work would not be done.
a
  Faculdade de Economia, Universidade Federal Fluminense, Niterói, Brasil.
b
  Faculdade de Economia, Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora, Juiz de Fora, Brasil
2
  Doutorando em Economia. E-mail: a.mejdalani@gmail.com
3
  Professor Associado e pesquisador do CNPq. E-mail: eduardo.goncalves@ufjf.edu.br
1. INTRODUCTION
        The creation and diffusion of knowledge is a complex process with multiple dimensions involved.
Thus, the understanding of the process is far from one dimensional but rather a combination of
complementary readings. In empirical research, the introduction of new instruments has restored interest in
this subject. On the one hand, empirical works throughout the literature have focused mainly on the
examination of the spatial determinants of knowledge creation and diffusion. On the other hand, a more
recent branch has incorporated elements and metrics of social network analysis in such a way to reflect how
interactions between players influence the process.
        Marshall (1920 [1890]) proposed the idea that knowledge is in the “air” to explain how co-
localization in space benefit the innovation process. He stated, “if one man starts a new idea, it is taken up
by others and combined with suggestions of their own; and thus it becomes the source of a further new
idea” (p. 156). In fact, Marshall understood that a social space is fundamental to the spillover of new ideas.
However, we also must note that the Marshallian air is a product of the co-localization of firms, whose
innovation activities can inspire their cohabitants. This idea remained the core of innovation study for a
long time until the introduction of new communication technologies began to change the way we create
social links. Recent works tend to explain the innovation process as a complex system of social links
between inventors, firms and regions (Henderson, 2007; Powell & Gianella, 2010; Fritjar & Rodriguez-
Pose, 2016). Thus, knowledge spillover between inventors does not seem to occur only because co-location
makes social contact easier. On the other hand, it is the social affinities that enable connections, and co-
location is a process by which agents diminish their spillover costs. Therefore, while the former innovation
literature was widely influenced by how location influences regional performance, the latter tries to
understand why and how inventors find and cooperate with each other. Cassi and Plunket (2015) refer to
the proximity perspective and the relational perspective.
        In this paper we attempt to analyze how inventors connect to each other in Brazil. We are interested
in two main questions. First, what do inventors seek in a partnership? Second, what are the perceptions they
form before connecting? Although the first question is a more traditional objective to pursue, the second
one is not very common. From a microeconomic viewpoint, inventors are optimizing players with intrinsic
costs of inventing and cooperating and a bundle of types of returns. An inventor may apply him/herself in
cooperation to strengthen their network, to have better reputation, to share investment costs, to access new
information and, of course, for financial gain. On the other hand, an inventor might invent alone in a slow
but highly profitable process. Thus, the optimization mechanism would drive the inventor to dedicate some
amount of their time to cooperation.
        It is important to note that the cost of cooperation has been decreasing due to the invention of low-
cost communication technologies, which has made social interaction more common (Castells, 1996). This
can help inventors to increase cooperation and form inventing teams with strong bonds within. However,
cooperation can also involve issues of uncertainty and trustworthiness.
        We address our two questions by applying the proximity perspective proposed by Torre and Gilly
(1999) which tries to elaborate the reasons that bring two nodes closers. However, most inventors have
information asymmetry and do not have fully knowledge the potential partner’s costs, expectations and
reputation. They form their own expectations based on the perception given by available information.
Cowan, Jonard and Zimmermann (2006, p. 156) point out that “the repetition of interactions creates
information that permits partners to reduce uncertainty and increase predictability regarding each others’
behavior”. Hence, as inventors tighten and select their ties, the more efficient their connections become and
the more effective their perception formation.
        The aim of the paper is to answer both questions above by analyzing inventors’ personal microdata
and network patterns within the Brazilian context. We use all Brazilian co-patenting data in all
technological fields between 2000 and 2011, and only inventors with formal employment registered in the
Brazilian Ministry of Employment.
        Methodologically, the paper uses social networks methods combined with traditional econometric
modelling. To capture a node’s role in a tie, we breakdown the model to identify non-explicit hierarchy of
dominance, based on the proximity analysis of Torre and Gilly (1999). We algebraically develop a way to
introduce node features into interactions and call this technique “dominance coefficient decomposition”.
This metric, as will be shown later, is similar to the gravitational computation of characteristics, although
our coefficient is better optimized for social networks rather than spatial analysis.
         We can briefly summarise our results into two types. First, (i) there are high spatial boundaries in
Brazilian inventive networks and (ii) the inventors and their networks tend to form clusters around central
nodes that act as gatekeepers to their sub-systems. From the perception formation point of view, (iii) the
partner’s gender matters, (iv) individuals seek individuals with a higher educational level and salary than
their own, although (v) bilateral matching tends to approximate individuals with similar levels. We have
evidence to believe that individuals form their connections based on their own perceptions of what a “good
tie” is, which may seem a result of boundary rationality. Moreover, the dominance coefficient fulfilled our
expectations to mimicry hierarchical dominance in the model.
         The paper is organized as follows. The next section introduces the basis of collaboration theory in
the study of innovation. The third section presents the core of the node’s gain perception theory. The fourth
section is an overview of both international and Brazilian empirical works on innovation. The fifth section
presents data and methodology, in which the “dominance coefficient decomposition” is algebraically
demonstrated. Then, we show and discuss our empirical results. The final section presents concluding
remarks.

2. THE THEORETICAL BASIS OF COLLABORATION
        The motives that lead to cooperative behaviour are widely debated in innovation literature. Dachs
et al (2008) argue that traditional firm-based views of innovation process lack an explanation of why (and
how) firms engage in cooperation activities. The relational view, they point out, “focused on inter-firm
relationship as a source of competitive advantages” (p. 202). De Faria et al (2010) found in the literature
that firms look for knowledge beyond their own boundaries to access complementary capabilities and
technological resources. In a similar way, cooperation activities can occur at varying levels rather than
between firms, such as regions, scientific teams, universities or – as this paper will explore – individuals.
        The polymath “garage inventor” is now a rarity. Most inventors are highly qualified workers that
master a small set of specific knowledge and have to become part of a group in order to access
complementary capabilities from other highly qualified inventors. In fact, scientific team size (Wuchy et
al, 2007) and academic co-authorship (Hicks & Katz, 1996; Adams et al, 2005) are growing. The
cooperative behaviour of inventors is thus enlightened and the question “why do they cooperate?” precedes
the question “what do they seek?”
        We can divide cooperation activities into three sequential steps: (i) the first contact, (ii) the
cooperation itself and (iii) the result. Whether the first contact is a result of active searching or an occasional
meeting (e.g. college colleagues) is difficult to capture. In general, collaboration occurs within communities
that provide match opportunities (Giuri & Mariani, 2013). However, when facing new problems, inventors
often search for partnerships outside their own surroundings, leading to inter-business and inter-regional
collaboration.
        The second step, cooperation itself, is the exchange of knowledge. In current data, it is not possible
to know for sure the knowledge stock of each inventor, and what they cede and what they absorb. While
also difficult to measure, it is possible to establish some premises. Giuri and Mariani (2013) identified that
education, for example, enhances knowledge spillover and absorption. Since inventors cooperate to access
new cognitions, and it is supposed that higher educational levels implies higher knowledge stocks, then the
spillover tends to be stronger from the more educated inventor to the less educated one. The same should
occur in other knowledge-stocking characteristics of the inventor. Whittington and Smith-Doerr (2008),
Jung and Ejermo (2014) and Crescenzi, Nathan and Rodriguez-Pose (2016) identified that individuals use
available public information to create their perception and to convert potential ties into formed ties. This
information could be, for example, the partner’s gender, ethnicity, language, job position or technological
field. Thus, as individuals search for a group of “good” characteristics, they tend to form smaller groups of
potential inventors, and convert ties inside these groups. Whittington and Smith-Doerr (2008) found that
intragroup connections are much more common than inter-group connections.
         The last step is the product of collaboration and this we can measure. It can be scientific papers,
products placed in the market or patent applications. There are advantages of using patents as a proxy for
innovation. Nagaoka, Motohashi and Goto (2010) argue that patents are highly valued inventions with
economic relevance from a reliable dataset of easy access. Moreover, TerWal and Boschma (2008) point
out that patent data is also easy to transform into a collaboration network. In fact, many recent studies of
innovation networks use patent data in different aggregations as a proxy for collaboration, such as Bresci
and Lissoni (2004, 2005), Ejermo and Karlsson (2006), Maggioni, Nosveli and Uberti (2007), Cassi and
Plunket (2015), Morescalchi et al. (2015) and Crescenzi, Nathan and Rodriguez-Pose (2016). In this paper,
we use co-patent data to identify a previous step of formed tie.
         Proximity analysis as developed by Torre and Gilly (1999) and Boschma (2005) – in innovation
science – is useful as an analytical resource to expand the traditional regional view. From this perspective,
innovation is a combination of five different dimensions of proximity: cognitive, organizational, social,
institutional and geographical. Despite the identification of this multi-dimensional perspective of
innovation, this reading is more about how to understand innovation process and less about how to build a
cognitive model of how inventors understand each other. In this paper, we use the concept of perception
from game theory and cognitive sciences. It slightly shifts the question from “what do inventors seek in a
partnership” to “what the inventors look for when they seek partnership”, without major changes to our
objectives, however. We present this concept in the following section.

3. THE CONCEPT OF NODE PERCEPTION
        While from the regional perspective the gravitational forces of regional capabilities is one of the
main causes of cooperation, from the individual inventors’ perspective it is how people see each other as
potential partners. Owan and Nagaoka (2011) identified two types of motives that make inventors more or
less susceptible to cooperation, namely intrinsic and extrinsic. “Intrinsically motivated behaviors are
behaviors which a person engages in to feel competent and self-determining” (p. 3), and “extrinsic motives
such as career concerns, the desire to enhance their reputations inside and outside their organizations, and
the expectation that their performance will affect their research funding and compensation” (p. 3). Thus,
the inventor tends to become more cooperative if he or she perceives that the relationship will convert into
personal gains. In other words, the portfolio of potential partners is built upon the inventor’s perception of
gains. However, what influences this perception?
        The Oxford Dictionary describes perception as “the way in which something is regarded,
understood, or interpreted” and Kahnemann (2002) describes it as the process of fast, automatic, associative
and slow-learning thinking. In other words, perception is a personal reading of information after filtering
based on previous knowledge, experiences or prejudices.
        Assuming that inventors have limited time and choose to split this time between working on their
own projects and cooperating with others, there are costs of working alone (e.g. slower production) and of
cooperation (e.g. attend to social meetings to find partners). If they see that, the gain of working alone is
greater than when cooperating, they will not waste their time on it. However, if there is the perception that
cooperation leads to greater gains, they will choose a partner in their portfolios. Hence, the inventor’s
perception of relationship gains translates what each inventors takes into account when choosing partners
in their portfolios. This choosing process is less reasoning than the previous one, by which the inventor
choose between working alone or cooperating with others. First, individuals cannot access more than a few
publicly available information about a partner, such as his/her age and business field. However, personal
data as salary is usually confidential. The inventor uses general information - such as educational level,
social status, wealth and productivity – to create a perception based upon general information, personal
beliefs and common sense. If the particular information adapts to the general perception, the probability of
cooperation is expected to be high. Hence, the question “how do inventors cooperate?” can be reformulated
to “how do inventors see each other and what gains do they expect?”.
4. EMPIRICAL RESEARCHES ON INVENTOR COLLABORATION
        As mentioned above, only few works use the individual level to analyze the determinants of
collaboration. Firstly, because personal data is difficult to access and secondly, regional-based and firm-
based studies are more common. Thirdly, the number of individuals in the network is much harder to work
when compared to regions and even firms. Below, we review some concepts mentioned in empirical
literature on collaboration. These differ in level of aggregation, but they have similar interpretations if we
extrapolate them to the individual level.

      Geography matters when forming new connections: At the regional level, Morescalchi et al.
       (2015) and Scherngell and Barber (2008) found constraints of physical distance within European
       Union borders. In a study on the internationalization of inventive activity, Picci (2010) identified
       that a common border has a positive effect on bilateral collaboration. Moreover, in Sweden Ejermo
       and Karlsson (2006) found regions that the R&D resources of neighboring regions play a positive
       role in network affinity. At the firm level, Paier and Schengell’s (2010) results indicate that
       geography matters in firm collaboration in the EU.
      Proximities can be substitutable: At the inventor ties level, Cassi and Plunket (2015) found that
       different forms of proximity can be substitutable. Once a connection exists, social proximity
       overlaps geography and technology in the probability of forming new ties.
      Regional development level is important: Montobbio and Sterzi (2013) studied the
       internationalization of co-patent activities in different countries with different development levels
       using GDP per capita and institutional maturity of the property rights rules as development
       measurements. They found that institution maturity and development are highly correlated, and
       countries with less mature institutions tend to cooperate less with other countries. In particular, we
       are not concerned with the internationalization of Brazilian innovation activities, but with the
       internal distribution of it. However, Brazilian regions have high heterogeneity in development
       levels, and regional features can constrain individuals within a less-developed region hampering the
       task of seeking others in the network.
      Individual characteristics of inventors: Whittington and Smith-Doerr (2008) identified that
       inventors that share similarities tend to form sub-groups in the network and connect within these
       groups. Crescenzi, Nathan and Rodriguez-Pose, for example, identified ethnic-linguist groups,
       while Jung and Ejermo (2007), Whittington and Smith-Doerr (2008) and Gaughan and Bozeman
       (2016) found that the partner’s gender is an important factor in the forming of groups.
        Few works focus on inventors, and even fewer on their personal features. First, the access to the
microdata of patents is restricted. Second, access to complementary and indispensable data – such as
salaries and residence – is even more restricted due to confidentiality. Because of this, most works cited
above carried out topological research of networks rather than a study on the individual characteristics of
the inventor, or used a higher aggregation level to access other characteristics of nodes.
        Using patent data, Agrawal et al. (2008) – patent citation - and Nathan and Rodriguez-Pose (2016)
– co-patenting – explore the inventor level in the network. Both papers access personal data in some nodes
in cognitive and institutional terms. In our paper, we include a social-economic level of personal data,
regarding information about educational level, wage and residence of the inventors.

The Brazilian Innovation Network
       The Brazilian innovation system is immature and in process of formation (Albuquerque, 1996;
Gonçalves and Almeida, 2009). According to Albuquerque (2000) in Brazil, there is a high proportion of
small firms and single individual inventions, and a small participation of domestic firms. Moreover,
Albuquerque et al (2002), Lemos et al (2006) and Gonçalves (2007) found that innovation activity is highly
concentrated in the Southeast region, especially around innovation centers such as São Paulo, Rio de
Janeiro, Campinas and Brasília. In contrast, peripheral regions in the North and Northeast regions show
low numbers of patents per capita (Gonçalves, 2007). These findings demonstrate that geographic
inequality in the Brazilian Innovation System is a mirror of the country’s historic development, which has
created high economic inequality between the center-southern regions and the northern regions.
       The previous works focus on the regional perspective rather than innovation network. The difficulty
of accessing reliable databases was a constraint to this kind of study until recently, when some institutions
made efforts to build and simplify access to certain information. Sidone, Haddad and Mena-Chalco (2016a,
2016b) used information from academic résumés available on the Lattes Platform 4 to build a scientific
network of Brazilian researchers. They found that distance is a key element in determining the network
formation, and that less-prestigious scientific regions are becoming more important in the network.
       Our paper contributes to this debate in two ways. First, we use the individually identified patent
database to build the network. Second, we focus on the inventor rather than the region or the firm. However,
our work analysis and conclusions are not localized, but can be understood as a contribution to the study of
innovation network formation in emerging countries.

5. DATA AND METHODOLOGY
Data
        In this paper, two databases are used. First, the database thankfully ceded by the Brazilian National
Institution of Intellectual Property (INPI), which contains information on patent application, applicants and
inventors. Second, the Annual Report on Social Information (in Brazilian Portuguese: RAIS), available
from the Brazilian Labour and Employment Ministry (MTS), which contains the personal data of formal
employees. Both databases uses the Natural Persons Register (in Brazilian Portuguese: CPF), an individual
taxpayer registry identification number as an impersonal identity of inventors and employees. The time
period used is from 2000 to 2011, divided into 4 equal 3 year periods.
        The advantage of using this is the access it provides the social-economic classified data of each
inventor, such as educational level, salary, residential address, and also employers’ data, such as firm size
and business type. This type of data – as far as we know – has not previously been used in a less developed
country study. Mainly due to the fact that it is difficult to obtain reliable database sources with a workable
time-series. On the other hand, the use of a formal employment database excludes “garage inventors”, those
who are not formally employed in companies, government organizations, research facilities or universities.
Moreover, international cooperation with Brazilian inventors is underestimated if foreign partners are not
formally employed in Brazilian firms/institutions. Neither pose a significant problem though. First, there
are few garage inventors within the network and second, the main target of this paper is to investigate how
Brazilians cooperate.
        The untreated INPI’s database relates patents to inventors in a long shape in which each line
correspond to a pair patent x inventor. With this information, it is possible to reshape the database to create
a matrix with size n x p, where n is the number of unique inventors and p is the number of unique patents.
                                        𝑇
The matrix multiplication of 𝑀𝑛𝑥𝑝 𝑀𝑝𝑥𝑛     results in a new matrix 𝑊𝑛𝑥𝑛 , where W is a matrix that describes
partnerships among the network. For each 𝑤𝑖𝑗 ∈ 𝑊, if 𝑤𝑖𝑗 is zero, then there is no formal evidence of
cooperation between I and j. Otherwise, if 𝑤𝑖𝑗 > 0, then i and j cooperated. The value of each w counts the
number of times that two nodes cooperated in the period.
        𝑊𝑛𝑥𝑛 can be rearranged into a new workable databases of three variables: (i) identification of
inventor, (ii) identification of co-inventor, and (iii) number of cooperation. To avoid double counting, the
identification order was sorted using inventor’s CPF number. Thus, we called the greater inventor’s CPF
number as inventor 1, and the lower as inventor 2 (the co-inventor). This classification does not intend to
represent any hierarchy though.
        From the RAIS database, three sets of characteristics were selected: (i) personal, (ii) occupational
and (iii) geographic. Table 1 classifies the variables chosen. Inventors with an incomplete set of data were
excluded.




4
 Lattes is a public provided platform maintained by CNPq (National Council for Scientific and Technological Development, in
English) to manage information related to research (http://lattes.cnpq.br/).
                            Table 1. Classification of data from RAIS’ database

                                          Type                     Data
                                                                  Gender
                                        Personal
                                                           Educational Level
                                                                  Salary
                                      Occupational
                                                             Business Field
                                      Geographic                    City

The variables Gender and Business Field were included as a dummy of equality. If two nodes in a tie are
both from the same gender, then the variable has a value of 1, otherwise 0. The Business Field data uses
the National Classification of Economic Activities (in Brazilian Portuguese: CNAE), based on the
International Standard Industrial Classification of Economic Activities – ISIC. If the 3-digit code were
equal between nodes, then the business dummy variable has a value of 1, otherwise 0. The City data used
Global Positioning System – GPS – coordinates to find the centroid of residence city. The variable distance
is calculated using Haversine formula of geo-distance. Educational Level and Salary uses the methodology
presented in the next section.

Hierarchical dominance coefficient decomposition
        Nagaoka (2011) points out that literature treats a patent-generating partnership as an invention with
higher commercial value. Hence, a tie – or a partnership cooperation – exists if two inventors co-participate
in a patent. The network formed is bilateral, weighted and non-hierarchical. Although non-hierarchical,
information is thought to have a common direction in the network. For example, inventors with a higher
educational level transmit knowledge to their partner who has a lower level. Therefore, the model is based
on the premise that there is information dominance – or, at least, equality – in the relationship, even if there
is no observed hierarchy.
        In a tie (i, j) information may be split into two parts: who gives and who gains. Similar to
gravitational models, the relational forces between actors define attraction forces that make connections
stronger or weaker. These forces can be described as a combination of differences and sums or means.
Assume a simple model where variable y is determined by the variable x of i and j. Then:
                                                                             1
                                   𝑦𝑖𝑗 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 |𝑥𝑖 − 𝑥𝑗 | + 𝛽2 (𝑥𝑖 + 𝑥𝑗 ).
                                                                             2
        Where the first term, multiplying 𝛽1, is the absolute difference of the observations of x in both nodes.
The second term, multiplying 𝛽2, is the mean of x in the tie. By the triangular inequality:

                                     |𝑧𝑖 | − |𝑧𝑗 | ≤ |𝑧𝑖 − 𝑧𝑗 | ≤ |𝑧𝑖 | + |𝑧𝑗 |

       If 𝑥𝑖 , 𝑥𝑗 ≥ 0 ∀𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝑉 and 𝑧𝑖 = max(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑥𝑗 )and 𝑧𝑗 = min(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑥𝑗 ), then

                0 ≤ max(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑥𝑗 ) − min(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑥𝑗 ) = |𝑧𝑖 − 𝑧𝑗 | ≤ max(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑥𝑗 ) + min(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑥𝑗 )
                               |𝑧𝑖 − 𝑧𝑗 | = max(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑥𝑗 ) − min(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑥𝑗 ) ≥ 0
       Therefore
                                                                                                    1
              𝑦𝑖𝑗 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 (max(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑥𝑗 ) − min(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑥𝑗 )) + 𝛽2 (max(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑥𝑗 ) + min(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑥𝑗 )).
                                                                                                    2
       After some manipulation
                                    𝛽2                       𝛽2
                        𝑦𝑖𝑗 = 𝛽0 + ( + 𝛽1 ) max(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑥𝑗 ) + ( − 𝛽1 ) min(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑥𝑗 )
                                    2                        2
                   𝛽                     𝛽
       Call 𝛾1 = ( 2 + 𝛽1 ) and 𝛾2 = ( 2 − 𝛽1 ). The coefficients 𝛾 are individual values for the node in
                    2                   2
the dominant position – the max – and the one in dominated position – the min. Table 2 analyzes the
influence of 𝛽 direction on the 𝛾 sign.

                            Table 2. Relationship of signs of Beta and Gamma


                             Coefficient           𝛽1 > 0             𝛽1 < 0

                                                   𝛾1 ≥ 0             𝛾1 ⋛ 0
                                𝛽2 > 0
                                                   𝛾2 ⋛ 0             𝛾2 ≥ 0
                                                   𝛾1 ⋛ 0             𝛾1 ≤ 0
                                𝛽2 < 0
                                                   𝛾2 ⋛ 0             𝛾2 ⋛ 0

       Quantitative variables such as salary and educational level will use this method. It enables not
only the analysis of variable influence on tie connectivity but also how the position of the node influences
it.

Contrafactual Building
        The probability of two inventors becoming partners is directly related to previous contacts – such
as co-working, co-studying, or having mutual friends. In a network with 7,733 inventors, it is highly
improbable that a single node has a potential partnership with other 7,732 inventors. If that were the case,
the network would have 29,895,778 potential collaborations. However, the amount of time an inventor has
to dedicate to collaboration is limited, and the time available for social meeting and other personal contacts
is limited. It is reasonable to limit the potential connections one can have. A second network with all
potential ties – where 𝑤𝑖𝑗 = 0 – will work fine as pseudo-counterfactual for the real connections.
        The literature suggests methods of network counterfactual building (see King & Zeng, 2001;
Sorenson, Rivkin & Fleming, 2006; Chandrasekhar, 2015). In common, the strategy adopted is to select
case-controlled ties randomly with 𝑤𝑖𝑗 = 0.
        Some works, such as that of Cassi and Plunket (2014), use a fixed number of case-controlled ties.
This paper adopts a fixed proportion in case-controlled ties selection based on the Erdös-Renyi Model
(Erdös & Renyi, 1959). This method has some advantages due to its good behavior (Chandresekhar, 2015),
since (i) the number of ties expecting from a node is (𝑛 − 1)𝑝, (ii) the probability that two neighbors of i ,
j and k forms a tie is p, and (iii) the probability that i, j and k are mutually connected is 𝑝3 .
        In this paper, the probability of tie connection in ERM is 0.05. Table 3 describes the resulting
network after combining ERM and de facto network. On average, 2.2% of ties were formed. The network
seems to be a case of a rare event due its low rate of formed connections. King and Zeng (2001) define rare
event as the cases in which the number of occurred events is much higher than the number of non-occurred,
and the conditional variance is much higher than the conditional mean. These cases require models that
correct the high proportion of zero values. Santos Silva and Tenreyo (2011a) suggest the Poisson Pseudo-
Maximum Likelihood (PPML) estimator.
             Table 3. Distribution of formed ties versus counterfactual ERM ties, by triennials

                                    2000-2002 2003-2005 2006-2008 2009-2011 2000-2011
             (1)   Formed Ties        2,764         1,999        4,766         5,150        14,679
             (2)   ERM Ties           68,198      109,644       209,144       266,150      653,136
           (1)+(2) Total Ties         70,962       111643       213,910       271,300      667,815
                   % Formed           3.90%        1.79%         2.23%         1.90%        2.20%

Estimation Method
        Santos Silva and Tenreyo (2011a) and Fally (2015) consider PPML estimator to be consistent to
treat rare event problem, Cameron and Trivedi (2013) argues that estimators based on a negative binomial
distribution are enough. This paper does not intend to enter the debate of what estimator is desirable in a
rare event case, thus both PPML and Negative Binomial estimators are used. The PPML estimator is based
on the Poisson regression with a density distribution function (Cameron & Trivedi, 2013)
                                                          𝑦
                                                  𝑒 −𝜇 𝜇𝑖 𝑖
                                     𝑓(𝑦𝑖 |𝑥𝑖 ) =           , 𝑦𝑖 = 0,1,2, …
                                                     𝑦𝑖 !
        On the other hand, PPML estimators use an interaction mechanism based on the Generalized Linear
Model, which can lead to convergence issues (Santos Silva & Tenreyo, 2006, 2011a). Consequently, Santos
Silva and Tenreyo (2010, 2011b) suggest using subsamples of the issued variable. In a network estimation
the use of subsamples can exclude important nodes and ties, however. Therefore, we treat any convergence
issue excluding the entire variable from the model.

Empirical Model
        The proposed model aims to find variables that explain connections in Brazilian inventor networks
by combining network and individual characteristics. The results will help to understand how inventors’
gain perception works in a situation in which there are no explicit hierarchies. We divide variables into four
types: (i) absolute difference, (ii) mean value, (iii) control dummies, (iv) linear. The first two types describe
the implicit hierarchy of knowledge flowing within the tie. The third type is an explicit equality variable
that assumes the value of 1 if the two nodes of a tie have the same value, and 0 otherwise. The fourth type
is used to measure the distance between the nodes. The dependent variable is the number of observed
connections. We describe independent variables in Table 4.
                      Table 4. Independent variables, expected signs and description

                                Expected
              Variable                                            Description
                                  Sign
                                            Physical distance between two inventors, in
        Distance                    -
                                            kilometers, using the centroid of the residence city.
                                            Absolute difference of proximity centrality between
        Centrality                          the inventors. The proximity centrality of a tie in a
                                    -
        Difference                          network measures how easily a node can be accessed
                                            due to its connections
        Educational Level                   Absolute difference of educational level observed
                                    -
        Difference                          between the inventors.
                                            Absolute salary difference observed among the
        Wage Difference             -       inventors measured in the number of Brazilian
                                            National Minimum Wages.
        Educational Level                   Average of educational level of the nodes within the
                                    +
        Average                             tie.
                                            Average salary of the nodes within the tie measured
        Wage Average                +
                                            in Brazilian National Minimum Wage.
        Same Gender                 +       Tie is formed between inventors of the same gender.
        Same City                   +       Both inventors live in the same city.
                                            Both inventors work in companies in the same
        Same Business               +
                                            business field.
        Connection
                                            Tie is formed between academic inventor
        between University          ?
                                            (university) and a company inventor.
        and Company
                                            Dummies to indicate triennial of connection: T1, T2
        Triennials                  ?
                                            or T3. T4 is time-control variable.

ESTIMATION AND RESULTS
         We show results of estimation in Table 5 by the model used in columns, PPML or BNMR. There
are two estimated models for each, one including triennial dummies. Overall, the results of all the models
are very similar in sign, magnitude and significance.
         The coefficient of geographic distance between the nodes is negative and significant, as expected.
This means that two close nodes are more likely to connect than two distant ones. Literature calls this
phenomenon “spatial decay” and its presence and effects are well documented in Jaffe (1989), Audretsch
and Feldman (1996) and Henderson (2007). In particular, Gonçalves and Almeida (2007) present evidence
of spatial decay in the distribution of patents in Brazil. Likewise, Cassi and Plunket (2015) show that
geographical distance matters in tie formation, although it is more relevant for new connections.
         The variable same city has a positive coefficient, evidence of agglomeration of social structures
within boundaries. Saxenian (1994) and Granovetter (1985) identify an important feature in social clusters
in the development of creative regions. In Brazil the network is clustered in the central-southeast-south
polygon, while peripheral regions of the North and Northeast (the poorest and least productive states) have
little integration with the main network.
         The variable proximity centrality difference has a negative and significant coefficient. If two
inventors are similar in proximity centrality – or have similar ease in connecting – the tie connectivity is
higher than the one formed between nodes with a great centrality gap. In perception terms, a node can see
as the popularity of a potential partner as an entry point to new partnership. On the other hand, inventors
with high centrality do not have many incentives to connect to nodes with much lower centrality.
Consequently, inventors seek partners with similar popularity to access new potential partners. This
interpretation is close to Cassi and Plunket’s (2015) “number of partners in common” variable for France,
and Crescenzi, Nathan and Rodríguez-Pose’s (2016) “social proximity” variable for the United Kingdom.
                                  Table 5.Results of PPML and BNMR estimators

                 Variables           BNRM            PPML             BNMR¹             PPML¹
                 Geographical        -0.0009***      -0.0009***       -0.000919***      -0.0009***
                 Distance            (2.97e-05)      (4.80e-05)       (2.97e-05)        (4.77e-05)
                 (D) Centrality      -2.194***       -2.195***        -2.225***         -2.215***
                                     (0.0415)        (0.0579)         (0.0424)          (0.0603)
                 (D) Education       -0.143***       -0.140***        -0.138***         -0.137***
                                     (0.00506)       (0.0066)         (0.00512)         (0.0064)
                 (D) Salary          -0.0118***      -0.0119***       -0.0130***        -0.0133***
                                     (0.000795)      (0.0012)         (0.000812)        (0.0012)
                 (A) Salary          -0.0087***      -0.0079**        -0.00655***       -0.00531
                                     (0.000809)      (0.00399)        (0.000861)        (0.0041)
                 (A) Education       0.0232***       0.0195**         0.0267***         0.0192**
                                     (0.0058)        (0.00774)        (0.00610)         (0.0086)
                 SameGender          0.199***        0.168***         0.181***          0.149***
                                     (0.0162)        (0.0172)         (0.0164)          (0.0172)
                 Same City           2.263***        2.255***         2.287***          2.275***
                                     (0.0230)        (0.0289)         (0.0230)          (0.0287)
                 Same Business       1.601***        1.607***         1.603***          1.606***
                                     (0.0192)        (0.0258)         (0.0192)          (0.0252)
                 University-
                 Company             0.479***        0.484***         0.513***          0.521***
                                     (0.0185)        (0.0209)         (0.0188)          (0.0218)
                 Constant            -4.394***       -4.334***        -4.527***         -4.386***
                                     (0.0995)        (0.114)          (0.106)           (0.117)
                 Observations        667.815         667.815          667.815           667.815
                 𝑅2                                  0.262                              0.264

       (1) Controlled by 3-year-period dummies. Results omitted.

       Note: (D) denotes “Difference” treatment, and (A) denotes “Average” treatment.

        The wage and educational level variables are separated in two terms: absolute difference and tie
average. For the variable wage, both difference and average is negative and significant. The sign for average
is different from that expected. Brazilian workers with higher salaries occupy better hierarchical positions.
These are typically managers and are less inventive. Therefore, there is less propensity for inventors to
connect with such people. On the other hand, educational level coefficients have expected signs, negative
for difference and positive for average. Inventors tend to connect to others with a similar educational level,
and there is a connectivity gain if the combined educational level is high. This result confirms for Brazil
what Giuri and Mariani (2013) verified in EU.
         Table 6 shows the calculated dominance coefficient. Both educational level and salary coefficients
show a negative impact for the dominant position. This indicates that nodes with higher values on these
attributes perceive losses from connecting to others with lower values. On the other hand, a dominated
position has a positive impact on education and salary. We can understand that nodes with lower levels
perceive higher gains when connecting with more educated and richer nodes. This result shows that an
inventor with lower levels of education and salary – the dominated position – is more likely to connect with
individuals of a higher status. From the gains perception viewpoint, inventors seek partners with higher
status, since the return on the partnership is also higher. On the other hand, inventors with a higher status
have a negative return when connecting with lower status inventors. The combination of these effects shows
that even though inventors seek potential partners of a higher status, the connection is most likely to occur
between inventors with similar status.
   Table 6 – Hierarchical Dominance Coefficient Decomposition of the Negative Binomial Regression
                                           Model Results

                                          𝛽>0                           𝛽<0
                                                                 𝛾1 𝐵𝑁𝑀𝑅 = −0.1314
                                                                 𝛾1 𝑃𝑃𝑀𝐿 = −0.1303
                    𝛼>0                     -
                                                                  𝛾2 𝐵𝑁𝑀𝑅 = 0.1546
                                                                 𝛾2 𝑃𝑃𝑀𝐿 = 0.14975
                                                                 𝜔1 𝐵𝑁𝑀𝑅 = −0.0162
                                                                 𝜔1 𝑃𝑃𝑀𝐿 = −0.0159
                    𝛼<0                     -
                                                                 𝜔2 𝐵𝑁𝑀𝑅 = 0.0118
                                                                 𝜔2 𝑃𝑃𝑀𝐿 = −0.0119

        In general, these results show that there is evidence of gender, educational and social status intra-
group proximities in the Brazilian network. In the international literature, our results lead to the same
conclusions as Whittington and Smith-Doerr (2008) and Jung and Ejermo (2007) for gender. On
educational and wage levels, our results are a novelty to the empirical research on the theory of proximities.
       Moreover, the Brazilian network follows the historical development of Brazilian regions, rich and
high-density coastal cities in the southeast, and a poor and low-density area in central and northern areas.
Adding to this, the fact that Brazil covers an area of 8.5 million km², the clustering of highly qualified
workers in a small area reinforces the role of geographical proximity. The geographical distribution of the
collaboration network reinforces the geographical agglomeration pattern of patents in Brazil, as identified
by Gonçalves and Almeida (2007) and Oliveira, Gonçalves and Almeida (2016).

6. CONCLUSIONS
         This paper investigates the formation of perceptions within the Brazilian inventor network over the
first decade of the 21st century. We identify the motivation factors that make ties stronger or weaker. We
can divide our contributions as follows: (a) the use of new database with personal data, (b) the proposition
of a dominance coefficient as a perception measurement, (c) the case study of the proximity theory applied
to an emerging country, (d) the model result itself.
         First, we merged two datasets to create a new database: Brazilian Patent applications at the National
Institution of Intellectual Property (INPI) and the workers registries from the Ministry of Labor and
Employment of Brazil. The data merging allows us to link inventors and their personal data, such as
educational level, salary and address.
         Second, we developed a coefficient to extract implicit hierarchy from ties which knowledge flows
both ways between nodes. Since this technique attempts to simulate a node’s weight in the link based on
its relative status, we called it dominance hierarchy coefficient. We broke it down into (a) average and (b)
difference coefficients, which can be manipulated to indicate the role of each node in the tie: the dominant
node and the dominated node. We used these two roles as a perception proxy to illustrate how inventors
form their perception system based on their role. We believe this coefficient is useful to deal with networks
without explicit hierarchies and future empirical works would benefit from it.
         Third, our paper is an addition to the scarce literature on networks applied to Brazil. Moreover,
while many papers explore innovation networks in developed countries, our work is a contribution to the
understanding of the innovation cooperation in an emerging country, where intellectual property institutions
are still immature.
         Finally, we summarize the results below:
      Physical distance and border constraints matter: Individuals have a higher propensity to connect
         with close partners. This results is similar to the geographic agglomeration pattern of patents in
       Brazil (Gonçalves and Almeida, 2007). Moreover, compared to international findings, this result is
       similar to what Morescalchi et al (2015) and Scherngell and Barber (2008) found within European
       borders.
      Network positioning is important: Central nodes have a higher probability of connecting with
       other central nodes. A highly connected inventor tends to form groups with other highly connected
       inventors more easily than with an occasional one. This result demonstrates that in Brazil the social
       proximity of Torres and Gilly (1999) is similar to what Cassi and Plunket (2015) found in France.
      There is gender inequality in the network: The gender of inventors matters for tie formation and
       inventor grouping, analogous to what Jung and Ejermo (2007) and Whittington and Smith-Doerr
       (2008) found. In perception perspective, male inventors (the majority) connect to other male
       inventors expecting higher gains from these links.
      Inventors seek partners with better levels of education and wealth, although it is not always
       possible: Inventors form their perception based on what they expect from partnership. Thus, if they
       believe that better levels of education and wealth is a good proxy for better returns, they will look
       for partners with these characteristics. Nonetheless, they also avoid partners of a much lower status
       than their own, which leads links forming between similar inventors.

        In conclusion, there are many paths to explore in the study of networks, especially in Brazil and
other emerging countries. Our paper is, as far as we know, a first attempt to understand how inventors form
their connections based on their perceptions in Brazil. Moreover, the use of personal information is an
under-explored field, which requires some efforts to access and disclose data.
REFERENCES
Adams, J.D., Black, G.C., Clemmons, J.R., Stephan, P.E., 2005. Scientific teams and institutional
collaborations: Evidence from US universities, 1981--1999. Res. Policy 34, 259–285.
Agrawal, A., Kapur, D., McHale, J., 2008. How do spatial and social proximity influence knowledge flows?
Evidence from patent data. J. Urban Econ. 64, 258–269.
Albuquerque, E. da M., 2000. Domestic patents and developing countries: arguments for their study and
data from Brazil (1980--1995). Res. Policy 29, 1047–1060.
Albuquerque, E. da M., 1996. Sistema nacional de inovação no Brasil: uma análise introdutória a partir de
dados disponíveis sobre a ciência e a tecnologia. Rev. Econ. Política 16, 56–72.
Audretsch, D.B., Feldman, M.P., 1996. R&D spillovers and the geography of innovation and production.
Am. Econ. Rev. 86, 630–640.
Balconi, M., Breschi, S., Lissoni, F., 2004. Networks of inventors and the role of academia: an exploration
of Italian patent data. Res. Policy 33, 127–145.
Boschma, R., 2005. Proximity and innovation: a critical assessment. Reg. Stud. 39, 61–74.
Breschi, S., Lissoni, F., 2005. “Cross-Firm” Inventors and Social Networks: Localized Knowledge
Spillovers Revisited. Ann. Econ. Stat. 189–209.
Cassi, L., Plunket, A., 2015. Research collaboration in co-inventor networks: combining closure, bridging
and proximities. Reg. Stud. 49, 936–954.
Cassi, L., Plunket, A., 2014. Proximity, network formation and inventive performance: in search of the
proximity paradox. Ann. Reg. Sci. 53, 395–422.
Castells, M., 1996. The network society. Oxford: Blackwell.
Chandrasekhar, A., 2015. Econometrics of network formation, in: The Oxford Handbook of the Economics
of Networks. pp. 303–357.
Crescenzi, R., Nathan, M., Rodríiguez-Pose, A., 2016. Do inventors talk to strangers? On proximity and
collaborative knowledge creation. Res. Policy 45, 177–194.
Dachs, B., Ebersberger, B., Lööf, H., 2008. The innovative performance of foreign-owned enterprises in
small open economies. J. Technol. Transf. 33, 393–406.
De Faria, P., Lima, F., Santos, R., 2010. Cooperation in innovation activities: The importance of partners.
Res. Policy 39, 1082–1092.
Ejermo, O., Karlsson, C., 2006. Interregional inventor networks as studied by patent coinventorships. Res.
Policy 35, 412–430.
Erdös, P., Rényi, A., 1959. On random graphs, I. Publ. Math. 6, 290–297.
Fally, T., 2015. Structural gravity and fixed effects. J. Int. Econ. 97, 76–85.
Fitjar, R.D., Rodríguez-Pose, A., 2016. Nothing is in the air. Growth Change.
Gaughan, M., Bozeman, B., 2016. Using the prisms of gender and rank to interpret research collaboration
power dynamics. Soc. Stud. Sci. 46, 536–558.
Giuri, P., Mariani, M., 2013. When distance disappears: Inventors, education, and the locus of knowledge
spillovers. Rev. Econ. Stat. 95, 449–463.
Gonçalves, E., 2007. O padrão espacial da atividade inovadora brasileira: uma análise exploratória.
EstudosEconômicos (São Paulo) 37, 405–433.
Goncalves, E., Almeida, E., 2009. Innovation and spatial knowledge spillovers: evidence from Brazilian
patent data. Reg. Stud. 43, 513–528.
Granovetter, M., 1985. Economic action and social structure: The problem of embeddedness. Am. J. Sociol.
91, 481–510.
Henderson, J.V., 2007. Understanding knowledge spillovers. Reg. Sci. Urban Econ. 37, 497–508.
Hicks, D.M., Katz, J.S., 1996. Where is science going? Sci. Technol. Hum. Values 21, 379–406.
Jaffe, A.B., 1989. Real effects of academic research. Am. Econ. Rev. 957–970.
Jung, T., Ejermo, O., 2014. Demographic patterns and trends in patenting: Gender, age, and education of
inventors. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change 86, 110–124.
Kahneman, D., 2002. Maps of bounded rationality: A perspective on intuitive judgment and choice. Nobel
Prize Lect. 8, 351–401.
King, G., Zeng, L., 2001. Logistic regression in rare events data. Polit. Anal. 137–163.
Lemos, M.B., Campos, B., Biazi, E., Santos, F., 2006. Capacitação Tecnológica e CatchingUp: o caso das
regiões metropolitanas emergentes brasileiras. Rev. Econ. Política 26, 95–118.
Maggioni, M.A., Nosvelli, M., Uberti, T.E., 2007. Space versus networks in the geography of innovation:
A European analysis. Pap. Reg. Sci. 86, 471–493.
Marshall, A., 1890. Principle of Economics, 8 th. Ed. 1920).
Montobbio, F., Sterzi, V., 2013. The globalization of technology in emerging markets: a gravity model on
the determinants of international patent collaborations. World Dev. 44, 281–299.
Morescalchi, A., Pammolli, F., Penner, O., Petersen, A.M., Riccaboni, M., 2015. The evolution of networks
of innovators within and across borders: Evidence from patent data. Res. Policy 44, 651–668.
Nagaoka, S., Motohashi, K., Goto, A., 2010. Patent statistics as an innovation indicator. Handb. Econ.
Innov. 2, 1083–1127.
Nagaoka, S., Owan, H., 2011. Exploring the Sources of Firm-level Scale Economies in R&D:
Complementary assets, internal and external knowledge inflows, and inventor team size.
Ozman, M., 2009. Inter-firm networks and innovation: a survey of literature. Econ. Innov. New Technol.
18, 39–67.
Paier, M., Scherngell, T., 2011. Determinants of collaboration in European R&D networks: empirical
evidence from a discrete choice model. Ind. Innov. 18, 89–104.
Picci, L., 2010. The internationalization of inventive activity: A gravity model using patent data. Res. Policy
39, 1070–1081.
Powell, W.W., Giannella, E., 2010. Collective invention and inventor networks. Handb. Econ. Innov. 1,
575–605.
Saxenian, A., 1994. Regional networks: industrial adaptation in Silicon Valley and route 128.
Scherngell, T., Barber, M.J., 2009. Spatial interaction modelling of cross-region R&D collaborations:
empirical evidence from the 5th EU framework programme. Pap. Reg. Sci. 88, 531–546.
Shaw, A.T., Gilly, J.-P., 2000. On the analytical dimension of proximity dynamics. Reg. Stud. 34, 169–
180.
Sidone, O.J.G., Haddad, E.A., Mena-Chalco, J.P., 2016. A ciência nas regiões brasileiras: evolução da
produção e das redes de colaboração científica. Transinformação 28.
Sidone, O.J.G., Haddad, E.A., Mena-Chalco, J.P., 2016. Scholarly publication and collaboration in Brazil:
The role of geography. J. Assoc. Inf. Sci. Technol.
Silva, J.M.C.S., Tenreyro, S., 2006. The log of gravity. Rev. Econ. Stat. 88, 641–658.
Silva, J.M.C.S., Tenreyro, S., 2010. On the existence of the maximum likelihood estimates in Poisson
regression. Econ. Lett. 107, 310–312.
Silva, J.M.C.S., Tenreyro, S., 2011. Further simulation evidence on the performance of the Poisson pseudo-
maximum likelihood estimator. Econ. Lett. 112, 220–222.
Silva, J., Tenreyro, S., 2011. Poisson: some convergence issues. Stata J. 11, 207–212.
Simões, R., Baessa, A., Campolina, B., Silva, L., 2002. A distribuição espacial da produção científica e
tecnológica brasileira: uma descrição de estatísticas de produção local de patentes e artigos científicos. Rev.
Bras. Inovação 1, 225–251.
Sorenson, O., Rivkin, J.W., Fleming, L., 2006. Complexity, networks and knowledge flow. Res. Policy 35,
994–1017.
TerWal, A.L.J., Boschma, R.A., 2009. Applying social network analysis in economic geography: framing
some key analytic issues. Ann. Reg. Sci. 43, 739–756.
Whittington, K.B., Smith-Doerr, L., 2008. Women inventors in context: Disparities in patenting across
academia and industry. Gend. Soc. 22, 194–218.
Wuchty, S., Jones, B.F., Uzzi, B., 2007. The increasing dominance of teams in production of knowledge.
Science (80-. ). 316, 1036–1039.
