       Deforestation and Infant Health: Evidence from an Environmental Conservation Policy in Brazil

                                                                              Bladimir Carrillo Bermúdez1
                                                                            Danyelle Karine Santos Branco2
                                                                                     Juan C. Trujillo Lora3
                                                                                  João Eustáquio de Lima4


Abstract

This study provides evidence of a negative externality of deforestation in infant health. As identification
strategy, we exploit the introduction of a change in the forest policy which caused a marked reduction in
deforestation by municipalities in the Amazon region of Brazil. We show that this policy of forest reduced
the rates of preterm birth and low birth weight in those municipalities that were potentially exposed to the
intervention. Importantly, our results are insensitive to a variety of robustness exercises.


Key words: Infant Health; Environmental Quality; Deforestation; Brazil

Resumo

Este estudo fornece evidências significativas de uma externalidade negativa do desmatamento na saúde das
crianças. Como estratégia de identificação, explora-se a introdução de uma política de conservação da
floresta que causou uma acentuada redução no desmatamento nos municípios da Região Amazônica no
Brasil. O trabalho mostra que essa política de conservação de florestas reduziu as taxas de prematuridade e
baixo peso ao nascer nos municípios que foram potencialmente expostos à intervenção. Mais importante, os
resultados encontrados são insensíveis a uma variedade de exercícios de robustez.

Palavras-chave: Saúde Infantil; Qualidade Ambiental; Desmatamento; Brasil

Área ANPEC: Economia Agrícola e do Meio Ambiente

Classificação JEL: I12, K32, Q51




1
  Universidade Federal de Viçosa. Email: bladimir.bermudez@ufv.br
2
  Universidade Federal de Viçosa. Email: danyelle.branco@ufv.br
3
  Universidad del Atlántico. Email: juantrujillo@mail.uniatlantico.edu.co
4
  Universidade Federal de Viçosa. Email: jelima@ufv.br
              1.    Introduction

        There is a growing consensus that deforestation has a significant impact on the environment. Among
these, one of the most important is its contribution to emissions of greenhouse gases. Globally, deforestation
accounts for about 17% of total emissions of such gases (IPCC, 2014). Other changes in the environment are
related to the propagation of vectors, such as malaria-inducing ones (VITTOR, 2009). These changes in the
environment have potential health externalities. Previous studies have consistently shown that the emission
of particles implies worse mortality outcomes (CONEUS; SPIESS, 2012; CURRIE et al., 2009), while in
some countries diseases such as malaria remain a major cause of death5. For all this, the control of illegal
deforestation of forests has been of general interest. Thus, the design of an optimal forest policy requires an
estimation of the benefits of reducing the rate of deforestation. Previous studies have focused on the global
effects of deforestation due to concerns about global warming but have typically ignored "local" effects.

        In this study, we investigated the effects of deforestation on health considering the introduction of a
new forest policy that caused a marked variation in deforestation within the Amazon region of Brazil.
Assunção, Gandour and Rocha (2011) show that the launch of the Plano de Ação para a Prevenção e
Controle do Desmatamento na Amazônia Legal (PPCDAM) drastically reduced deforestation rates. We
investigated the effect of PPCDAM on birth outcomes of children born in municipalities that were potentially
exposed to the intervention.

       Understanding the extent to which deforestation affect infant health is important for several reasons.
First, there is a growing consensus that fetal adverse shocks have negative economic consequences in the
long run. Indeed, previous studies have shown that better health outcomes at birth are associated with greater
human capital accumulation (ALMOND; CURRIE 2011; ALMOND, 2006; CASE et al., 2002, 2005; Currie,
2011a)6.This is especially important given that health shocks during childhood are often transmitted from
generation to generation (CURRIE, 2011a). Hence, understanding how deforestation affects birth outcomes
could impact the design of forest policies. Second, studying newborns has several methodological advantages
to understanding the deforestation-health link. One is that the time of exposure to the environmental quality
of the newborn is easier to identify than the adult population. As is argued in Currie (2011b):
                                     “The study of newborns overcomes several difficulties in making the
                                     connection between pollution and health because, unlike adult diseases that
                                     may reflect pollution exposure that occurred many years ago, the link between
                                     cause and effect is immediate” (CURRIE 2011b, p.p. 66).

      Third, the long-term effects of health shocks in early life may be larger in developing countries due to
limited ability to offset these shocks (CURRIE; VOGL, 2013).Therefore, to extrapolate estimates from
developed countries to developing economies could lead to less accurate policy designs.

       The relationship between environmental quality and health is the subject of a voluminous empirical
literature. Nevertheless, we are unaware of any previous study that raised a link between deforestation and
child health. Remarkably, the literature on the influence of the environment on health has focused on the
effects of particulate pollutant emission (CHAY; GREENSTONE, 2003; CONEUS; SPIESS, 2012;



5
    http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11425172
6
    A detailed summary of this literature is presented in Almond and Currie (2011) and Currie and Vogl (2013).
CURRIE; NEIDELL, 2005; CURRIE et al., 2009). The evidence from these studies, however, is insufficient
to inform the effects of deforestation because there are multiple mechanisms through which the deterioration
of the forest area could affect health. Several epidemiological studies provide some evidence of such
mechanisms. Vittor et al. (2006) found that the incidence of mosquito bites that induce malaria is
substantially higher in deforested areas. Meanwhile, Chaves et al. (2008) show that the incidence of Lymey’s
pathology (leishmaniasis) is also associated with deforestation. In addition, an association between
deforestation and the incidence of SARS, Ebola and other bat viruses has been found (LEROY et al., 2005;
LOOI; CHUA, 2007; FIELD, 2009). Failure to observe these mechanisms could result in an underestimation
of the effects of deforestation on health.
       Estimating the effect of deforestation on health outcomes is not a simple task, however. A simple
Ordinary least squares (OLS) regression of a health outcome on deforestation does not provide causality
because deforestation in this regression may be endogenous. Individuals with higher incomes and strong
preferences for a "good" environment can migrate to less deforested areas. This would overestimate the true
effect of deforestation. Alternatively, if the deforested areas are replaced with infrastructure (such as roads,
schools, etc.) so that capitalize on higher prices of housing, then the high-income families who value these
improvements will choose to be localized in areas that have been most deforested. This would bias to zero
the true effect deforestation. Therefore, simple correlations are unlikely to provide convincing evidence.

       Our identification strategy exploits a change in a policy of environmental conservation that caused a
large reduction in deforestation rates. In particular, we exploit the differential changes in deforestation
attributable to geographic variation of PPCDAM effects within a short window of time. The PPCDAM was
introduced in 2004 and emphasized those municipalities with critical levels of deforestation. Evidence
suggests that this policy substantially reduced deforestation in those municipalities that had critical levels of
deforestation in 2004, while those with low levels of deforestation this policy had little or no effect
(ASSUNÇÃO; GANDOUR; ROCHA, 2011). This suggests that the latter group of municipalities may be a
useful control group. Thus, our analysis compares the infant health outcomes before and after the
intervention of municipalities with large reductions in the rate of deforestation with those who had little or no
reduction in deforestation.

      Brazil provides a compelling setting to explore the effects of deforestation for several reasons. First, the
country has the world's largest rainforest, with an extension that is equivalent to nearly half the total area of
Europe. Therefore, the consequences of deforesting the Amazon rainforests of Brazil are of global concern.
Second, Brazil is an emerging country that has experienced rapid economic growth in recent years. This
represents significant challenges since Brazil is in the development stage in where the deterioration of the
environmental quality is increasing with economic development (GROSSMAN, 1995). Third, deforestation
contributes about 50% of emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) in Brazil (MINISTÉRIO DA CIÊNCIA E
TECONOLOGIA, 2010), suggesting that the emission of this gas could be a particularly important
mechanism in deforestation-health link. Finally, Brazil has detailed information about deforestation rates at
the municipal level data since 2000, allowing us to study the effects of deforestation with a large panel data.

      There are several threats that our empirical approach is exposed. Among them, one of the most
important is the introduction of new social programs that coincide with the adoption of PPCDAM. If the
targeting of other social programs is correlated with the PPCDAM then we could underestimate or
exaggerate the effects of deforestation on child health outcomes. The evidence we present below suggests
that the introduction of such programs have little effect on our estimates of the effect of PPCDAM. In the
section 4 we discuss the major threats and how we face them.
      We find suggestive evidence that deforestation has a robust effect on infant health. Our preferred
specifications suggest that PPCDAm reduced the incidence of extreme preterm birth in 0.45% and very low
birth-weight in 0.38%. Importantly, these findings are insensitive to a variety of robustness exercises. For
example, we found no evidence that changes in other potentially confounding factors (such as the
characteristics of mothers) explain the improvements in child health.

      The next section of this article presents a brief review of the channels through which deforestation may
affect children's health. Section 3 describes the PPCDAM. Section 4 presents the empirical strategy we use to
identify the effect of PPCDAM on birth outcomes. Section 5 describes the data used. The section 6 shows the
results. Section 7 presents some robustness checks. Finally, the last section concludes.


         2.    Deforestation-Infant-health linkages

       We can draw from existing literature insights to identify the main mechanisms underlying the effects of
deforestation on infant health. Through the process of logging, deforestation alters important elements of the
ecosystem such as aquatic conditions and the microclimate. It has been demonstrated that deforestation
reduces rainfall levels and increases the temperature levels (IPCC, 2014; KURUKULASURIYA;
ROSENTHAL, 2013; SERÔA DA MOTTA, 2011; DORE, 2005; NOBRE; ASSAD, 2005). The effect on the
rainfall occurs because deforestation reduces the natural recycling cycle through which vegetation absorbs
moisture from the ground and sends it to the atmosphere, where as rain it returns. In turn, climate warming
occurs through the connection between deforestation and greenhouse gases. The forest plays an important
role in the absorption of such gases. By reducing the size of forests an increased pollution is emitted into the
atmosphere and therefore the greater the speed of global warming. These changes in climate may have
implications for children's health. Both water scarcity and a higher climate warming may affect the
household’s demand for health inputs through reductions in agricultural production, which means less
income and higher food prices. The direct consequence of this is fetal exposure to poor intake of vitamins
and iron, and a decreased ability of the mother to invest in prenatal care (WORLD HEALTH
ORGANIZATION, 2012; TRUJILLO; CARRILLO; IGLESIAS, 2013). If reduction in the amount of water
means less water quality, then it would increase the risk of diarrhea and respiratory infections (WORLD
HEALTH ORGANIZATION, 2012).

        Importantly, the effect of deforestation on child health through income is theoretically ambiguous. On
the one hand, the restrictive policies of deforestation can contribute to improving agricultural productivity
through reductions in fluctuations in rainfall and temperature. Moreover, such policies can become an
impediment for farmers to expand their production levels. At least in the short term these expansion
constraints to farmers could result in less income for households that depend on this activity. Therefore, the
net effect of the restrictive policies of deforestation depend in part on the magnitude of these two impacts on
production.

        In addition, changes in the ecosystem also influence the survival of vectors that induce malaria.
Indeed, the survival of mosquitoes is mainly determined by the temperature and humidity. Empirically, the
relationship between deforestation and malaria risk has been documented by previous studies. Vittor et al.
(2006) shows that the risk of malaria is 278 times higher in deforested areas in the Amazon region of Peru.
For Brazil, Olson et al. (2010) shows that 48% of the increase in the incidence of malaria is explained by the
increase of deforestation between 1997 and 2000. This transmission channel of deforestation is important in
view of the mortality rates due to malaria. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), in 2010,
660,000 people died across the globe because of this condition.
       There are other diseases that are also associated with climate change. Examples of these diseases are:
dengue, the Lymey’s pathology (leishmaniasis), SARS, Ebola, and those induced by the black fly and other
viruses of bats (WLSON et al., 2002; LEROY et al., 2005; LOOI; CHUA, 2007; CHAVES et al., 2008;
FIELD, 2009; MORIN; COMRIE; ERNST, 2014). The transmission of these infectious diseases not only
occurs because deforestation provides the optimal environment for the breeding of carrier insects but also
through increased human contact with animals (WOLFE et al., 2005; WOLFE et al., 2007).The incidence of
these diseases, however, varies across the globe. For example, the incidence of SARS and Ebola is specific in
countries of Asia and Africa. Thus, this channel is likely to play a minor role in Brazil. By contrast, dengue is
expected to be a more important explanatory factor for this country.

        The interaction of these factors could exacerbate the effect of deforestation on birth outcomes. This
will depend on the rate at which deforestation affects climate change and the magnitude of the impact of
climate changes on the outcome at birth. In this regard, there is a set of studies in the literature that attempts
to estimate the effects of exposure to extreme climates in the uterus. Deschênes, Greenstone, and Guryan
(2009) find that exposure to extreme heat during pregnancy reduces birth weight. They then predict that the
end of the XXI century global climate change would reduce by 0.22% the birth-weight of white children and
0.36% that of African-American children. In addition, they find that the probability of low birth weight7will
increase by about 5.9%. Lawlor, Leon, and George (2005) find heterogeneous effects by period of gestation.
They find that birth weight has a negative relationship with temperature exposure in the first trimester of
pregnancy, whereas exposure in the third quarter the relationship found is positive. All this evidence of the
effects of climate change, however, is concentrated to developed countries. Many of the channels that can
operate in developing countries are likely to have little or no effect in developed countries. For example,
malaria is virtually non-existent in those developed economies as well as the incidence of dengue. Moreover,
this is compounded by the fact that higher-income families are better able to compensate for an adverse
impact on the environment.

        While the evidence on the link between temperature and birth-outcomes for developing countries is
smaller, there is a large literature exploring the link between water scarcity and child health (KIM, 2010;
KUDAMATSU et al., 2010; AGUILAR; VICARELLI, 2011; SKOUFUAS et al., 2011; BURGESS et al.,
2011; ROCHA; SOARES, 2012). The results of Kudamatsu et al. (2010) for a set of African countries
indicate that fluctuations in precipitation levels have a negative impact on child mortality and malnutrition.
For Mexico, Aguilar and Vicarelli (2011) find that the Fenómeno del Niño affects the height and weight of
infants. The authors present some evidence to suggest that the fall in income from agriculture explains their
results. Finally, Rocha and Soares (2012) investigate the effect of fluctuations in precipitation levels for the
semiarid region of Brazil. They find that negative shocks in rainfall levels imply higher rates of low birth
weight and premature births. In short, the whole body of evidence suggests that fluctuations in rainfall could
be an important mechanism through which deforestation exerts its influence on children's health.

       The greenhouse gas emissions can also affect birth outcomes independent of changes in climate. As is
well known, the forest areas have an important role in the absorption of pollutant gases. Therefore, the
deforestation reduces the natural ability of the forest to absorb such gases. Thus, further deforestation equals
more air pollution. The contribution to air pollution through deforestation is greater if the method used to
deforest is large-scale burning. According to IPCC (2014), deforestation contributes 17% of total emissions
of greenhouse gases over the world. For Brazil, which has the world's largest forest, deforestation contributes
almost half of the total CO2 emissions. This figure is similar to the total emissions from vehicles in the U.S.
(QUADRELLI; PETERSON, 2007; CERRI et al. 2009). Given the immense territorial dimension of Brazil,

7
    Low birth weight is defined as less than 2500 grams.
the relative contribution of deforestation to greenhouse gas emissions should be significantly higher in the
Amazon region of Brazil.
        Air pollution can affect children's health in various ways. To the extent that a pregnant woman is
exposed to polluted air, the development of the fetus may be adversely affected. This is due to toxins carried
in the blood of the mother that can be transmitted to the uterus, which increases the risk of health and
developmental problems. The main health risks caused by fetal exposure to air pollution are the negative
effects on birth weight and gestation period. Among the most recent studies on the subject, which also found
negative effects on other child health indicators, are Beatty and Shimshack (2011) Knittel, Miller, and
Sanders (2011), and Currie (2011).

      While the above evidence suggests that deforestation may be an environmental factor that contributes
to worse birth outcomes, we are unable to find any studies that have proposed a link between these variables.
Our study therefore contributes to exploring the effects of deforestation on birth weight and the length of the
gestation period.

           3.    Policy Context - PPCDAm

       Perhaps one of the places in the world that best represents the consequences of deforestation is Brazil.
Indeed, this country is among the six countries that account for 60% of global deforestation (FAO, 2010).8 A
retrospective analysis of deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon region proves to be useful. It is estimated that
by 1980 deforestation reached about 300 thousand square kilometers, which represents 6% of its total area.
However, this pace became more intense during the first years of the 2000s. According to Instituto Nacional
de Pesquisas Espaciais (INPE) figures, approximately 19,000 square kilometers of forest per year were lost
on average between 1996 and 2005. Given this scenario, Brazilian conservation policies for prevention and
control of deforestation in the Amazon had to undergo an intensive review. Indeed, the Brazilian government
to take stringent measures to curb deforestation. Therefore, in 2004, the government adopted the Plano de
Ação para a Prevenção e Controle do Desmatamento na Amazônia Legal (PPCDAM). In the same year, the
deforestation of the Brazilian Amazon reached its peak, registering a loss of 27,000 square kilometers.

        The PPCDAM was based on a new way to combat deforestation. It integrated the whole efforts of
federal, state and municipal governments with specialized agencies and civil society. The management and
integrated action facilitated the implementation of innovative processes for monitoring, environmental
control and territorial management. The mutual collaboration between the different stakeholders enabled the
increased intensity of monitoring activities. This ability has improved significantly with the implementation
of Sistema de Detecção de Desmatamento em Tempo Real (DETER) of the INPE and the creation of Centro
de Monitoramento Ambiental (CEMAM) within the Instituto Brasileiro de Meio Ambiente e Recursos
Naturais Renováveis (IBAMA).

        The PPCDAm is structured into three main areas, namely i) land and land use planning, with special
attention given disputes over land ownership; ii) environmental monitoring and control, to improve
monitoring, licensing and inspection; and iii) promotion of sustainable production activities, including better
use of already deforested land and development of transport infrastructure and sustainable energy. The
implementation of the actions can be directed to municipalities, according to criteria considered as priorities
and critical to each municipality observed. The intention is to reduce deforestation by 80% by 2020. Until
2012, the figures indicated that this goal is not far from being achieved. In fact, in 2011, one of the lowest

8
 Nearly 12,343 square miles of forest are deforested each year in the Brazilian Amazon. This area is equivalent to almost five times
the territory of the Duchy of Luxembourg.
rates of deforestation since official data became available was recorded, yielding 78% less deforestation than
in 2004.

        Some studies in the literature have attempted to estimate the effects of PPCDAM (KATOS, 2010;
ASSUNÇÃO et al., 2011; ASSUNÇÃO et al., 2012; ASSUNÇÃO; GANDOUR; ROCHA, 2013). In
particular, Assumption et al. (2012) investigated the underlying causes of the decline in observed rates of
deforestation in the Amazon since 2004. The authors evaluated the impact of PPCDAM. The identification
strategy of these authors takes advantage of the heterogeneity in local politics to win transverse variation.
The authors' results indicate that deforestation rates have been sensitive to the prices of agricultural
production. After controlling for the effects of prices, they found that conservation policies implemented
have contributed significantly to the reduction of deforestation since mid-2000s. According to the study in
question half of avoided deforestation between 2005 and 2009 can be attributed to conservation policies
introduced in the period. The simulations suggest that the developed plans accounted for approximately
62,000 km2 of avoided deforestation. This amount represents about 52% of the total area to be deforested in
the absence of policies.

        In order to show what were the associated PPCDAM policies that contributed to the reduction of
deforestation in the Amazon, Assunção et al. (2012) and Assunção et al. (2013) evaluated the impact of some
changes in the plan, especially the command and control. Assunção et al (2012) analyzed the new policy of
providing rural credit 9 in the Amazon Biome, introduced in 2008. The authors found that about U.S. $ 2.9
billion in rural credit were not contracted between 2008 and 2011 due to the new restrictions. This reduction
prevented the deforestation of over 2,700 km2 of forest area, meaning a 15% drop in deforestation in the
period. Importantly, the impact of the resolution on the deforestation was significant only in municipalities
that have livestock production as their main economic activity. In another study, Assunção et al. (2013)
estimated that policies of command and control based on Sistema de Detecção de Desmatamento em Tempo
Real (DETER) prevented the deforestation of over 59,500 km2 of Amazon rainforest between 2007 and
2011. Should the policy had not been changed, deforestation in the region would have been 59% higher. The
analysis also revealed that agricultural production in the region was not affected by such changes.
      In summary, the evidence suggests that PPCDAM was primarily responsible for the large reduction in
deforestation observed after 2004. Nevertheless, we do not know any study that has tried to evaluate the
externalities of PPCDAM in other dimensions different to deforestation. In particular, the angle of health is
important given its direct link with the welfare. Our study contributes to the literature estimating the effects
of PPCDAM on child health. Know the extent to which the PPCDAM affects child health would contribute
to better information for cost-benefit analysis of changes in forest policy. For example, from 2012 to 2013,
there was a 370% increase in deforestation that coincides with the approval of the Forest Code of 2012. This
policy change includes among its actions the exemption from responsibility of those who directly cause
deforestation. Thus, a detailed analysis of the targets affected by deforestation is required to quantify the
costs of the adoption of this policy.


              4.    Empirical Strategy


      Our identification strategy exploits variation across Brazilian municipalities induced by the
intervention PPCDAm. We estimate the following model for each outcome variable of child health:


9
    The Resolution 3545 was responsible for the changes in granting credit and deforestation in the Amazon Biome.
                                                                                                            !
                 "                                                                                         #$%

           is the outcome variable of interest in child health for the municipality i and year t. The dummy
variable Post 2004 denotes the years after 2004. This is the intervention period that witnessed a rapid
escalation in controlling deforestation.                       is the rate of municipal deforestation of 2004.
To facilitate interpretation, we normalize this variable by standardizing it with the mean and standard
deviation. The interaction between this variable and the linear trend year capture differential trends in the
dependent variable. The inclusion of this interaction term is relevant because it is possible that the
municipalities with the highest deforestation rates in 2004 are systematically different from other
municipalities in characteristics that we do not observe. The vector includes a set of Z municipal controls.
The terms y ! represent municipality and year fixed effects. Finally, " is the idiosyncratic error term.
Standard errors are robust and clustered at municipality level. This allows us to perform statistical inference
robust to heterocedasticity and autocorrelation.

        The coefficient of interest is β, which measures the impact of deforestation policy. Our identification
strategy lies on pre-existing variation in deforestation due to geographical factors or unique natural
conditions, through the Brazilian Amazon. Therefore, one would expect that municipalities with high
deforestation rates have benefited most. This is the same strategy behind Assunção, Gandour and Rocha
(2011). Therefore, if deforestation has negative effects on children's health, then one would expect that child
health indicators have improved more in those municipalities that benefited most from the intervention.

        There are several potential threats to estimate (1), however. The first one is that the introduction of
PPCDAM coincides with the launch of the Bolsa Familia program. If the focus of this social program is
correlated with that of PPCDAM, then ignoring this could lead to a biased estimate of the parameter of
interest. We face this threat by including the interaction between the variable Post2004 and the municipality
GDP of 2004. We use the municipality GDP of 2004 as a proxy for the Bolsa Familia program targeting.
This variable is a good proxy because it is plausible that the government has placed emphasis on those
municipalities that had higher levels of poverty in 2004. Therefore, the inclusion of the interaction term
would allow us to control indirectly by the influence of the Bolsa Familia program and any other social
program whose focus has been the poorest municipalities. As a robustness exercise, we use alternative
proxies, such as the Gini index of inequality. Also, we control for the share of expenditure on education and
health, to capture different dimensions of local policy that could be correlated with the PPCDAM. More
importantly, we also control for the percentage of beneficiaries of Bolsa Familia in each municipality for
each year since 2004. As discussed below, our baseline results are robust to these exercises.

        Another potential threat has to do with the fact that pregnant women with higher incomes and greater
concern for the care of their infants could after the intervention period relocate to municipalities with
healthier environment. We believe that this is implausible given the costs of mobility and the fact that a
municipality with a healthy environment is probably not a neighboring municipality. That is to say,
municipalities with high deforestation are usually surrounded by municipalities with high deforestation.
Therefore, to find a town with low deforestation levels would imply travel many miles, which increases
transaction costs. To additional confidence, we conduct a robustness exercise that consists of estimating the
following regression on observable characteristics of mothers:

                &'(                                                                                         !
                 "                                                                                         # %

       &'( are indicator variables of the characteristics of mothers, such as educational attainment, race,
and teen pregnancy. If mothers choose not to systematically change its municipal location after surgery then
the β coefficient should not be statistically different from zero. That is, there should be no systematic changes
in the characteristics of mothers that are explained by the intervention.

      An additional concern that arises is the fall in agricultural prices that coincided with the period of
intervention. The fall in agricultural prices may discourage deforestation and therefore the effect of the
coefficient of interest in (1) would reflect more than the influence of PPCDAM. In order to mitigate this
possible problem, we include variables that represent state-specific trends. If the variation in agricultural
prices is more or less uniform within states, then these variables would capture the influence of agricultural
prices. Furthermore, the introduction of these variables allows us to control indirectly by the influence of any
other confounding factor that varies in time and government level. As a robustness exercise, we include
specific micro-region trends, which is a bit demanding in terms of computational load.

          5.    Data

      In this study, we use data for the Legal Amazon region of Brazil, which is constituted of 782
municipalities. The source of information on children's health in our study comes from the Brazilian National
System of Information on Birth Records (SINASC/Datasus)10. In relation to infant and maternal
characteristics such as educational attainment, age and place of residence, all this information is available in
the system since 1996. However, we focus on the period 2000-2007 for infants who were born around the
introduction of PPCDAM. Ideally, an analysis of the effects of deforestation on the health outcomes should
be taken as the unit of analysis the individual. However, SINASC only provides aggregate information on
live births and mothers. Given this restriction, in this study the unit of analysis is the municipality. The
municipality where the mother lives is taken as the reference municipality for the panel. This is an important
point because not always the municipality where the mother resides is the same where she gave birth.

      Using this information, we construct a set of control variables related to the characteristics of mothers:
educational attainment, percentage of whites (with the approximate percentage of white births), teen mother
and marital status. As outcome variables of infant health, we focus on: very low birth-weight rate (percentage
of infants less than 1500 grams), low birth-weight rate (percentage of infants less than 2500 grams), extreme
prematurity rate (percentage of infants born before 28 weeks of gestation), and prematurity rate (percentage
of infants born before 38 weeks gestation).

      Regarding the data on deforestation, we extract the information from the Instituto Nacional de
Pesquisas Espaciais (INPE). This institute provides information on the area deforested for each municipality
since 2000. The INPE uses remote sensing detection technology to map increases in deforested area from
year to year. Deforestation is given as the total deforested area in square kilometers for each of the
municipalities. As we mentioned in the previous section, we use the rate of deforestation in 2004 to capture
pre-existing variation in deforestation due to geographic or regional specific factors as a strategy to identify
the impact of PPCDAM. This variable is normalized by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard
deviation.

     The remaining variables that we use throughout the study as additional controls or checks for
robustness are agricultural production per capita, per capita GDP in 2004, and the percentage of spending on
education and health. The source of information of the first two variables comes from the Brazilian Institute
of Geography and Statistics (IBGE, for its acronym in Portuguese), while for the other two comes from
Ministério da Fazenda. In addition, an attempt to control for the influence of the Bolsa Familia program we

10
  This           information          is          available          free            of             charge            at
http://www2.datasus.gov.br/DATASUS/index.php?area=0205&VObj=http://tabnet.datasus.gov.br/cgi/deftohtm.exe?sinasc/cnv/nv
present estimates where we control for the percentage of beneficiaries. This information comes from the
Ministério do Desenvolvimento Social e Combate à Fome. Finally, we use the variable Gini inequality index
to control for the targeting of other social programs and access to basic sanitation. The information of these
two variables comes from the population census 2000. Descriptive statistics for all variables used in this
study are presented in the Table 1.

                                                       [Table 1]


          6.   Results

      We begin by examining the distribution of the main variables before and after intervention. For this we
present the average of the variables used in the pre and post intervention periods according to the level of
deforestation observed in 2004. Specifically, the table compares municipalities with low deforestation (those
located to the 75th percentile of the distribution) to those with high deforestation (those located above the
75th percentile of the distribution). In the table it is also reported that the p-values are obtained from testing
mean differences among the municipalities with low and high rate of deforestation. A higher percentage of
white infants are born in municipalities with high deforestation, but the educational level of mothers is lower.
The biggest difference between the two groups was observed in agricultural production, which is about 100%
in both periods. This is consistent since one of the incentives to deforest is to expand agricultural production.
The percentage of the health budget is slightly higher in municipalities with less deforestation, although only
in the post-intervention period a statistically significant difference is observed. In the child health variables
significant differences are observed both in low birth-weight and preterm birth rate, with the highest
incidence of both indicators in municipalities with less deforestation. The results in the table does not allow
us to infer that there is any significant change in trend in child health variables, possibly due to the influence
of other confounding factors.

        We now present regression models controlling for several confounding factors and assess whether
there are significant differentials in the trends of child health variables. The results of estimating equation (1)
are presented in Table 2. Each column adds different set of controls. The table is divided into four panels.
The first panel presents the results for very low birth weight rate; the second for low birth weight rate; the
third for extreme preterm rate and the fourth for preterm rate.

        The results for the first panel show that the incidence of very low birth weight decreased relatively
more in those municipalities where deforestation was reduced more. Column 1 only by controlling the
interaction between deforestation in 2004 and a linear trend and the fixed effects of year-municipality yields
an estimate of -0.000735 (with a standard error = 0.000349) coefficient, which is significant at 5%. Column 2
adds the interaction between initial per capita GDP and the post 2004 dummy. This interaction term captures
the influence of other social programs created in the year of the launch of the PPCDAM. The inclusion of
this term has little effect on the estimated coefficient of interest reducing it in absolute terms while remaining
significant at 10%. The inclusion of the characteristics of mothers has a negligible effect on the estimated
coefficient. When adding nonlinear state specific trends the estimated coefficient becomes -0.000705.

         Panel B estimates suggest that PPCDAM had positive effects on the incidence of low birth weight,
reducing it in the intervention period. The parameter of interest is estimated at -0.00136 in column 1, but is
statistically insignificant. Once is indirectly controlled the influence of other social programs, the coefficient
passes to -0.00148 and becomes slightly significant. Again, the inclusion of variables related to maternal
characteristics has no effect on the estimated parameter. With the addition of state-specific trends, the
estimated parameter of the impact of PPCDAM is estimated in -0.00172 and significant at 10%.
        The results for extreme prematurity (Panel C) suggest that PPCDAM helped to reduce the incidence
of birth outcome. The coefficient of interest is relatively stable to the inclusion of various controls, being
between -0.000365 and -0.000353, and statistically significant in all cases. By contrast, the results for
Preterm Birth are less stable and the estimation results indicate that PPCDAM did not significantly improve,
once this indicator was controlled by the specific state trends (Panel D).

        To interpret the magnitude of the estimated coefficients, we proceed to evaluate how much would be
the reduction in each outcome variable if the rate of deforestation in 2004 happens to be three standard
deviations higher, which is equivalent to comparing municipalities in the lowest quintile with those in the
highest quintile. The results of this exercise indicate reductions of 0.38% in the incidence of very low birth-
weight rate, of 0.09% in the low birth-weight rate, of 0.45% in extreme preterm rate, and of 0.06% in preterm
rate. This analysis suggests that the effects of PPCDAM on child health are modest.

                                                     [Table 2]

        We now investigate whether the large observed reduction in deforestation after 2004 resulted in a
reduction in agricultural production. This is important because deforestation is closely linked to agricultural
production, and the profits or losses of income in this sector can have a direct impact on birth outcomes. We
estimate again equation (1) but now the dependent variable is the logarithm of per capita agricultural
production. The results of these estimates are presented in Table 3. There are no significant reductions in
agricultural production that may explain the effects of PPCDAM on child health presented above. Indeed,
while the estimated coefficient of the impact of PPCDAM on agricultural production is negative, it is only
marginally significant in the most parsimonious specification.

                                                   [Table 3]

        The above evidence suggests that household income was not one of the mechanisms by which the
reduction in deforestation influenced the birth-outcomes in the period 2005-2007. This could be an indication
that there is a compensation effect: the positive effect of reducing deforestation (through less variability in
climate and rainfall) is offset by a negative effect (via less agricultural expansion), making that the final
effect is zero.


      7. Robustness of findings

    In this section, we perform a number of robustness tests designed to assess the validity of our
identification strategy. Specifically, we explore alternative specifications to examine whether our findings are
insensitive to the introduction of contemporary social programs, pre-existing trends, mean reversion, sorting
and serial autocorrelation. In general, the results from these robustness checks are reassuring. Given space
constraints, we do not present robustness exercises to sorting and serial autocorrelation.


7.1. Contemporaneous Social Programs

    It is possible that differential trends in child health indicators in municipalities with large reductions in
deforestation are not necessarily influenced by the PPCDAM, but by the introduction of other social
programs in 2004. The most important social program introduced in that year was the Bolsa Familia. Our
strategy to address this potential problem in our baseline estimates above was to include the interaction
between per capita GDP in 2004 and the indicator variable of the intervention period. The assumption behind
this strategy is that the program focused on the poorest municipalities based on income levels. This
assumption may fail if GDP is a poor proxy of the degree of poverty of the municipalities or if the targeting
of programs took into account other dimensions. In Table 4, we explore a variety of alternative specifications
to check the robustness of our baseline results.

    Column 1 replicates our main estimates, while column 2 shows the results of a specification that includes
the share of spending on health and education as control variables. The inclusion of these variables should
capture different dimensions of local policy that could be correlated with the implementation of PPCDAm.
The results in the table show that our main estimates are robust to the inclusion of these variables. For
example, in Panel A, the coefficient of interest changes from -0.000705 to -0.000811 and is now estimated
more precisely.

    Alternatively, columns 3-6 use interactions between the indicator variable of the intervention period and
the Gini index, the rate of child labor, the illiteracy and the percentage of appropriate houses11. Each of these
interactions is added separately and not all at once. Note that the inclusion of these interaction terms allows
us to control indirectly by pre-existing differential trends in infant health. As can be seen, our results are
robust to the inclusion of these variables and in some cases the coefficients are estimated more precisely.

    Column 7 directly controls the influence of the Bolsa Familia Program. Indeed, now we include in our
estimates the percentage of beneficiaries as a control variable, as well as the interaction between this variable
and the dummy of the intervention period. Our results hardly change with the inclusion of these variables.

    Column 8 controls simultaneously for all variables used in previous columns. Naturally, this can create
problems of collinearity, but our interest is to evaluate how the coefficients of interest change with this
exercise. Assuming that our research design is valid and the other social programs is no threat to our
estimates, then the addition of these variables should only reduce the sampling variance while leaving
unchanged the estimated parameters of interest. The results of this exercise suggest that our identification
strategy is valid and that the inclusion of these control variables does not significantly affect our estimates.
Again, the coefficients are estimated more precisely. Indeed, those coefficients that were significant at 10%
are now 5%, while those that were significant at 5% became significant at 1%.

                                                                  [Table 4]
7.2.Pre-existing trends and Mean Reversion

    The identifying assumption of our approach is that in the absence of PPCDAM, municipalities with
different levels of deforestation have experienced the same proportional changes in infant health. We
investigate the validity of this assumption in two related complementary ways. First, we include microrregion
specific linear trends. This results in the inclusion of about a hundred additive terms given that on average a
microrregion is made up of seven municipalities. Assuming that variations in agricultural prices and the
degree of dependence on the agricultural sector are homogeneous across municipalities within each
microrregion, the inclusion of these micro-region specific trends allow us to control indirectly by the
influence of the dynamics in the agricultural prices. Additionally, we include a lagged term of the dependent
variable. This allows us to control for mean reversion also.

    The results of this exercise are presented in Table 5. As usual, Column 1 replicates our baseline
estimates. The results in column 2 show that adding specific trends of microrregion has no noticeable effect
on our main estimates. Column 3 adds the lagged of the dependent variable as a control variable. Most of our

11
     These variables are taken from the 2000 population census.
results remain robust to the inclusion of this variable. However, the coefficient that measures the effect on
low birth-weight is substantially reduced (in absolute terms) and becomes statistically insignificant.

    Column 4 presents a second complementary way of investigating whether there are pre-existing trends
affecting our results. Specifically, we exclude municipalities in states with very low rates of deforestation in
2004. This increases the comparability across municipalities and thus helps minimize the likelihood of
differential trends in child health. The specification in column 4 is the same as column 3, but now the number
of observations is substantially reduced due to the restriction that we impose. Despite this reduction in the
number of observations, the coefficients of interest remain very similar to our baseline results. Very similar
results are obtained when we include the interaction between the lagged dependent variable and the year
dummies (not shown). This suggests that it is unlikely that our results are influenced by the existence of pre-
existing trends.

                                                      [Table 5]


      8. Conclusion

       This study provides the first estimates of the effects of deforestation on children's health. We show that
the change in forest policy introduced in 2004 reduced the incidence of very low birth-weight by 0.38% and
extreme preterm 0.45%. Our findings are robust to a variety of robustness exercises. We check for possible
mean reversion including the lag of each outcome variable and the results are qualitatively and quantitatively
similar. Also, our results are insensitive to a variety of variables that capture the influence of local policy. In
addition, we also directly control the influence of the Bolsa Familia, the main intervention for poverty
alleviation program introduced in 2004, and our findings remain similar. Finally, our findings are not
explained by pre-existing micro-regional trends.
       The effects of deforestation on child health that we found in this study are modest. We argue that this is
because forest policy had no significant impact on agricultural production. This null effect may be due to two
offsetting effects that reducing deforestation implies. On the one hand, less deforestation involves increased
agricultural productivity due to less variability in temperature and rainfall. On the other hand, less
deforestation implied lower productivity due to the reduction in the expansion of agricultural land. The
combination of these two effects seem to explain the null effect of forest policy on agricultural production
and, in turn, explain the modest impact of reducing deforestation on child health. We leave for future studies
to further evaluate this argument.

References

Aguilar, A. and Vicarelli, M. (2011). El Nino and Mexican Children: Medium-term Effects of Early-Life
Weather Shocks on Cognitive and Health Outcomes. Unpublished Manuscript.

Almond, D., & Currie, J. (2011). Human Capital Development Before Age Five. in Orley Ashenfelter and
David Card (Eds.), The Handbook of Labor Economics, 4b. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.

Almond, D. (2006). Is the 1918 influenza pandemic over? Long‐Term effects of in utero influenza exposure
in the Post‐1940 U.S. population. Journal of Political Economy, 114(4), pp. 672-712.

Assunção, J., Rocha, R., Gandour (2011). Deforestation Slowdown in the Legal Amazon: Prices or Policies?
Working Paper 1.
Assunção, J., Gandour, C., Rocha, R., Rocha, R. (2011). Does Credit Affect Deforestation? Evidence from a
Rural Credit Policy in the Brazilian Amazon. Working Paper 2.

Assunção, J., Gandour, C., Rocha, R (2013). DETERring Deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon:
Environmental Monitoring and Law Enforcement. Working Paper 3.

Barker, D. J. P. (1990). The fetal and infant origins of adult disease: The womb may be more important than
the home. BMJ: British Medical Journal, 301(6761), p. 1111.

Behrman, J. R., & Rosenzweig, M. R. (2004). Returns to birthweight. Review of Economics and
Statistics, 86(2), 586-601.

Burgess, R., Deschenes, O., Donaldson, D., and Greenstone, M. (2011). Weather and Death in India.
Unpublished Manuscript.

Case, A., Lubotsky, D., & Paxson, C. (2002). Economic status and health in childhood: The origins of the
gradient. The American Economic Review, 92(5), pp. 1308-1334.

Case, A., Fertig, A., & Paxson, C. (2005). The lasting impact of childhood health and
circumstance. Journal of Health Economics, 24(2), 365-389.

Cerri, C. C. et al. (2009). Brazilian greenhouse gas emissions: the importance of agriculture and livestock.
Scientia Agricola, v. 66 n.6.

Chaves, L. F., Cohen, J. M., Pascual, M., and Wilson, M. L. (2008). “Social exclusion modifies climate and
deforestation impacts on a vector-borne disease,” PLoS neglected tropical diseases, 2, 1-8.

Chay, K. Y., and Greenstone, M. (2003). “The impact of air pollution on infant mortality: evidence from
geographic variation in pollution shocks induced by a recession,” The quarterly journal of economics, 118,
1121-1167.

Coneus, K., and Spiess, C. K. (2012). “Pollution exposure and child health: evidence for infants and toddlers
in Germany,” Journal of Health Economics, 31, 180-196.

Currie, J. (2011a). "Inequality at Birth: Some Causes and Consequences." American Economic Review,
101(3): 1-22.

Currie, Janet and Reed Walker. (2011b). “Traffic Congestion and Infant Health: Evidence from EZ Pass.”
American Economic Journals-Applied Economics.

Currie, J., and Neidell, M. (2005). “Air pollution and infant health: What can we learn from California's
recent experience?,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, 1003-1030.

Currie, J. (2009). "Healthy, wealthy, and wise: Is there a causal relationship between child health and human
capital development?." Journal of Economic Literature, 47, 87-122.

Currie, J., & Vogl, T. (2013). Early-life health and adult circumstance in developing countries. Annual
Review of Economics, 5(7), 1-7.36.
Deschênes, O., Greenstone, M., & Guryan, J. (2009). Climate change and birth weight. The American
Economic Review, 211-217.

Dore, M. H. I. (2005). Climate change and changes in global precipitation patterns: What do we konw?
Elsevier Enviroment Internacional, vol. 31, p. 1167-1181.

Field, H. E. (2009). “Bats and emerging zoonoses: henipaviruses and SARS,” Zoonoses and public
health, 56, 278-284.

Grossman, G. M. and Krueger, A. B. (1995). Economic growth and the environment. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 110:353_377.

Hargrave, J. and Kis-Katos, K. (2010). Economic Causes of Deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon: A Panel
Data Analysis for 2000s. In Proceedings of the German Development Economics conference, Hannover.
Verein für Socialpolitik, Research Committee Development Economics.

IPCC (2007). Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report. New York: Cambridge University Press.

IPCC. (2014). Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Climate Change 2014: mitigation of climate
change. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Kim, Y. (2010). The Impact of Rainfall on Early Child Health. Unpublished Manuscript.

Kudamatsu, M., Persson, T., and Stromberg, D. (2010). Weather and Infant Mortality in Africa. Unpublished
Manuscript.

Kurukulasuriya, P., Rosenthal, S. (2013). Climate Change and Agriculture : A Review of Impacts and
Adaptations. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Lawlor, D. A., Leon, D. A., & Smith, G. D. (2005). The association of ambient outdoor temperature
throughout pregnancy and offspring birthweight: findings from the Aberdeen Children of the 1950s
cohort. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, 112(5), 647-657.

Leroy, E. M., Kumulungui, B., Pourrut, X., Rouquet, P., Hassanin, A., Yaba, P., and Swanepoel, R. (2005).
“Fruit bats as reservoirs of Ebola virus,” Nature,438, 575-576.

Looi, L. M., and Chua, K. B. (2007). “Lessons from the Nipah virus outbreak in Malaysia,” Malays. J.
Pathol, 29, 63-67.

Ministério da Ciência e Tecnologia, (MMA, 2013). Plano de ação para a prevenção e controle do
desmatamento na Amazônia legal, 3ª Fase (2012-2015) pelo Uso Sustentável e Conservação da Floresta,
Brasília.

Morin, C. W., Comrie, A. C., & Ernst, K. (2013). Climate and dengue transmission: evidence and
implications. Environmental health perspectives,121(11-12), 1264.

Moster, D., Lie, R. T., & Markestad, T. (2008). Long-term medical and social consequences of preterm
birth. New England Journal of Medicine, 359(3), 262-273.
Nobre, C. A., Assad, E. D. (2005). O Aquecimento Global e o Impacto na Amazônia e na Agricultura
Brasileira. INPE, v. 1.

Olson, S. H., Gangnon, R., Silveira, G. A., Patz, J. A., Olson, S. H., Gangnon, R., and Patz, J. A. (2010).
“Deforestation and malaria in Mancio Lima county, Brazil,” Emerging infectious diseases, 16, 1108.

Rocha, R., & Soares, R. R. (2012). Water scarcity and birth outcomes in the Brazilian semiarid (No. 6773).
Discussion Paper series, Forschungsinstitut zur Zukunft der Arbeit.

Quadrelli, R. Peterson, S. (2007). The energy-climate challenge: Recent trends in CO2 emissions from fuel
combustion. Elsevier Energy Policy, vol. 35, p. 5938-5952.

Sêroa da Motta, R. (2011). A Política Nacional sobre Mudança do Clima: Aspectos Regulatórios e de
Governança. In: Mudança do clima no Brasil: aspectos econômicos, sociais e regulatórios. Brasília, Ipea.

Skoufias, E., Vinha, K., and Conroy, H. (2011). The Impacts of Climate Variability on Welfare in Rural
Mexico. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, 5555.

Trujillo, J. C., Carrillo, B., & Iglesias, W. J. (2013). Relationship between professional antenatal care and
facility delivery: an assessment of Colombia. Health policy and planning.

Vittor, A. Y., Gilman, R. H., Tielsch, J., Glass, G., Shields, T. I. M., Lozano, W. S., and Patz, J. A. (2006).
“The effect of deforestation on the human-biting rate of Anopheles darlingi, the primary vector of falciparum
malaria in the Peruvian Amazon,” American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 74, 3-11.

Vittor, A. Y., Pan, W., Gilman, R. H., Tielsch, J., Glass, G., Shields, T., ... and Patz, J. A. (2009). “Linking
deforestation to malaria in the Amazon: characterization of the breeding habitat of the principal malaria
vector, Anopheles darling,” American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 81, 5.

Wilson, M. D., Cheke, R. A., Fiasse, S. P. J., Grist, S., Osei-Ateweneboana, M. Y., Tetteh-Kumah, A., ...and
Post, R. J. (2002). “Deforestation and the spatio-temporal distribution of savannah and forest members of the
Simuliumdamnosum complex in southern Ghana and south-western Togo,” Transactions of the Royal
Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 96, 632-639.

Wolfe, N. D., Daszak, P., Kilpatrick, A. M., and Burke, D. S. (2005). “Bushmeat hunting, deforestation, and
prediction of zoonotic disease,” Emerging infectious diseases, 11, 1822.

Wolfe N. D., Dunavan C. P., Diamond J. (2007). “Origins of major human infectious diseases,” Nature 447,
279-283.
World Health Organization (2010). UN-Water Global Annual Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking-water:
GLAAS 2010: Targeting Resources for Better Results. World Health Organization, Geneva.
                                                           TABLES

Table 1. Summary Statistics
                                       Pre-intervention (2000-2004)                         Post-intervention (2005-2007)
                                     Low                High                              Low                High
                                                                    P-values                                             P-values
                                 Deforestation     Deforestation                      Deforestation     Deforestation


Married                              31.83               32.07           0.65             25.52               28.67           0.00
Teen Mother                          32.27               32.23           0.83             30.69               30.07           0.02
Mother Education                     26.56               23.86           0.00             37.14               34.12           0.00
Log of Agricultural GDP             -0.498              -0.039           0.00             -0.401              0.071           0.00
Helth Spending Share                 30.93               30.01           0.14             40.33               36.97           0.00
Education Spending Share             50.66               50.89           0.72             54.68               55.06           0.60
Very Low Birth-Weight
Rate                                 0.55                0.55            0.95              0.75               0.66            0.02
Low Birth-Weight Rate                5.87                5.49            0.00              6.23               5.91            0.01
Extreme Preterm Birth                0.25                0.24            0.80              0.31               0.28            0.36
Preterm Birth                        6.98                5.84            0.00              5.20               4.98            0.45


Observations                                    3845                                               2307
Source: Author's elaboration, from the survey data.
Agricultural GDP per capita is in constant 2000 prices. High Deforestation refers to municipalities that had rates of deforestation in
2004 above the 75th percentile of the distribution. Mother Education refers to the percentage of mothers who reported an education
level equal to or greater than 8 years.
Table 2. Effects of PPCDAm on infant health
                                                      (1)                      (2)                   (3)           (4)
                                                 Panel A: Dependent variable is Very Low Birth-Weight Rate
Post 2004 x Deforestation 2004                      -0.000735**            -0.000643*       -0.000666**        -0.000714*
                                                     (0.000349)            (0.000343)        (0.000339)        (0.000374)


                                                 Panel B: Dependent variable is Low Birth-Weight Rate
Post 2004 x Deforestation 2004                        -0.00136             -0.00148*          -0.00149*        -0.00170*
                                                     (0.000894)            (0.000894)        (0.000889)        (0.000968)


                                                 Panel C: Dependent variable is Extreme Preterm Birth
Post 2004 x Deforestation 2004                      -0.000353**            -0.000320*       -0.000325**       -0.000361**
                                                     (0.000175)            (0.000167)        (0.000165)        (0.000170)


                                                 Panel D: Dependent variable is Preterm Birth
Post 2004 x Deforestation 2004                       -0.00124              -0.00319*           -0.00304         -0.00108
                                                     (0.00179)             (0.00185)          (0.00188)        (0.00189)


2004 GDP per capita x Post 2004                          No                   Yes                 Yes             Yes
Maternal Characteristics                                 No                   No                  Yes             Yes
State-Specific trends                                    No                   No                  No              Yes


Year x 2004 Deforestation                               Yes                   Yes                 Yes             Yes
Year and Municipality Fixed Effects                     Yes                   Yes                 Yes             Yes
Observations                                                6152           6152              6152                6152
Source: Author's elaboration, from the results of this paper.
Notes: Maternal Characteristics contains Married (%),Teen Mother (%), and Mother Education. Robust standard errors clestared at
municipality level are into parentheses. * P<0.1; ** P<0.05; P<0.01.

Table 3. Effects of PPCDAm on agricultural production
                                                                   (1)                      (2)                   (3)
                                                     Dependent variable is log of agricultural production
Post 2004 x Deforestation 2004                                -0.000306*                -0.000203            -0.000248
                                                              (0.000169)                (0.000168)           (0.000158)



2004 GDP per capita x Post 2004                                   No                       Yes                  Yes
State-Specific trends                                             No                       No                   Yes

Year x 2004 Deforestation                                        Yes                       Yes                  Yes
Year and Municipality Fixed Effects                              Yes                       Yes                  Yes
Observations                                                   6152                     6152                   6152
Source: Author's elaboration, from the results of this paper.
Notes: Robust standard errors clestared at municipality level are into parentheses. The agricultural GDP is in logs and 2000
constant prices. * P<0.1; ** P<0.05; P<0.01.
Table 4. Effects of PPCDAm on infant health (Contemporaneous Social Programs)
                                         (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)
                                                        Panel A: Dependent variable is Very Low Birth-Weight Rate
Post 2004 x Deforestation 2004        -0.000705*   -0.000811** -0.000797** -0.000765** -0.000743** -0.000864**      -0.000725*   -0.000968**
                                      (0.000376)   (0.000406)   (0.000377)   (0.000384)   (0.000378)   (0.000400)   (0.000376)   (0.000446)


                                                            Panel B: Dependent variable is Low Birth-Weight Rate
Post 2004 x Deforestation 2004        -0.00172*     -0.00187*   -0.00168*    -0.00180*    -0.00169*    -0.00192**   -0.00177*    -0.00231**
                                      (0.000966)    (0.00109)   (0.000969)   (0.000971)   (0.000971)   (0.000970)   (0.000970)    (0.00115)


                                                            Panel C: Dependent variable is Extreme Preterm Birth
Post 2004 x Deforestation 2004        -0.000365** -0.000441** -0.000434** -0.000393** -0.000385** -0.000456** -0.000349** -0.000531***
                                      (0.000171)   (0.000189)   (0.000172)   (0.000176)   (0.000175)   (0.000181)   (0.000172)   (0.000201)


                                                                Panel D: Dependent variable is Preterm Birth
Post 2004 x Deforestation 2004         -0.00121     -0.00115     -0.00112    -0.000681    -0.000527    -0.000523    -0.000394     -0.00203
                                       (0.00188)    (0.00199)   (0.00201)    (0.00190)    (0.00191)    (0.00195)    (0.00193)     (0.00204)




Education and heatlh spending share      No           Yes          No           No           No           No           No           Yes
Gini x Post 2004                         No           No           Yes          No           No           No           No           Yes
Child labor x Post 2004                  No           No           No           Yes          No           No           No           Yes
Illiteracy rate x Post 2004              No           No           No           No           Yes          No           No           Yes
Adequate housing x Post 2004             No           No           No           No           No           Yes          No           Yes
Bolsa Familia Program                    No           No           No           No           No           No           Yes          Yes


2004 GDP per capita x Post 2004          Yes          No           No           No           No           No           No           Yes
Maternal Characteristics                 Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
State-Specific trends                    Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Year x 2004 Deforestation                Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Year and Municipality Fixed Effects      Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Observations                            6152         5540         6152         6152         6152         5128         6152          4636
Source: Author's elaboration, from the results of this paper.
Notes: Maternal Characteristics contains Married (%),Teen Mother (%), and Mother Education. Robust standard errors clestared at
municipality level are into parentheses. Gini, child labor, Illiteracy and Adequate housing are taken from the 2000 population
census. Bolsa Familia Program: we include in our estimates the percentage of beneficiaries as a control variable, as well as the
interaction between this variable and the dummy of the intervention period. * P<0.1; ** P<0.05; P<0.01.
Table 5. Effects of PPCDAm on infant health (Pre-existing regional trends and Mean Reversion)
                                                      (1)                 (2)                  (3)                 (4)
                                                         Panel A: Dependent variable is Very Low Birth-Weight Rate
Post 2004 x Deforestation 2004                    -0.000714*          -0.000690**          -0.000668*          -0.000822**
                                                  (0.000374)           (0.000345)          (0.000374)           (0.000404)

                                                            Panel B: Dependent variable is Low Birth-Weight Rate
Post 2004 x Deforestation 2004                     -0.00170*           -0.00149*           -0.000232           -0.0000812
                                                  (0.000968)           (0.000902)          (0.000870)          (0.000894)

                                                            Panel C: Dependent variable is Extreme Preterm Birth
Post 2004 x Deforestation 2004                   -0.000361**          -0.000341**         -0.000421**          -0.000450**
                                                  (0.000170)           (0.000166)          (0.000199)           (0.000210)


                                                                Panel D: Dependent variable is Preterm Birth
Post 2004 x Deforestation 2004                      -0.00108           -0.00299            -0.00174             -0.000870
                                                   (0.00189)           (0.00195)           (0.00163)            (0.00154)

Microrregion-Specific trends                          No                  Yes                 Yes                  Yes
Year lagged dependent variable                        No                  No                  Yes                  Yes


State-Specific trends                                 Yes                 No                  No                   No
2004 GDP per capita x Post 2004                       Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes
Maternal Characteristics                              Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes
Year x 2004 Deforestation                             Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes
Year and Municipality Fixed Effects                   Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes
 Observations                                            6152            6152               5383                 2940
Source: Author's elaboration, from the results of this paper.
Notes: Maternal Characteristics contains Married (%),Teen Mother (%), and Mother Education. Robust standard errors clestared at
municipality level are into parentheses. * P<0.1; ** P<0.05; P<0.01.
