        ’Mommy, I miss daddy’. The effect of family
          structure on children’s health in Brazil ∗
                                                                          †
                          Natalia N. Ferreira-Batista
                                    Department of Economics
                        University of Sao Paulo at Ribeirao Preto, Brazil
                                                             ‡
                                       Sara Ayllón
                                    Department of Economics
                          University of Girona and EQUALITAS, Spain




                                             Abstract
           This paper studies the relationship between lone motherhood and children’s
       height-for-age z-scores in Brazil. In order to isolate the causal effect between family
       structure and children’s condition, we estimate a treatment-effects model that uses
       male preference for firstborn sons (as opposed to firstborn daughters) to instrument
       the probability of a woman becoming a single mother. We find that children being
       raised by a lone mother have a height-for-age z-score that is 0.31 points lower than
       that of children of similar characteristics that cohabit with both progenitors. We
       argue that the increasing trend of lone motherhood in Brazil should be treated as
       a major concern in health policy design.

       JEL classification: I10, J12, J16
       Keywords: lone motherhood, height-for-age z-score, Brazil, treatment-effects, chil-
       dren




  ∗
     Correspondance to: sara.ayllon@udg.edu.
   †
     Address: Av. Bandeirantes 3900, FEARP / Bloco C1 - sala 7, CEP 14040-905, Ribeirao Preto, Sao
Paulo (Brazil). Tel. (+55) 16 3602 0506. E-mail: nbatista@usp.br
   ‡
     Address: C/ Universitat de Girona, 10, 17071, Girona (Spain). Tel. (+34) 972 418779. Fax. (+34)
972 418032. E-mail: sara.ayllon@udg.edu


                                                 1
1     Introduction
The health of Brazilian children has constantly and significantly improved in recent
decades. Data from the 2010 Census recorded that infant mortality in the first year
of life had nearly halved in ten years. In 2000, for every thousand live births, 29.7 babies
died before their first birthday, while the figure in 2010 was 15.6. Regarding anthropo-
metric indices, stunting decreased during the period between 2003 and 2009 from 15.7%
to 9.7% among white children and from 20.5% to 11.7% among blacks (Reis, 2012). This
is an important achievement for the advancement of human capital investment as it is well
known that early life conditions have persistent and profound impacts on an individual’s
later life in terms of chronic diseases, education and wages (see Barker, 1990; Almond and
Mazumder, 2005, 2011; Almond and Currie, 2011; Currie and Vogl, 2012; Lin and Liu,
2014; among others).
    The progress in maternal and child health that Brazil is achieving is the result of
important changes over the last three decades in several domains. Brazil has experienced
major economic growth with an increase in Gross National Income (GNI) per capita of
47.2% only between 2004 and 2012 (according to World Bank data). The financial gap
between rich and poor has become less pronounced and cash transfer schemes (particu-
larly Bolsa Famı́lia) have increased family income among the poorest groups. From an
educational point of view, the major investment in elementary schooling during the 1990s
has increased educational attainment among Brazilian mothers. In parallel, Brazil has
experienced an important decline in its fertility rate. The country has also seen great
improvements in terms of urbanization (access to water and sanitation).
    Specifically in terms of health policy, in the late 1980s, a three-tiered healthcare system
of private security, social security and charitable institutions was replaced by a universal,
tax-funded, national health system. Primary health care became the cornerstone of the
system, and the geographical targeting of care led to the setting up of family health teams
in the neediest areas of the country. Moreover, maternal-child health policies in Brazil
underwent profound change: a vertical health program that started in the 1980s, PAISM,
for the promotion of breastfeeding, oral rehydration and immunizations, as well as the
implementation of many national and statewide programs have improved children’s health
and nutrition (Paim et al., 2011; Barros et al., 2010).
    Despite all the progress, the prevalence of stunting (1 out of 10 children) is much
higher than in well-nourished populations, indicating that there is still room for improve-
ment. Moreover, even if the Brazilian case can be thought of as a successful example, the
speed of the improvement has not been uniform and important differences still remain.
On a geographical level, differences between rural, urban and metropolitan areas continue
to exist, which are mainly explained by the heterogeneity in sanitation and access to or
quality of the health system. Despite convergence to a national standard level, the preva-
lence of stunting has been historically much higher in the poorest (North and Northeast)
regions than in the wealthier Southeast. Also, although the racial gap in nutritional indi-
cators has clearly decreased, white children still receive better nutrition than blacks (Reis,
2012).
    While acknowledging regional and racial disparities, the main focus of this paper is to
study the importance of family structure as a source of inequalities in children’s health
outcomes. Our hypothesis is that children raised by a lone mother are more likely to have
lower height-for-age z-scores after controlling for other socio-economic and demographic
characteristics than children growing up with both parents. Several mechanisms may


                                              2
be at play. Lone mothers may suffer higher levels of stress because of the difficulties
dealing with the role of sole carer and primary breadwinner. At the same time, lone
mothers cannot count on the help and monitoring of a cohabiting partner. Similarly, they
may have more difficulties obtaining care for their children because of a smaller extended
family. All these mechanisms may explain the poorer health outcomes for children raised
by a lone mother. As far as we know, this is the first time that family structure has been
taken explicitly into account when analysing children’s health inequalities in the case of
Brazil.
    If our hypothesis is confirmed, our results have important implications both for social
and health policy. According to data from Brazilian Censuses, the number of children
under the age of 14 that did not live with their father multiplied almost fourfold from
1980 to 2010. Indeed, in Brazil, nearly 1 out of 5 children between 0 and 13 years of age
were raised by a lone mother in 2010. Historically, Brazil has had a high level of informal
unions (which account for 36% of all unions in the most recent data). Also, it is common
to have a child in each new union to fulfil the idea of having a proper family —this being
particularly true for men who leave their children from previous relationships with the
mothers (Greene, 1992). To this situation, we can add the violent context of high male
homicide and incarceration rates (Murray et al., 2013; Reichenheim et al., 2011), which
increase the probability of women rearing their children alone.
    The isolation of a causal effect between family structure and children’s health requires
an econometric strategy that accounts for selection into marital status. We estimate
a treatment-effects model that uses male preference for firstborn sons (as opposed to
firstborn daughters) to instrument the probability of a woman becoming a single mother.
Family economics literature has well established that firstborn children are more likely to
cohabit with a father figure if they are boys than if they are girls (see Dahl and Moretti,
2008; Ananat and Michaels, 2008; Ayllón, 2014a). Assuming that the sex of a child
is random and that there is no sex-selection abortion in Brazil (Chiavegatto Filho and
Kawachi, 2013), the gender of the firstborn in a household allows us to implement an
instrument variable strategy that, to the best of our knowledge, is used for the first time
in the context of children’s health analysis.
    Our results indicate that children raised by a lone mother in Brazil have a height-for-
age z-score that is 0.31 points lower than that of children of the same characteristics that
cohabit with both parents. These findings are robust to different specifications that control
for socio-economic and demographic characteristics. Moreover, the number of children in
the household below the age of 10 and the mother’s lack of schooling are factors associated
with lower height-for-age z-scores. In turn, the mother’s height and body-mass index are
positively related with children’s height (indicating to the importance of controlling for
the genetic code). Our results confirm that family structure should not be overlooked
when designing health policy in Brazil: lone motherhood may become a real challenge
for future maternal-child health programs in Brazil (much more than racial or regional
disparities).
    After this introduction, the following section describes the acute consequences of mal-
nutrition in early life. Section 3 discusses the relationship between children’s malnutrition
and family structure according to previous literature. Section 4 describes the dataset used
and presents some descriptives while section 5 details the econometric strategy. Section
6 contains our main results and Section 7 concludes.




                                             3
2       Malnutrition in early life
Malnutrition is typically caused by a combination of inadequate food intake and infections
that impair the body’s ability to absorb or assimilate food. It encompasses stunting, wast-
ing, and deficiencies of essential vitamins and minerals, with obesity or over-consumption
of specific nutrients as another form. From an economic perspective, infant nutritional
status can be seen as the output of a health production function, where nutrient intake is
a very important input. However, in addition to that and to the particular genetic varia-
tion, there are other relevant variables: appropriate care, household conditions (including
food insecurity), parental education, access to quality health care and living environment.
    There are two commonly used anthropometric indicators for children’s nutritional sta-
tus: wasting and stunting, which distinguish between short-term and long-term physiologi-
cal processes (WHO, 1986). The first indicates a low weight-for-height and reflects current
nutritional problems (diarrhoea, insufficient dietary intake and other childhood diseases).
The weight loss associated with wasting can be restored quickly under favourable con-
ditions and is generally seen as a short-lived problem.1 The stunting index is measured
by height-for-age and shows children’s cumulative linear growth or a chronic restriction
on their potential growth. It thus reflects the child’s present and past inadequate nutri-
tion and/or frequent illnesses, expressing a long-run health condition and is not usually
reversible. The WHO recommends it as a reliable measure of overall social deprivation
(WHO, 1986).2 These indicators are measured in terms of a standard deviation z-score
which accounts for the difference between the value for an individual and the median value
of the reference population (same age and sex) divided by the same reference population’s
standard deviation.
    Extensive epidemiological literature has focused on the early childhood environment,
nutrition in particular, and its relationship with health outcomes in adulthood.3 It em-
phasizes that linear growth failure is largely confined to the intrauterine period and the
first years of life, and is caused by inadequate diet and frequent infections. Malnutrition
in the early years of life may also cause later deficiencies in cognitive development. There
is some disagreement as to whether the effects of malnutrition on cognitive development
are more acute when the child is a baby (0-6 months), as Dobbing (1976) argues, or a
toddler (6-36 months), but there seems to be a consensus that the first two years are very
important (Waber et al., 1981; Pollitt et al., 1995; Martorell, 1995; Glewwe and King,
2001).
    Early growth failure will lead to reduced adult stature unless there is compensatory
growth in childhood (so-called catch-up growth), which is partly dependent on the extent
of maturational delay that lengthens the growth period. Because maturational delays in
low-income and middle-income countries are usually shorter than 2 years, only a small
part of growth failure can be compensated. Individuals who remain in the setting where
they developed childhood malnutrition tend to become short adults (Martorell et al., 1994
    1
     Glewwe et al. (2001) argue that weight-for-height can be useful for evaluating intervention programs
because it quickly responds to changes in nutritional status.
   2
     Weight-for-age is a third index, but it must be interpreted cautiously because of its inability to
distinguish between stunting and wasting, and consequently between acute and chronic malnutrition.
Because it is a combination of the other two indices, it does not distinguish between small but well-fed
children and tall but thin ones. It also changes rapidly.
   3
     This is known as the fetal and infant origins hypothesis and was developed by Barker (1990) who has
argued that inadequate nutrition in uterus ’programs’ the fetus to have metabolic characteristics that
can lead to future diseases.


                                                   4
and 2005).4
     The epidemiological literature reveals that the nutritional status of a woman before and
during pregnancy is important for a healthy pregnancy outcome (Kramer, 1987; Kramer
and Victora, 2001). Short maternal stature is a risk factor for caesarean delivery and
low maternal body-mass index is associated with intrauterine growth restriction (WHO,
1995; Fishman et al., 2004; Ronsmans et al., 2006). In the short term, the results of
maternal/child malnutrition are mortality, morbidity and disability. In the long term,
the consequences are adult size, intellectual ability, economic productivity, reproductive
performance, and metabolic and cardiovascular diseases (Black et al., 2008).
     Regarding academic achievement, particularly in developing countries, the economic
literature has found that childhood malnutrition is a significant determinant of delayed
enrolment and low test scores (Glewwe and Jacoby, 1995; Glewwe et al., 2001; Alderman
et al., 2001; Wisniewski, 2010; Monk and Kingdon, 2010). Malnutrition in childhood can
also undermine labour outcomes in adulthood because of the probability of low school
attainment being greater for unhealthy children than for those who were well-nourished
(Deaton, 2008).
     In the Brazilian case, Machado (2008) showed that for children between 7-14 years
old and from the Northeast and Southeast regions, low height-for-age status increases the
chances of late entry into school. The study by Gomes-Neto et al. (1997) uses data from
a major education intervention program, EDURURAL (conducted in three Northeastern
states in the 1980s), which measured students’ health. This program was designed to
reduce low achievement and high drop-out rates in these rural areas. The authors studied
the complementarities between health and educational attainment/cognitive proficiency of
children and found that changes in nutritional status play an important role in explaining
cognitive differences among children (but do not have an impact on the final degree of
schooling).
     More recently, Gigante et al. (2006) used a large cohort of data from all children
born in the city of Pelotas (on the country’s Southern region) in 1982, with follow-ups in
adulthood (21-23 years old) to analyse various later health and economic outcomes. This
study confirms that height-for-age predicts school or cognitive test performance in later
life, and stunting between 12 and 36 months of age predicted poorer cognitive performance
and/or lower school grades attained in middle childhood.
     So, the previous literature has reached a strong consensus on the acute consequences
of malnutrition during the first years of life across the whole life cycle. This paper assesses
whether stunting (measured by height-for-age z-score) can be partly explained by family
structure in Brazil.


3       Family structure and infant health: a review
Studies that have analysed the impact of marriage on health systematically find a positive
association between the two. In general, the literature indicates that married people live
longer, have fewer problems related to alcohol, engage in fewer risky behaviours and have
better mental health (see Lillard and Panis, 1996; Espinosa and Evans, 2008; Rendall et
al., 2011; Curran et al., 1998; Duncan et al., 2006; Umberson, 1992; among others).
     The literature has established that the marriage-health relationship can be explained
    4
    Improvements in living conditions, such as those brought on through adoption, can trigger catch-up
growth but do so more effectively in very young children.



                                                  5
by selection, causation or both.5 According to the selection framework, healthier people
are more prone to marriage because they are more desirable in the marriage market
(e.g. physical attraction, mental well-being, higher income, greater self-sufficiency, likely
longevity, etc.). In this case, it is not possible to attest that marriage itself provides
a better health condition. So, the advantages observed in the health status of married
people (compared to those without a partner) only reflect selection (Goldman, 1993).
    On the other hand, the causation alternative advocates that marriage does cause
benefits to the health of the people involved (adults and children). This is known as
the marriage protection hypothesis, which sees marriage as a mechanism that protects
people’s health through: (i) social channels as integration, (ii) accomplishment of some
social roles, (iii) support, (iv) financial resources and economies of scale, and (v) joint
and full monitoring between spouses. The most common view is that marriage leads to
emotional support: it is seen as an institution that gives a sense of meaning (or purpose)
of responsibility/commitment to others, as well as closeness.6 It also works as a sign
of fulfilment of an adult social role, which together with parenthood reduces the chance
of health-harmful and risk-taking attitudes (Ross et al., 1990; Waite, 1995; Hibbard
and Pope, 1993; Rendall et al., 2011). Other factors include family income/wealth and
economies of scale that may increase access to medical care and the purchase of better
nourishment and housing (Becker, 1991; Hahn, 1993).
    Despite the difficulties disentangling the influence of selection and protection, stud-
ies that have dealt with the issue are consistent regarding a marriage premium. They
generally find that the association between marriage and health is a combination of both
(Lillard and Panis, 1996; Murray, 2000; Rendall et al., 2011), so marriage affects and is
affected by its members’ health status. Consequently, the positive results of marriage on
health are also extended to the children living in two-parent families.
    The monitoring mechanism is especially relevant when there are children in the house-
hold because they are treated as a collective good by both parents (Weiss and Willis,
1985).7 In this case, any opportunistic behaviour by one of the parents is avoided by
the monitoring between them, which may encourage both to invest in the common good.
Theoretical models provide intuition for the empirical studies that have evaluated the
effect of marriage on children’s health through specific inputs, for example, quality/time
of prenatal care, nutrition and/or abstention from tobacco, alcohol or illegal substances
during pregnancy (Currie and Gruber, 1996; Joyce, 1999; Evans and Lien, 2005; Abrevaya
and Dahl, 2008; Almond and Mazumder, 2011; Evans and Ringel, 1999). The findings
indicate that the quality of care during the prenatal period, including the significance of
the mother’s nutrition, is very important for ensuring that the infant is born in healthy
conditions, thus affecting the child’s subsequent ability to accumulate human capital.
    Moreover, despite the increased diversity of family arrangements, women are still
disproportionately the primary caregivers for children in Brazil. As a result, women are
more likely than men to be faced with the dual role when unmarried: that of sole caregiver
and primary breadwinner. This situation affects access to resources and psychological
well-being and must have an impact on the quality of care provided to children (Osborne
et al., 2012). A mother’s stress (or depression) has a negative impact on her child’s
   5
     See Wood et al. (2007) and Ribar (2004) for extensive reviews of studies that relate marriage to
adult’s health and mortality as well as the impact of marriage on children’s development outcomes
(intergenerational health effects of marriage).
   6
     This approach started with the seminal work by Durkheim (1951) on suicide.
   7
     In empirical studies, children’s quality may be represented either by their health condition or by some
educational outcome.


                                                     6
health, not just in key periods such as pregnancy and breastfeeding but also during early
childhood (Chung et al., 2004).8
    Regarding the father’s involvement, some research suggests that it plays a role in
linking family structure to children’ health outcomes. Married and cohabiting fathers are
more likely to be involved with their children by virtue of proximity, while men who are
not married to or living with their child’s mother find it harder to be involved, and hence
participate less (Furstenberg and Cherlin, 1991). Besides, when a union dissolves, the
father’s involvement drastically declines (Tach et al., 2010), especially if the relationship
ends when children are very young. In general, the literature suggests that fathers may
have an impact on infant health by encouraging (or not) women to seek prenatal care
and refrain from unhealthy behaviours, such as smoking and consuming alcohol while
pregnant (Teitler, 2001). Misra et al. (2010) have suggested that the father’s involvement
may improve birth and infant health outcomes by reducing maternal stress.
    The relevance of each aforesaid mechanism is difficult to evaluate since they depend
on the interaction between family members.9 Therefore, no empirical study of the impact
of family structure on children’s development has succeeded in isolating each mechanism.
    A significant number of empirical studies have examined the potential effects of family
structure on children’s development, and these generally confirm the disadvantage of
children from households led solely by women.10 Most of the literature focuses on cognitive
and educational factors, as well as factors that are relevant during youth (early pregnancy,
smoking, anxiety and economic inactivity). Studies that specifically analyse the impact
of family structure on children’s health indicate that unmarried mothers invest less in
prenatal care and, consequently, their children have poorer indicators at birth. Thus,
their children are at a disadvantage to others in terms of prematurity, birth weight and
mortality (Bennett, 1992; Bennett et al., 1994; Bird et al., 2000; Peacock et al., 1995).
    However, few of these studies have addressed a causal relationship. The challenge for
disentangling the effect of family structure on children’s outcomes resides in the difficulty
finding exogenous variations in the mothers’ marital status. Ribar (2004) argues that
in most studies the identification strategies used to address the issue of selectivity into
marriage are unconvincing.11 One of the most common methods used is that of instru-
mental variables, and it is usually found that exclusion restrictions reduce the association
between family structure and well-being (which is consistent with selectivity) but do not
eliminate the association (which is consistent with causality). Such is the case with Buck-
les and Price (2013), who measure the effect of marriage on four child indicators: low birth
weight (< 2, 500 grams), prematurity (< 37 weeks), mortality in the first year of life and
the Apgar test. They use a sample of siblings to show that accounting for selection with
regard to observable and time-invariant characteristics significantly reduces estimates of
the marriage premium, but the positive causal effect remains.
    This paper uses the instrumental variable method to analyse the causality between
family structure and children’s malnutrition (measured by height-for-age z-scores) by
   8
     See Amato (2005), Fomby and Cherlin (2007) and Wu (1996) for further studies that have documented
the adverse associations of family instability and child outcomes.
   9
     Note, for example, that lone-mothers may also be exposed to some degree of monitoring by other
family members (parents, siblings, etc.).
  10
     For a literature review see Ribar (2004) and Sigle-Rushton and McLanahan (2004).
  11
     It seems that the literature that analyses the impact of family structure on child outcomes (such
as education or early adult results such as teenage pregnancy, tabacco or drug consumption) address
causality more often. Some examples are Ermisch and Francesconi (2001), Finlay and Neumark (2010)
and Craigie (2008).


                                                  7
proposing a new exclusion restriction that has not been previously used for a similar
research question.


4     Data, definitions and descriptives
Data is from the Brazilian Consumer Expenditure Survey (Pesquisa de Orçamentos Fa-
miliares, POF) relative to the 2008-2009 period. The survey contains 190,159 individuals
from 55,970 households and is representative of the population living in private households
in Brazil. Our working sample is restricted to all (single-birth) children under 60 months
of age that are sons or daughters of the head of household (or spouse), whose mothers are
between 20 and 44 years of age (both inclusive) and did not have their child as teenagers.
This last restriction is imposed because we do not want to confound the effect of teenage
biological immaturity (which may have consequences on children’s health outcomes) with
that related to lone motherhood. Moreover, in the POF, family ties are defined in relation
to the head of household: (i) spouse/ partner, (ii) child (son/daughter), (iii) another rel-
ative, or (iv) non-relative. Such a survey structure allows us to link 89.3% of the infants
in the sample to their mothers. Children classed as ’another relative’ (10.5%) or ’non-
relative’ (0.2%) cannot be linked to their mothers even if they are in the household.12 As
explained above, the 60 month threshold seems most appropriate when seeking to capture
early-life health. In total, 10,072 records have been used.
     The POF data contains anthropometric measures for all individuals (weight, height
and length) as well as information on such characteristics as age, race, education, position
in the family, availability of a private health insurance plan for each person in the fam-
ily, household income, governmental cash transfers, living conditions (sanitation, street
paving, public lighting, health facility in the community, quality of public services, violent
area, etc.) and geographic variables (state and urban/rural areas).
     Despite its importance, the raw anthropometric data collected by the POF is of lim-
ited value as an indicator of malnutrition in its own right, partly because weight and
length/height depend on both age and gender. So, in order to assess the adequacy of
a child’s growth it is necessary to compare these indicators with their distribution in a
“healthy” reference group and identify “extreme” or “abnormal” departures from the ref-
erence values.13 To do this, the Anthro software created by the World Health Organization
(WHO) was used, which requires input of each infant’s sex, age in months, weight and
length/height data.14 From this data, z-scores for height-for-age have been calculated.
Table 1 shows that the average height-for-age z-score is zero with a standard deviation of
   12
      Strickly speaking, this means that our sample is not representative of all children under the age of
60 months in Brazil. However, it is also true that about 5% of children in this age group do not live
with their mothers (according to the 2010 Census data) so, we are not missing as many mother-child
links as it may seem. Also note that the restriction of mother’s age is also related to survey structure
limitations. By only using the sample of women between 20-44 we disregard the possibility of considering
grandmothers that are rearing their teenage daughter’s child.
   13
      A total of 101 observations were considered extreme cases and were deleted from the final analysis.
   14
      Anthro can be consulted at the web page http://www.who.int/childgrowth/software/en (June 2014).
This software also provides the WHO Child Growth Standard measures for weight-for-age (WAZ), weight-
for-height (WHZ) and body-mass index for age (BMI). Since 2006, the WHO has used new curves to
assess the growth and development of children around the world. This new standard was obtained by
combining longitudinal follow-ups from birth to 24 months and a cross-sectional survey of children aged
18 to 71 months. The sample has information from 8,440 healthy breastfed infants and young children
from a wide variety of ethnic backgrounds and cultural settings (Brazil, Ghana, India, Norway, Oman
and the USA).


                                                    8
1.70 and a minimum and maximum value of -5.99 and 5.92, respectively. Indeed, descrip-
tives indicate that 11.2% of children in the sample suffer chronic malnutrition (stunting).
On the other hand, 15.7% are obese.
    Regarding family structure, a child’s mother is considered to be a lone mother if none
of the registered members of the household is her partner. This means that the lone
mother may be divorced, separated, never married or widowed. As a matter of fact, the
POF data does not make it possible to distinguish the mother’s marital status.15 In total,
9.6% of the children in the sample cohabit with a lone mother.
    As in many other parts of the world, lone motherhood has become an increasing
phenomenon in Brazil as shown in Graph 1, which uses data from the Censuses from 1970
to 2010 to create a sample with the same characteristics as those explained above. A
thorough analysis of this trend goes beyond the scope of this paper but two explanations
stand out in the case of Brazil. Firstly, the analysis by Greene and Rao (1995) indicates
a squeeze in the Brazilian marriage market (a shortage of men) driven by a decrease
in mortality rates. As, on average, men marry younger women, the simple reduction
of mortality in younger cohorts increases the supply of women in relation to men. The
result of this compression would be an increase in cohabitation, with men going through
various unions during their life cycle.16 Secondly, it is important to take into account
how the Brazilian context of violence also increases the probability of a woman having to
raise her children alone. Each year the country loses approximately 45,600 men lives due
to homicides, according to data from the Ministry of Health (2010), which particularly
affects young men. The same is true for incarceration rates.
    The other rows in Table 1 show summary statistics for the groups of variables that will
be used as controls when modelling the effect of lone motherhood on children’s height-for-
age z-scores: other demographic factors, children’s and mothers’ characteristics, household
economic status, and regional/urbanization descriptives.
    As for other demographic characteristics, summary statistics indicate that there are
between 1 and 4 children in each household under 60 months of age (average 1.32) and
that 43% of the children in the sample have at least a brother or sister between the ages
of 5 and 10 and 24% between the ages of 11 and 15.
    Regarding children’s characteristics, 48.9% of the sample are girls; 51.1% are black,
half-caste or indigenous and, on average, they are 32 months old. As for mothers’ charac-
teristics, mean age is 29.6 and mean age at birth is 27.4. Mothers’ average height is 158
centimetres, their body-mass index is 24.8 and, they have been to school for an average
of 8 years. 4% of the mothers have never been to school and nearly 18% of them did not
complete primary education.
    At least two of the mothers’ characteristics are particularly important for the children’s
health: height and age at birth. Regarding mother’s height, extensive literature highlights
its correlation with some reproductive outcomes. Taller mothers tend to have easier births
(Liljestrand et al., 1985), heavier babies at birth (Kirchengast et al., 1998), fewer stillbirths
(Pollet and Nettle, 2008) and higher survival rates among their children. Thus, the
mother’s height carries direct information on genetic inheritance and indirect information
about her own past situations of malnutrition and poverty.
  15
     Throughout the paper, we use lone mother and single mother, irrespectively, to refer to women that
are raising their children without a partner in the household, regardless of marital status.
  16
     A qualitative analysis by Greene (1992) showed that in Brazil it is common to have a child in each
new union to fulfil the idea of having a proper family. A husband and wife may wish to have a child
together regardless of the number of children either of them had before. This is particularly true for men
who leave their children from previous relationships with the mothers.


                                                    9
                            Table 1: Summary statistics

                 Variable                 Mean          Std. Dev.       Min.    Max.
    Height-for-age z-score (haz )         0.002           1.707         -5.99   5.92
    % in malnutrition (haz < -2)           0.112          0.315           0      1
    % being obese (haz > +2)              0.157           0.364           0      1
    Family structure
    Lone-mother                           0.096             0.295         0        1
    No. of children up to 60 months        1.320            0.534         1        4
    No. of children up 5-10 years old     0.528             0.731         0        5
    No. of children up 11-15 years old 0.311                0.633         0        5
    Child’s characteristics
    Girl                                  0.489              0.5          0       1
    Black, half-caste or indigenous       0.511              0.5          0       1
    Age (in months)                       32.122           17.519         0       60
    Mother’s characteristics
    Age                                   29.647            5.964        20       44
    Age at birth                          27.427            5.993        17       44
    Height (in cm)                       158.953            7.018        130      188
    Body Mass Index (BMI)                  24.86            4.653       13.86    54.67
    Years of education                    8.125             3.957         0       15
    Never at school                       0.039             0.193         0        1
    Primary school incomplete              0.178            0.382         0        1
    Primary school completed               0.290            0.454         0        1
    Secondary school completed             0.366            0.482         0        1
    University degree                      0.119            0.324         0        1
    Household economic status
    In poverty                            0.165             0.371         0        1
    Receiving Bolsa Familia               0.231             0.421         0        1
    log(income per capita)                5.754             1.016       1.244    9.572
    Urbanization / regional characteristics
    Piped water                           0.878             0.328         0        1
    Paved street                           0.595            0.491         0        1
    North                                 0.099             0.299         0        1
    Northeast                             0.302             0.459         0        1
    Southeast                             0.143              0.35         0        1
    South                                 0.142             0.349         0        1
    Central West                           0.078            0.268         0        1
    N                                                          10072
Source: Pesquisa de Orçamentos Familiares, 2008-09. Author’s computation. Weighted results.




                                            10
Figure 1: Evolution of the percentage of children under 60 months of age cohabiting
with their mother (20-44 years) with an absent father in Brazil, 1970-2010




                      10
                      8
                      6
                      4
                      2




                           1970        1980           1990           2000           2010




Source: Own calculations on Brazilian Census Data, 1970-2010. Weighted results.



    The information on the mother’s age at birth is a measure of her biological maturity,
which is another relevant factor for the child’s health outcomes. Finlay et al. (2011)
analyse the effect of the mother’s age at first birth on infant mortality, its anthropometric
failure (stunting and underweight), diarrhoea and anaemia. Using data from Demographic
and Health Surveys (conducted from 1990 to 2008) for 55 low and middle-income countries,
these authors found that the risk for the child’s health is lower for women who have gave
birth for the first time between the ages of 27 and 29. The risk of infant mortality in
firstborn children from mothers below 27 and above 29 is higher, although the effect is
only statistically significant for women below the age of 18.
    The variables referring to household economic conditions are poverty status and being
a Bolsa Famı́lia beneficiary. Poverty is defined using the same concept applied by the
government cash-transfer program, Bolsa Famı́lia, which has been operating since 2003.
This study uses the values that were established from June 2008 onwards: families with an
income per capita up to 30 USD (monthly) are considered “extremely poor” and families
with an income per capita above 30 USD but below 60 USD are considered “poor”. Here
the sum of these two groups defines a poor family. In the sample, 16.5% of the children
live in a poor family and 23.1% receive the cash transfer.
    It is important to note that the Bolsa Famı́lia is a secondary indicator of household
poverty but also works as a health input control. Its inclusion was necessary for two
reasons. First, because of its conditionality regarding the health of children up to 7 years
old, which requires beneficiary families to monitor the vaccination card and make frequent
visits to the doctor to follow-up the children’s growth and development. This condition
exposes all children whose families are beneficiaries (partially) to the same health input:
access to medical services (prescriptions and monitoring).17 Second, the Bolsa Famı́lia
  17
       Women aged 14 to 44 years should also follow up and, if pregnant or nursing (lactating), should carry


                                                      11
and poverty status are both included (despite being based on the same criteria) because
not every poor family receives this cash transfer (and vice versa).
    In order to control for the level of urbanisation, we also consider the variables “piped
water” and “paved street”. The first is used as an indicator of sanitation conditions and
the second as a proxy for the public services that come with urbanization. In the sample,
87.8% of the children live in an area with piped water and 59.5% with a paved street.
As for regional characteristics, the Brazilian territory is divided into five areas (North,
Northeast, Southeast, South and Central West). Most children live in the Northeast
region of the country, followed by the Southeast and South.


5     Econometric strategy
The simplest modelling strategy to capture the relationship between family structure and
child malnutrition would be an OLS regression accounting for changes in the outcome of
interest according to a set of observable characteristics. Formally,
                                                                0
                         hazi = β0 + β1 singlemotheri + β2 Xi + i                         (1)

being hazi the height-for-age z-score. As already explained above, among nutritionists,
height-for-age is a widely recognized index to identify malnutrition. Among economists,
it is the most useful indicator of a child’s health and welfare in developing countries and
is widely recognized as a good predictor of many later-life outcomes. Moreover, β1 is the
coefficient for lone motherhood which we expect to be negative thus indicating poorer
health outcomes among children being raised by a single mother. Xi is the vector of
explanatory variables, and finally, i is the usual white noise error term.
     However, a simple linear regression holds the assumption that the mother’s marital
status is an independent variable and that there is no correlation between the error term
of the model that gives rise to the choice of mother’s marital status and the error term in
our equation of interest (i ). As a matter of fact, there are various channels by which the
mother’s marital status may be thought of as endogenous, and therefore, the estimates
from equation 1 are inconsistent. As explained in the literature review, people choose
whether they will partner or not and with whom, so marital status is a selection-into-
treatment. Moreover, there are unobservable factors related to mothers’ health that
make an unhealthier woman more likely to be a single mother and which, in turn, affect
children’s health. If the error term in a model for becoming single mother is correlated
with poor mothers’ health, and the error term in equation (1) is correlated with this, the
error terms are correlated. In this case, we have an omitted variable problem that yields
biased OLS estimates.
     In order to account for the bias, we fit an instrumental variables estimation, a treatment-
effects model that will also restore consistency under the hypothesis of selection of unob-
servable factors. This is achieved with at least one instrumental variable that must be (di-
rectly) correlated with marital status and, at the same time, (directly) uncorrelated with
the child’s height-for-age z-score (the so-called exclusion restriction hypothesis). Thus we
are interested in fitting the model:
                                                                0
                         hazi = β0 + β1 singlemotheri + β2 Xi + i                         (2)
out pre-natal tests and monitor their health and the baby’s health.



                                                  12
                                                        0
                              singlemotheri∗ = α0 + α1 IVi + ui                                 (3)
where
                     
                         1,   singlemother* > 0, i.e., mother is single, separated, divorced
singlemotheri∗   =
                         0,   otherwise
and IVi is the instrumental variable that needs to assign exogenous variation to the
relation between mother’s marital status and child’s height-for-age. Expressed differently,
we need at least one variable that influences the probability of a woman becoming a single
mother that, at the same time, exerts no influence on her child’s height-for-age z-scores.
    In this paper, the instrumental variable is “firstborn girl”. The family economics
literature has shown the existence of a relationship between the probability of divorce
or lone motherhood and the sex of the firstborn in a family. Dahl and Moretti (2008),
Ananat and Michaels (2008), Bedard and Deschênes (2005) and Ayllón (2014b) have
shown for the United States that firstborns are less likely to cohabit with a father figure
if they are girls. In other words, firstborn girls (as opposed to firstborn boys) increase the
probability of divorce or separation among natural parents and decrease the probability
of their mother finding a new partner after dissolution of a partnership.18
    Several hypotheses have been used to explain the association between partnership
stability and firstborn males. First, it could be that men are (simply) gender biased and
have a greater preference for raising boys than girls, which would explain why they are
more likely to cohabit with their male offspring. Second, the role model hypothesis argues
that fathers may believe that their sons are more in need of a male role model (than
daughters) and that is why they are more likely to stay. Third, the technological reasons
or differential costs hypotheses assume that men could be more efficient at raising boys
than girls so, since it is easier for them, they are more likely to cohabit with their male
children. This is similar to the idea that girls could be more costly in terms of money
and time. Finally, the compensatory behaviour hypothesis assumes that boys have more
health problems and are harder to look after than girls, so fathers are more likely to stay
in the household to compensate.
    We hypothesize that, like in the United States, “firstborn girls” (and all their brothers
and sisters) are more likely to live without their father in Brazil than children in families
where a boy is born first. Indeed, a simple regression probit with the dataset at hand
confirmed that this is the case: firstborn girls are more likely than boys to live with a lone
mother (with a significance level of 5%). We have confirmed these results with data from
the five Brazilian Censuses from 1970 to 2010 extracted from the International Integrated
Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS-International) (see Minnesota Population Center,
2013). The significance level for the gender effect was even higher, which is readily
explained by the fact that the Census contains a huge number of observations compared
to the POF and therefore the gender effect can be more easily captured (Ayllón, 2014a).
    It is important to note that results from the simplest regression model indicated that
“firstborn girl” has no influence on the height-for-age z-score equation, which allows us to
implement an instrumental variables strategy. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first time that such an instrument has been used in the context of child health analyses.
    Mothers’s previously imposed age limitations help us to ensure that the child observed
to be the eldest really is the mother’s firstborn. In Brazil, mean age at leaving home is
  18
    Note that the same idea can be applied to widows. The death of a partner is a natural event that
does not affect all women with the same likelihood. But we claim that once a woman becomes a widow,
her chances of having a new partner are conditional on the sex of her firstborn child.


                                                13
above 20, so it is unlikely for the firstborn in a family to have already left the parental home
while the mother has a child that is younger than 6. Median spacing between children
of the same mother below the age of 20 is 3 years (with an average of 3.4) according to
Census data from 2010. Moreover, we assume that child sex is random (women cannot
induce the sex of their babies) and that there is no sex-selection abortion in Brazil as
confirmed by Chiavegatto Filho and Kawachi (2013).


6     Empirical results
Table 2 shows the results of the treatment-effects regression model. The first row clearly
indicates that, controlling for other observable factors, being raised by a single mother is
associated with lower height-for-age z-scores or, phrased differently, with a higher prob-
ability of suffering malnutrition, among children under the age of six in Brazil. The
coefficient for lone mothers is statistically significant at 1%. Moreover, post-estimation
results indicate that, conditional on being in a lone mother household, a child’s expected
height-for-age z-score is 0.31 points lower than for children in households with both par-
ents. This is, for example, equivalent to the effect of being raised by a mother that never
attended school.




                                              14
    The results of the second equation indicate the validity of the instrument variable
used. Having a firstborn girl in the family increases the probability of a mother raising
her children alone (statistically significant at 2%). The Wald test (shown at the bottom
of the table) establishes that we can reject the hypothesis that the two error terms are un-
correlated. Moreover, a likelihood-ratio test of an over-identified treatment-effects system
of interest against a just-identified version indicated the validity of the instrument used.
Indeed, the “firstborn girl” dummy was not significant in the main outcome equation in
any of the specifications we tried.
    As for the other variables for family structure, the number of children in a household up
to 10 years of age is associated with lower height-for-age z-scores in the studied sample, but
not in the case of older siblings (11-15 years). It is reasonable to believe that malnutrition
is more prevalent in families with a large number of children since food needs to be shared
among more members.
    Regarding the other explanatory variables, we focus first on children’s characteristics.
Being a female infant is positively related with higher height-for-age z-scores while being
black, half-caste or indigenous does not have any explanatory power. Our results indicate
that the nutritional racial gap is closing in Brazil once controlling for the endogeneity of
family structure. Children’s age (in months) is negatively associated with height-for-age
z-score, which indicates that younger children are (in relative terms) taller than older
children.
    The mothers’ characteristics offer some of the factors with the greatest explanatory
power. Mothers’ height is associated with higher children’s height-for-age z-scores and
the same is true for body-mass index. Both variables are keys in our specification as they
control for the child’s genetic code. As for the mother’s age at birth: the older the mother
was when she gave birth to the child, the higher her children’s scores.19 This association
slightly reverses at older ages, following the usual inverted-U shape.20 A mother’s lack
of schooling is another key variable for understanding children’s height-for-age z-scores
in Brazil. Compared to a child whose mother holds a University degree, a child with a
mother that never went to school has a z-score that is 0.30 points lower. Note that no
differences are observed between mothers that went to school (even for a short period).
Moreover, children with an employed mother have higher than average height-for-age
z-scores, although the coefficient is only statistically significant at 10%.
    Household economic status was controlled by building a categorical variable that com-
bined poverty status and receipt of Bolsa Famı́lia (BF). Poor children in Brazil that live
in households that receive Bolsa Famı́lia are still suffering consequences for their health
condition because their family cannot provide sufficient economic resources. Despite the
Bolsa Familia’s success at fighting poverty in Brazil, poor children in beneficiary house-
holds have lower height-for-age z-scores compared to those not receiving the transfer.21
Also, household income per capita was considered (in logs) but was not statistically mean-
ingful.22
   19
      Note that despite our initial hypothesis that taller women could have had better chances in the
marriage market (and, therefore, be less likely to be a lone mother), the variable “mother’s height” was
not statistically significant in explaining single motherhood.
   20
      Mother’s age was not included in order to avoid multicollinearity problems.
   21
      If households are no longer considered poor thanks to the BF transfer, this would indicate major
success of the program, by not only helping families out of poverty but also their children out of malnu-
trition.
   22
      We also tried to include household income quintiles but this made no difference to the results so they
were left out of the final specification.


                                                    15
Table 2: Coefficients for the treatment-effects model on heigh-for-age z-scores in Brazil,
2008-09


                                               Height-for-age z-score equation
                                               Coefficient Std. error  P-value
        Family structure
        Lone-mother                          -2.107       0.221       0.000
        No. of children up to 60 months      -0.128       0.060       0.034
        No. of children 5-10 years old       -0.123       0.042       0.004
        No. of children 11-15 years old       0.004       0.043       0.921
        Child’s characteristics
        Girl                                  0.155       0.053       0.003
        Black, half-caste o indigenous       -0.034       0.058       0.559
        Age (in months)                      -0.037       0.006       0.000
        Age2 (in months)                      0.000       0.000       0.000
        Mother’s characteristics
        Height                                0.030       0.004       0.000
        Body Mass Index (BMI)                 0.022       0.005       0.000
        Age at birth                          0.496       0.266       0.063
        Age at birth2                        -0.015       0.009       0.095
        Age at birth3                         0.000       0.000       0.135
        Ref. University degree
        Never at school                      -0.305       0.154       0.048
        Primary school incomplete            -0.172       0.119       0.149
        Completed primary                    -0.142       0.113       0.209
        Completed secondary                  -0.070       0.096       0.466
        Employed                              0.106       0.055       0.056
        Household economic status
        Ref. ’Not poor, not receiving BF’
        Not poor, receiving BF                0.060       0.076       0.426
        Poor, not receiving BF                0.045       0.146       0.755
        Poor and receiving BF                -0.191       0.107       0.074
        log(income per capita)               -0.041       0.042       0.330
        Urbanization / regional characteristics
        Piped water                           0.076       0.069       0.269
        Paved street                          0.119       0.053       0.027
        Ref. Southeast
        Northeast                             0.047       0.074       0.523
        Northt                               -0.123       0.084       0.142
        South                                0.073        0.081       0.366
        Central West                          0.026       0.084       0.759
                                                 Lone-mother equation
        Firstborn girl                        0.166       0.066       0.012
        ln − L                             -21667236
        ρ                                     0.529
        Wald test of independent eq. (ρ=0); χ2 (1)= 47.01 ; Prob > χ2 = 0.0000

Source: Pesquisa de Orçamentos Familiares (POF), 2008-09; authors’ computation. Standard errors
allow for intragroup correlation (children having the same mother).
                                              16
    In terms of the level of urbanization, the results show that living in an area with
paved streets is positively related with higher height-for-age z-scores while piped water
does not have any explanatory power. As for regional characteristics, and unlike the
previous literature, we do not find statistically meaningful differences across regions once
controlling for other characteristics and the endogeneity of family structure.
    Other variables were included in the specification to test their importance for height-
for-age z-scores but they do not yield statistically significant results and were left out of
the final specification. These include living in an urban area, whether the child has a
private insurance plan, sewage disposal in the household, mail delivery service, dangerous
location in the sense of being close to a dump, sewer, polluted river or a hill subject to
sliding, garbage service, street-lighting and household’s perception of the quality of the
health service. Note that the inclusion of none of these variables (or groups of them)
made no difference to the main results.

6.1     Robustness checks
One possible drawback of the estimation strategy presented above is the fact that for
a certain number of children in the sample the explanatory variable “girl” in the main
equation and “firstborn girl” in the auxiliary equation refer to the same child. In order to
confirm our results, we have run the same specification but excluding firstborn children
(thus from second order onwards). The results were very similar to those presented in
Table 2: lone motherhood is associated with lower height-for-age z-scores with a coefficient
of -1.89 (rather than -2.10) and statistically significant at 1%. Similarly, “firstborn girl”
is associated with lone motherhood with a level of significance of 3% and a coefficient
of between 0.169 (rather than 0.166). These results confirm that our findings are not
dependent on the child’s order of birth, and neither is the instrumental variable strategy.23


7      Conclusions
This paper has studied the causal relationship between family structure and children’s
health conditions in Brazil. In particular, we assessed whether lone motherhood has any
influence on the height-for-age (z-score) of children under the age of 6. Using data from the
Pesquisa de Orçamentos Familiares collected between 2008 and 2009, we find that children
being raised by a lone mother have a height-for-age z-score that is 0.31 points lower
than that of children of similar characteristics that cohabit with both progenitors. The
results are robust to different model specifications and are the outcome of an instrumental
variable econometric strategy that has been used for the first time in the context of
child development analysis. More precisely, we use male preference for firstborn sons (as
opposed to firstborn daughters) to instrument the probability of a woman becoming a
single mother. Robustness checks also indicated that the results are not dependent on
children’s birth order.
    The mechanisms that help to understand the positive relationship between stunting
and lone motherhood in Brazil, while controlling for other socio-economic and demo-
graphic factors, are difficult to disentangle. The previous literature has indicated that
  23
    We hypothesize that the small reduction in the coefficient for lone motherhood may indicate that
second and higher order children are slightly less affected by family structure because lone motherhood
may have occured in these households more recently. However, the dataset at hand does not contain
information about when the mother started to raise her children alone.


                                                  17
lone mothers probably suffer higher levels of stress given the need to deal with the dual
role of sole carer and primary breadwinner.24 Stress may affect women’s capacity to care
for children and therefore child development may be jeopardised. Lone mothers also lack
monitoring by a cohabiting partner that could, for example, dissuade her from health-
harmful and risk-taking attitudes with regard to the child. Finally, women that raise their
children on their own may have a smaller extended family and also fewer social relations
(due to the amount of time and energy that needs to be devoted to childcare) and, as a
result, may find it harder to seek or obtain help (in all domains).
    Our findings indicate that lone motherhood should be a major concern for health policy
design in Brazil. As in other parts of the world, each year, more and more children are
being raised by a lone mother. Moreover, our results are probably highly conservative as
we have intentionally not considered teenage mothers in order not to confound biological
immaturity with lone motherhood (Finlay et al., 2011). Health policy designers in Brazil
should not only focus on the (shrinking) inequalities by region or race but should also
shift their attention to the (increasing) inequalities by family structure.


8      Acknowledgments
Sara Ayllón gratefully acknowledges financial support from Spanish projects ECO2010-
21668-C03-02, ECO2013-46516-C4-1-R and XREPP (Direcció General de Recerca) and
Natalia Batista from FAPESP (2011/11253-1) and CNPq (Project-400876/2011-6). We
wish to acknowledge the Institute of Geography and Statistics (Brazil) for providing the
Census data that made this research possible and the Minnesota Population Center (In-
tegrated Public Use Microdata Series, IPUMS) for making it available to us.




  24
    For example, Paxson and Waldfogel (2002) found for the United States that higher levels of ab-
sent fathers, especially absent fathers and working mothers, were associated with higher rates of child
maltreatment.


                                                  18
References
Abrevaya, J., and C. M. Dahl (2008): “The Effects of Birth Inputs on Birthweight:
 Evidence From Quantile Estimation on Panel Data,” Journal of Business and Economic
 Statistics, 26(4), 379–397.
Alderman, H., J. R. Behrman, V. Lavy, and R. Menon (2001): “Child Health
 and School Enrollment: A Longitudinal Analysis,” Journal of Human Resources, 36(1),
 185–205.
Almond, D., and J. Currie (2011): “Human Capital Development before Age Five,”
 in Handbook of Labor Economics, ed. by D. Card, and O. Ashenfelter, vol. 4B, chap. 15,
 pp. 1315–1486. Elsevier.
Almond, D., and B. Mazumder (2005): “The 1918 Influenza Pandemic and Sub-
 sequent Health Outcomes: An Analysis of SIPP Data,” American Economic Review,
 Papers and Proceedings, 95(2), 258–262.
         (2011): “Health Capital and the Prenatal Environment: The Effect of Ramadan
  Observance during Pregnancy,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(4),
  56–85.
Amato, P. R. (2005): “The Impact of Family Formation Change on the Cognitive,
 Social, and Emotional Well-being of the Next Generation,” The Future of Children,
 15(2), 75–96.
Ananat, E., and G. Michaels (2008): “The Effect of Marital Breakup on the Income
 Distribution of Women with Children,” Journal of Human Resources, 43(3), 611–629.
Ayllón, S. (2014a): “The Demand for Sons around the World,” Discussion paper, un-
  published.
         (2014b): “The Demand for Stepsons,” Discussion paper, unpublished.
Barker, D. J. (1990): “The Fetal and Infant Origins of Adult Disease,” British Medical
 Journal, 301(6761), 1111.
Barros, F. C., A. Matijasevich, J. H. Requejo, E. Giugliani, A. G.
 Maranhão, C. A. Monteiro, A. J. Barros, F. Bustreo, M. Merialdi, and
 C. G. Victora (2010): “Recent Trends in Maternal, Newborn, and Child Health in
 Brazil: Progress toward Millennium Development Goals 4 and 5,” American Journal
 of Public Health, 100(10), 1877–1889.
Becker, G. (1991): “A Treatise on the Family,” Harvard University Press.
Bedard, K., and O. Deschênes (2005): “Sex Preferences, Marital Dissolution, and
 the Economic Status of Women,” Journal of Human Resources, 40(2), 411–434.
Bennett, T. (1992): “Marital Status and Infant Health Outcomes,” Social Science and
 Medicine, 35(9), 1179–1187.
Bennett, T., P. Braveman, S. Egerter, and J. L. Kiely (1994): “Maternal
 Marital Status as a Risk Factor for Infant Mortality,” Family Planning Perspectives,
 26(6), 252–271.

                                          19
Bird, S. T., T. Chandra, T. Bennett, and S. M. Harvey (2000): “Beyond Marital
  Status: Relationship Type and Duration and the Risk of Low Birth Weight,” Family
  Planning Perspectives, 32(6), 281–287.

Black, R., L. Allen, Z. Bhutta, L. E. Caulfield, M. de Onis, M. Ezzati,
  C. Mathers, and J. Rivera (2008): “Maternal and Child Undernutrition: Global
  and Regional Exposures and Health Consequences,” The Lancet, 371(9608), 243–260.

Buckles, K., and J. Price (2013): “Selection and the Marriage Premium for Infant
 Health,” Demography, 50(4), 1315–1339.

Chiavegatto Filho, A. D. P., and I. Kawachi (2013): “Are Sex-selective Abortions
 a Characteristic of Every Poor Region? Evidence from Brazil,” International Journal
 of Public Health, 58(3), 395–400.

Chung, E. K., K. F. McCollum, I. T. Elo, H. J. Lee, and J. F. Culhane
 (2004): “Maternal Depressive Symptoms and Infant Health Practices among Low-
 income Women,” Pediatrics, 113(6), e523–e529.

Craigie, T.-A. (2008): “Effects of Paternal Presence and Family Instability on Child
 Cognitive Performance,” Discussion paper, Center for Research on Child Wellbeing,
 Working Paper 2008-03-FF.

Curran, P. J., B. O. Muthen, and T. C. Harford (1998): “The Influence of
 Changes in Marital Status on Developmental Trajectories of Alcohol Use in Young
 Adults,” Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs, 59(6), 647–658.

Currie, J., and J. Gruber (1996): “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent
 Changes in the Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women,” Journal of Political Economy,
 104(6), 1263–1296.

Currie, J., and T. Vogl (2012): “Early-life Health and Adult Circumstance in Devel-
 oping Countries,” Discussion Paper 18371, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Dahl, G. B., and E. Moretti (2008): “The Demand for Sons,” The Review of Eco-
 nomic Studies, 75(4), 1085–1120.

Deaton, A. (2008): “Height, Health, and Inequality: the Distribution of Adult Heights
 in India,” American Economic Review, 98(2), 468–474.

Dobbing, J. (1976): “Vulnerable Periods in Brain Growth and Somatic Growth,” in
 The Biology of Human Fetal Growth, ed. by D. F. Roberts, and A. M. Thomson, pp.
 137–147. Taylor & Francis, New York.

Duncan, G. J., B. Wilkerson, and P. England (2006): “Cleaning Up Their Act:
 The Effects of Marriage and Cohabitation on Licit and Illicit Drug Use,” Demography,
 43(4), 691–710.

Durkheim, E. (1951): Suicide: A Study in Sociology. New York: The Free Press.

Ermisch, J. F., and M. Francesconi (2001): “Family Structure and Childrens
 Achievements,” Journal of Population Economics, 14(2), 249–270.


                                         20
Espinosa, J., and W. N. Evans (2008): “Heightened Mortality after the Death of a
  Spouse: Marriage Protection or Marriage Selection?,” Journal of Health Economics,
  27(5), 1326–1342.

Evans, W. N., and D. S. Lien (2005): “The Benefits of Prenatal Care: Evidence from
  the PAT Bus Strike,” Journal of Econometrics, 125(1), 207–239.

Evans, W. N., and J. S. Ringel (1999): “Can Higher Cigarette Taxes Improve Birth
  Outcomes?,” Journal of Public Economics, 72(1), 135–154.

Finlay, J. E., E. Özaltin, and D. Canning (2011): “The Association of Maternal
  Age with Infant Mortality, Child Anthropometric Failure, Diarrhoea and Anaemia for
  First Births: Evidence from 55 Low-and Middle-income Countries,” British Medical
  Journal Open, 1(2), 1–24.

Finlay, K., and D. Neumark (2010): “Is Marriage always Good for Children? Ev-
  idence from Families Affected by Incarceration,” Journal of Human Resources, 45(4),
  1046–1088.

Fishman, S. M., L. E. Caulfield, M. de Onis, M. Blössner, A. A. Hyder,
  L. Mullany, and R. E. Black (2001): “Childhood and Maternal Underweight,” in
  Comparative Quantification of Health Risks, ed. by M. Ezzati, A. D. Lopez, A. Rodgers,
  and C. J. L. Murray, vol. 1, chap. 2, pp. 39–161. World Health Organization.

Fomby, P., and A. J. Cherlin (2007): “Family instability and child well-being,”
  American Sociological Review, 72(2), 181–204.

Furstenberg, F. F., and A. J. Cherlin (1991): Divided Families: What Happens to
  Children when Parents Part. Harvard University Press.

Gigante, D. P., B. L. Horta, R. C. Lima, F. C. C. Barros, and C. G. Victora
  (2006): “Early Life Factors are Determinants of Female Height at Age 19 Years in a
  Population-based Birth Cohort (Pelotas, Brazil),” Journal of Nutrition, 136(2), 473–
  478.

Glewwe, P., and H. G. Jacoby (1995): “An Economic Analysis of Delayed Primary
 School Enrollment and Childhood Malnutrition in a Low Income Country,” Review of
 Economics and Statistics, 77(1), 156–169.

Glewwe, P., H. G. Jacoby, and E. M. King (2001): “Early Childhood Nutrition
 and Academic Achievement: A Longitudinal Analysis,” Journal of Public Economics,
 81(3), 345–368.

Glewwe, P., and E. M. King (2001): “The Impact of Early Childhood Nutritional
 Status on Cognitive Development: Does the Timing of Malnutrition Matter?,” The
 World Bank Economic Review, 15(1), 81–113.

Goldman, N. (1993): “Marriage Selection and Mortality Patterns: Inferences and Fal-
 lacies,” Demography, 30(2), 189–208.

Gomes-Neto, J. B., E. A. Hanushek, R. H. Leite, and R. C. Frota-Bezerra
 (1997): “Health and Schooling: Evidence and Policy Implications for Developing Coun-
 tries,” Economics of Education Review, 16(3), 271–282.

                                          21
Greene, M. E. (1992): “Formal and Informal Marriage in Brazil: Changes and Conse-
 quences for Family Structure,” in Encontro Nacional de Estudios Populacionais, vol. 1,
 pp. 165–206. Anais VIII Encontro Nacional de Estudos Populacionais, ABEP.

Greene, M. E., and V. Rao (1995): “The Marriage Squeeze and the Rise in Informal
 Marriage in Brazil.,” Biodemography and Social Biology, 42(1-2), 65–82.

Hahn, B. (1993): “Marital Status and Women’s Health: The Effect of Economic Marital
 Acquisitions,” Journal of Marriage and Family, 55(2), 495–504.

Hibbard, J. H., and C. R. Pope (1993): “The Quality of Social Roles as Predictors
  of Morbidity and Mortality,” Social Science and Medicine, 36(3), 217–225.

Joyce, T. (1999): “Impact of Augmented Prenatal Care on Birth Outcomes of Medicaid
  Recipients in New York City,” Journal of Health Economics, 18(1), 31–67.

Kirchengast, S., B. Hartmann, K. W. Schweppe, and P. Husslein (1998):
  “Impact of Maternal Body Build Characteristics on Newborn Size in Two Different
  European Populations,” Human Biology, 70(4), 761–774.

Kramer, M., and C. G. Victora (2001): “Low Birth Weight and Perinatal Mortality,”
 in Nutrition and Health in Developing Countries, ed. by R. D. Semba, M. W. Bloem,
 and P. Piot, pp. 57–69. Springer.

Kramer, M. S. (1987): “Determinants of Low Birth Weight: Methodological Assessment
 and Meta-analysis,” Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 65(5), 663–737.

Liljestrand, J., S. Bergstrom, and S. Westman (1985): “Maternal height and
  Perinatal Outcome in Mozambique,” Journal of Tropical Pediatrics, 31(6), 306–310.

Lillard, L. A., and C. W. A. Panis (1996): “Marital Status and Mortality: The Role
  of Health,” Demography, 33(3), 313–327.

Lin, M.-J., and E. M. Liu (2014): “Does In Utero Exposure to Illness Matter? The 1918
  Influenza Epidemic in Taiwan as a Natural Experiment,” Journal of Health Economics,
  37, 152–163.

Machado, D. C. (2008): “Efeitos da Saúde na Idade de Entrada à Escola,” Pesquisa e
 Planejamento Econômico, 38(1), 67–96.

Martorell, R. (1995): “Results and implications of the INCAP follow-up study,”
 Journal of Nutrition, 125(4 Suppl.), 1127S–1138S.

Martorell, R., J. R. Behrman, R. Flores, and A. D. Stein (2005): “Ratio-
 nale for a Follow-Up Study Focusing on Economic Productivity,” Food and Nutrition
 Bulletin, 26(2 Suppl 1), S5–14.

Martorell, R., L. K. Khan, and D. G. Schroeder (1994): “Reversibility of Stunt-
 ing: Epidemiological Findings in Children from Developing Countries.,” European Jour-
 nal of Clinical Nutrition, 48(Suppl 1), S45–57.

Minnesota Population Center (2013): Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, In-
 ternational: Version 6.2 [Machine-readable database]. University of Minnesota.

                                          22
Misra, D. P., C. Caldwell, A. A. Young Jr, and S. Abelson (2010): “Do Fathers
 Matter? Paternal Contributions to Birth Outcomes and Racial Disparities,” American
 Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 202(2), 99–100.

Monk, C., and G. Kingdon (2010): “Health, Nutrition and Acadmic Achievement:
 New Evidence from India,” Economics Series Working Papers CSAE WPS/2010-14,
 University of Oxford, Department of Economics.

Murray, J., D. R. de Castro Cerqueira, and T. Kahn (2013): “Crime and
 Violence in Brazil: Systematic Review of Time Trends, Prevalence Rates and Risk
 Factors,” Aggression and Violent Behavior, 18(5), 471 – 483.

Murray, J. E. (2000): “Marital Protection and Marital Selection: Evidence from a
 Historical-Prospective Sample of American Men,” Demography, 37(4), 511–521.

Osborne, C., L. M. Berger, and K. Magnuson (2012): “Family Structure Transi-
 tions and Changes in Maternal Resources and Well-being,” Demography, 49(1), 23–47.

Paim, J., C. Travassos, C. Almeida, L. Bahia, and J. Macinko (2011): “The
  Brazilian health system: history, advances, and challenges,” The Lancet, 377(9779),
  1778–1797.

Paxson, C., and J. Waldfogel (2002): “Work, Welfare, and Child Maltreatment,”
  Journal of Labor Economics, 20(3), 435–474.

Peacock, J. L., J. M. Bland, and H. R. Anderson (1995): “Preterm Delivery: Ef-
  fects of Socioeconomic Factors, Psychological Stress, Smoking, Alcohol, and Caffeine,”
  British Medical Journal, 311(7004), 531–535.

Pollet, T. V., and D. Nettle (2008): “Taller Women Do Better in a Stressed Envi-
 ronment: Height and Reproductive Success in Rural Guatemalan Women,” American
 Journal of Human Biology, 20(3), 264–269.

Pollitt, E., K. S. Gorman, P. L. Engle, J. A. Rivera, and R. Martorell
 (1995): “Nutrition in Early Life and the Fulfillment of Intellectual Potential,” Journal
 of Nutrition, 125(4 Suppl), 1111S–1118S.

Reichenheim, M. E., E. R. de Souza, C. L. Moraes, M. H. de Mello Jorge,
 C. M. da Silva, and M. C. de Souza Minayo (2011): “Violence and Injuries
 in Brazil: the Effect, Progress Made, and Challenges Ahead,” The Lancet, 377(9781),
 1962–1975.

Reis, M. (2012): “Differences in Nutritional Outcomes between Brazilian White and
 Black Children,” Economics & Human Biology, 10(2), 174–188.

Rendall, M. S., M. M. Weden, M. M. Favreault, and H. Waldron (2011):
 “The Protective Effect of Marriage for Survival: A Review and Update,” Demography,
 48(2), 481–506.

Ribar, D. C. (2004): “What Do Social Scientists Know About the Benefits of Marriage?
  A Review of Quantitative Methodologies,” IZA Discussion Papers 998, Institute for the
  Study of Labor (IZA).


                                           23
Ronsmans, C., S. Holtz, and C. Stanton (2006): “Socioeconomic Differentials in
 Caesarean Rates in Developing Countries: A Retrospective Analysis,” The Lancet,
 368(9546), 1516–1523.

Ross, C., J. Mirowsky, and K. Goldsteen (1990): “The Impact of the Family on
 Health: The Decade in Review,” Journal of Marriage and Family, 52(4), 1059–1078.

Sigle-Rushton, W., and S. McLanahan (2004): “Father Absence and Child Wellbe-
  ing: A Critical Review,” in The Future of the Family, ed. by D. Moynihan, L. Rainwater,
  and T. Smeeding, pp. 116–155. Russell Sage Foundation, New York.

Tach, L., R. Mincy, and K. Edin (2010): “Parenting as a “Package Deal”: Rela-
  tionships, Fertility, and Nonresident Father Involvement among Unmarried Parents,”
  Demography, 47(1), 181–204.

Teitler, J. O. (2001): “Father Involvement, Child Health and Maternal Health Behav-
 ior,” Children and Youth Services Review, 23(4-5), 403–425.

Umberson, D. (1992): “Gender, marital status and the social control of health behav-
 ior,” Social Science and Medicine, 34(8), 907–917.

Waber, D. P., L. Vuori-Christiansen, N. Ortiz, J. R. Clement, N. E. Chris-
 tiansen, J. O. Mora, R. B. Reed, and M. G. Herrera (1981): “Nutritional
 Supplementation, Maternal Education, and Cognitive Development of Infants at Risk
 of Malnutrition,” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 34(Suppl 4), 807–813.

Waite, L. J. (1995): “Does Marriage Matter?,” Demography, 32(4), 483–507.

Weiss, Y., and R. J. Willis (1985): “Children as Collective Goods and Divorce Set-
 tlements,” Journal of Labor Economics, 3(3), 268–292.

WHO (1986): “Use and Interpretation of Anthropometric Indicators of Nutritional Sta-
 tus,” Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 64(6), 929–941.

         (1995): “Maternal Anthropometry and Pregnancy Outcomes: A WHO Collab-
  orative Study,” Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 73(Suppl), 1–98.

Wisniewski, S. L. W. (2010): “Child Nutrition, Health Problems, and School Achieve-
 ment in Sri Lanka,” World Development, 38(3), 315–332.

Wood, R. G., B. Goesling, and S. Avellar (2007): “The Effects of Marriage on
 Health: A Synthesis of Recent Research Evidence.,” Discussion paper, U.S. Department
 of Health and Human Services.

Wu, L. L. (1996): “Effects of Family Instability, Income, and Income Instability on the
 Risk of a Premarital Birth,” American Sociological Review, 61(3), 386–406.




                                           24
