          Productivity, Heterogeneity and Brazilian
                     multinational firms
                                 Pedro Henrique Cavalcanti Rocha ∗
                                   Hélio de Sousa Ramos Filho †


                                                 Resumo
O processo de globalização produtiva, especialmente após a década de 2000, reconfigurou a
dinâmica dos fluxos de investimentos internacionais. As firmas multinacionais tiveram, e ainda
têm, um papel fundamental neste novo cenário internacional. Um ponto interessante, da per-
spectiva microeconômica, é entender o que leva a essas firmas a expandirem suas operações em
outras economias. Com base no modelo de Yeaple (2009), busca-se avaliar se o nível de produ-
tividade das firmas multinacionais brasileiras e outras variáveis exógenas impactam as decisões
de investimento estrangeiro direto (IED). Ao utilizar microdados e diferentes modelos empíri-
cos, concluí-se que há, de fato, uma tendência das firmas brasileiras mais produtivas em estarem
presentes em um maior conjunto de países e, sobretudo, em maior escala. Verifica-se também
que as características-país, tais como Produto Interno Bruto (PIB), PIB per capita e distância
são relevantes, na maioria dos casos, em explicar as decisões de IED das firmas brasileiras.

       Palavras-chave: Produtividade, Firmas multinacionais, Brasil.

                                                 Abstract
The process of the globalization of production, especially after the decade of 2000, reconfig-
urated the dynamics of foreigns investiments flows. Multinational firms had, and still have,
a fundamental role in this new international economic scenario. An interesting point, on the
microeconomic perspective,is to understand what it takes these firms to expand it’s operations
in other economies. Based on the model constructed by Yeaple (2009), we aimed to evaluate
if the level of productivity within the firms and other exogenous variables impact the decisions
of foreign direct investiment (FDI). Using microdata and diferent empiric models, we con-
cluded that there is, in fact, a tendecy in the most productives brazilian firms to be present in a
larger set of countries and with higher levels of scales of operations. It is also verified that the
country-charactheristics, such as Gross Domestic Product (GDP), GDP per capita and distance
are relevant, in most cases, in explaining the decisions of FDI of brazilian firms.

       Key-words: Productivity, Multinational companies, Brazil.




   ∗ Graduate    Program in Applied Economics,UFPB, Brazil. E-mail:pedrohenriquecavalcantirocha@gmail.com.
   † Professor   of the Department of Economics,UFPB, Brazil E-mail:helioramos@gmail.com.


                                                      1
1    Introduction
        The technological gains achieved since the 1990s have encouraged the economies to
turn to foreign trade in the pursuit of trade gains. The globalization process has mitigated trade
barriers and encouraged investment foreign trade, promoting greater freedom to trade goods
and services between countries. Thus, the role of multinational firms in this phase of economic
integration has assumed a strong relevance in determining the flows of foreign direct investment
(FDI).
        Brazilian FDI outflows in the early 1990s, according to Amal e Kegel (2012), was re-
garded as relatively insignificant. From the late 1990 and early 2000, due to the economic
reforms carried out previously, brazilian firms moved towards the international markets through
foreign direct investment. This process has accelerated since 2001, driven by a new cycle of
business in the world economy. Since then, brazilian companies has been more actively in-
volved in global value chains through its subsidiaries and has increasingly promoted foreign
investment direct.
        Studies carried out by Yeaple (2009) suggest that the most productive firms promote
foreign direct investment in a larger set of countries and, in general, the revenues obtained
from these investments are greater in relation to the lesser productive firms. In addition, coun-
tries with a specific set of characteristics, such as large GDP and GDP per capita, population
size, smaller distances, bilateral or multilateral trade agreements, have a greater number of
subsidiaries of multinational firms, with a relatively lower level of productivity, compared to
countries with less attractive individual characteristics.
        For Brainard (1993) and Yeaple (2009), the direction of the investment flows of multi-
national firms tends to the markets with more proximity (in terms of distance) and fewer eco-
nomic restrictions to the movement of international investments. Using data for the United
States, evidence was found that more productive firms have subsidiaries in a larger set of foreign
economies and, in general, have higher revenues. In addition, the results showed the presence of
a pecking order of FDI, i.e., more productive firms are present in countries with less attractive
characteristics, while, on the other hand, less productive firms engage in FDI only in attractive
localities.
        Therefore, this paper seeks to test if the predictions described by Helpman, Melitz e
Yeaple (2004) and, especially, by Yeaple (2009), fit for the case of brazilian multinational firms.
The lack of scientific work that specifically addresses the outflows of Brazilian foreign invest-
ment, taking into account the economic theory developed about multinational firms, is the main
motivation of this research. Furthermore, the paper has two central goals: to find how the
subsidiaries of Brazilian multinationals are spatially distributed; and what are the determining
factors in the decision of multinational firms to serve foreign markets and how level of produc-
tivity and the other variables determine this decision paradigm.
        The article is divided into 5 sections, in addition to this introduction. The second section


                                                 2
deals with the revisions of the theoretical literature and its contributions to the development of
the theory of multinational firms. The third section deals with the empirical literature developed
in recent years. The fourth section is the methodology of the work, divide in obtaining the
data and the empirical strategies adopted. The results section is divided into 5 sub-sections:
descriptive analysis, scope, scale, country characteristics and cutoff point. The final section is
devoted to the final considerations.


2    Literature Review
        Dunning (1977) reinforces the role of multinationals in investment flows. In the initial
starting point of the traditional theory of multinationals, multinational firms have a set of spe-
cific advantages vis-à-vis domestic firms that justify the establishment of a subsidiary in another
country. Dunning denominates these advantages as OLI.
        The first advantage concerns about the sub-paradigm of property. Multinationals have,
in most cases, competitive advantages over domestic firms. These advantages are a result of
the possession of technological assets - such as technology and differentiated products - in a
monopolistic competition structure. The locational advantage consists of the natural and fixed
inputs in a foreign country which, together with the technological superiority, logistics and
administration of multinational firms, favors foreign investment in these localities. Finally,
internationalization refers to the advantage of which multinationals benefit from the differences
in the prices of factors of production between countries, in order to reduce production costs as
well as to obtain economies of scale.
        The eclectic approach of FDI and the role of multinationals encompasses a multitude of
factors from the OLI advantages. Other studies with a more specific approach on the different
modalities of FDI were carried out during the 1980s. These studies addressed two types of
foreign direct investment: Vertical FDI and horizontal FDI.
        Helpman (1984) assesses the decision-making processes of multinational firms regard-
ing vertical FDI. In his article, Helpman (1984) analyzes the conditions necessary for firms to
internationalize their production processes through FDI in order to identify the role of multina-
tional companies in the determination of international investment flows. The main contribution
of Helpman (1984) regarding the theory of multinational firms is the theoretical clarification of
the determination and movement of international investments. Countries differ in the allocation
of factors of production and multinationals have the capacity to exploit these divergences in the
remuneration of production factors, diversifying its production activities in lower cost areas.
        Markusen (1984) departs from Helpman’s approach of FDI. Markusen (1984) proposes
that the decisions of multinational firms to promote FDI are not based on the relative endowment
of factors, but on the degree of technological instruction of the firm. In addition, the horizontal
FDI derives from the interactions of companies at the plant level with firms activities such as
RD, marketing, advertising and distribution.

                                                3
        Markusen (1984) develops a model in which multinational (multi-plant) companies can
compete with domestic (single-plant) companies. In many respects, the model presents some
key elements, such as the role of multinationals in the determination of FDI, given technical
superiority, as well as the income gains of the recipient countries, due to the effects on the
intersectoral allocation of economic activity.


2.1    Foreign Direct Investment Theory: the 1990 decade
        Several contributions were made about the theory of multinational firms in the 1990.
While the 1980s theorists considered the divergence between the remuneration of factors of
production as the main driver of FDI, the approach adopted by the authors during the 1990s at-
tached greater importance to technological capabilities and economic incentives in determining
foreign direct investment. One of these authors were Brainard (1993).
        Brainard (1993) analyzes the decision-making process of multinational companies fac-
ing two possible choices: on the one hand, maximizing the proximity of the consumer mar-
ket of their products and, on the other hand, concentrating the productive process aiming for
economies of scale.
        The traditional approach of the 1980s predicted that the decisions of multinationals are
based on the difference in the allocation of production factors and, therefore, the prices of these
factors between the countries, which would encourage the firms to promote vertical FDI.
        Not taking into account the existence of differences between prices of production factors,
Brainard (1993) states that firms will be more likely to use resources to open a branch in a
foreign country the higher are the costs related to trade barriers and transportation costs, and
lower are the costs related to barriers to foreign investment and the size of economies of scale
at the industry level at the corporate level in aggregate terms. In short, given that factor prices
do not differ, firms choose to produce abroad or export by comparing the additional fixed costs
of opening a subsidiary in a foreign country and the variable costs of exporting.


2.2    FDI and heterogeneous firms
        The Helpman, Melitz e Yeaple (2004) model deals with the behavior of multinational
firms regarding direct foreign investment decisions, in the context of inter-sectoral heterogene-
ity. Initially, the authors work with the conception of horizontal FDI that was highlighted in
Markusen (1984) and the choice of firms between promote this type of FDI and exclusively
serve to the foreign market via export. The model differentiates inter-sectoral productivity
among domestic firms, exporters and firms which promote FDI. In general, the authors’ initial
observations are four:

   1. Only the most productive firms undertake activities abroad;



                                                4
   2. Among firms operating in other economies, only the most productive firms engage in
      foreign direct investment (FDI);

   3. Assuming a high intra-firm heterogeneity, the sales of the firms that operate under FDI
      are substantially higher than those of firms that carry out exports;

   4. Firms with low productivity operate only in the domestic market of their nationality.

         A firm in a country i will, in all cases, serve the domestic market through local pro-
duction. Nevertheless, it may also expand its commercial activities to foreign markets, through
exports or foreign direct investment.
         The graph constructed by HMY demonstrates analytically the main proposition of the
authors: the relation between the profit functions and the degree of productivity, and the impact
of this relation in the decision of investment. At first, all profit functions are linearly increasing
at the same level of demand, given the same labor productivity. Secondly, the profits of firms
that opt for FDI are initially lower than the others, given the fixed operating costs. In addition,
the profit function of exporting firms is less inclined due to transportation costs.

                                 Figure 1: Profit Linear Functions




                           Source:Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple(2004)


        Firms with a level of productivity lower than (aiD )1−ε opt for not starting productive
                                                                                             ij
activities once they obtain negative profits. Firms that operate in the interval between (aX )1−ε
       ij
and (aI )1−ε exclusively serve the domestic market.
        At the point of intersection between the profit functions of exporting firms and firms that
prioritize FDI, the level of profit is the same for both. However, firms with productivity higher
        ij
than (aI )1−ε have higher profitability than others.



                                                  5
2.3    Empirical Evidence
        Brainard (1993) extensively addressed the trade off faced by multinational firms on one
hand, concentrating productive activities in one location, aiming at economies of scale and, in
the other, the proximity of the consumer public.
        Brainard (1993) analyzed activities directed abroad, both on the share of exports and the
share of sales of affiliates in the with the purpose of evaluating the idiosyncrasies of recipients of
exports and foreign direct investment by US firms. Then, she promoted empirical tests related
to the activities of foreign companies in the United States. Similar to the initial estimates, the
purpose of this phase is to quantitatively analyze the characteristics of the US economy in order
to draw conclusions about the determinants of foreign firms’ decisions to export and carry out
FDI. The results suggested that a higher level of trade barriers and transportation costs would
reduce export incentives while making it more attractive to open an affiliate in another country,
as her theory indicates.
        Head e Ries (2003) proposed an adaptation of the HMY model in the case of firms of the
Japanese manufacturing sector with the objective of evidencing the parity between predictions
of the HMY model and the model alternative. The HMY model suggests a positive correlation
between the degree of dispersion of productivity among firms in a sector and the relative sales of
firms that promote FDI in relation to exporting firms in foreign markets.Nevertheless, the degree
of productivity determines the level of operation of a firm, such that only the most productive
firms serve the foreign markets by direct investment.
        However, Head e Ries (2003) have shown that there are several ways of estimating
productivity and, therefore, the relationship between export decisions and direct investment is
subject to the parameter used to quantify the productivity.
        In addition, the empirical model of Head e Ries (2003) showed that the heterogeneity in
the firm’s productivity seems to interact with the heterogeneity in market size and factor prices
of potential recipient countries. Finally, the relationship between firm size and the market in
which it operates is similar to that predicted by the HMY model.
        Yeaple (2009) took a different approach to the HMY model. In dealing with US firms,
Yeaple (2009) divided the analysis in scope (number of a firm’s subsidiaries in a foreign market),
and scale (size in terms of sales of the affiliates of the firms). One of the main predictions re-
sulting from Yeaple’s contribution (2009) is: as the productivity of the multinational increases,
the same happens with the scope and scale of operations of their affiliates, that is, more produc-
tive firms have subsidiaries in more countries, and obtain higher revenues from the sale of their
products.
        Futhermore, Yeaple (2009) considers the effect of individual characteristics of coun-
tries in determining the range that makes foreign direct investment relatively more profitable
than export. Thus, more attractive countries receive direct investment from firms that are both
productive and less productive, whereas only firms with high levels of productivity supplies


                                                  6
countries considered to be less attractive.
         As the empirical results of Yeaple (2009) suggest, for US firms, there is a pecking order
in relation to the level of productivity of firms and the scale of operations of their affiliates. The
results of the tests also point out that economies with larger GDP?s, higher GDP per capita and
closer to the United States tend to reduce the average productivity of the incoming affiliates of
US firms.
         Fariñas, Martín-Marcos e Velázquez (2018) analyze the HMY model, allied with the
Yeaple model (2009), in the case of the multinational activities of the European firms. The au-
thors seeked to demonstrate the existence of a relationship between the degree of productivity of
European firms and the decisions of expansion in foreign markets by FDI or exported activities,
(given by the cut-off point shown in Figure 1, presented in section 1.2) and also to analyse the
order of chain of firms in relation to the scale and scope of multinational activities, given the
level of productivity and the individual characteristics of the countries
         Unlike Helpman, Melitz e Yeaple (2004) and Yeaple (2009), who used only the United
States as a reference country in their research, Fariñas, Martín-Marcos e Velázquez (2018)
proposed an analysis with several european countries, controlling the heterogeneity from the
variability of the data. Another contribution of the authors was the distinction between own-
ership - ownership of the majority subsidiaries -, and control - direct control of affiliates - of
multinational firms.


3       Empirical Strategy

3.1     Methodology
3.1.1    Scope and Scale

        The empirical strategy is used to measure the scope and scale of brazillian multinational
activity. Statistical methods of linear regression and linear probability models were used to
promote the estimations. Most of the equation used in this empirical strategy were derived from
Yeaple (2009) and Fariñas, Martín-Marcos e Velázquez (2018).
        To examine the relation between scope of operations and productivity, controled by
sector and country, Yeaple (2009) used:

                            DNh j j = β0 + β1 ∗ lnPNh jh + θ p + θs + ε j                         (1)

Onde:
DNh j j : Binary variable. If the multinational firm from country h is present in country j, it
equals 1. Else, it equals 0;
lnPNh jh : the natural log of domestic firms revenue. It is a proxy for productivity; θ p : country
j fixed effects ;


                                                  7
θs : sectorial fixed effects.
ε j is the regression error.

     The estimation of the scale of operations by the multinational firms is given by the
TOBIT model. The equation that describes the model is:

                                SNh j j = β0 + β1 ∗ PNh j j + θ p + θs + ε j                      (2)

Onde:
SNh j j : affialite sales in a country j by firm from country h which have an affiliate in country j;
PNh j j : domestic firm revenues;
θ p : the country fixed effects for country j ;
θs : sectorial fixed effects for country j.
ε j is the regression error.

      For McDonald e Moffitt (1980), the use of the TOBIT model is generally adequate to
model data with the presence of corner solutions, that is, a frequency distribution with right
asymmetry and a large number of observations with null value. In this context, the traditional
method of Least Squares becomes inadequate given the regression bias to negative values.

3.1.2   Country characteristics

        Next, it is estimated if the individual characteristics of the countries are decisive factors
for the decision making of the multinational firm, when choosing between entering foreign
markets via export or FDI. In this context, countries with individual characteristics considered
attractive to multinational companies would reduce the gap where export profitability is higher
than FDI profitability, encouraging the latter. Thus, the empirical strategy is based on the use of
the Ordinary Least Squares model for three different equations.
        The first equation consists in the estimation of the number of branches, as a dependent
variable, by the set of variables related to the characteristics of the countries. In this case, the
aim is to evaluate if the characteristics of the countries impact the FDI decisions of firms in
expanding their multinational activities through new affiliates.

                 Ni = β0 + β1 ∗ GDP + β2 ∗ GDPpc + β3 ∗ DIST + β4 ∗ RTA + εi                      (3)

Onde:
Ni is the number of affiliates in country i;
εi is the regression error.

        The second equation associates the revenues of the subsidiaries with the country char-


                                                     8
acteristics, as follows:

                    SNi = β0 + β1 ∗ GDP + β2 ∗ GDPpc + β3 ∗ DIST + β4 ∗ RTA + εi                  (4)

Onde:
SNi is the affiliate revenue in country i;
εi is the regression error.

        Finally, the third equation deals with the average productivity of multinationals with
country characteristics, that is, the logarithm of domestic revenue of firms that have a subsidiary
in the same set of country characteristics, divided by the number of subsidiaries that they have
in a country i. The equation is given by:

                        j
               (lnPNi /Ni ) = β0 + β1 ∗ GDP + β2 ∗ GDPpc + β3 ∗ DIST + β4 ∗ RTA + εi              (5)

Onde:
   j
PNi is the average productivity of firm j in country i. εi is the regression error.



3.1.3       Cut-off point

        According to Yeaple (2009), the cut-off point of multinational activity (PN) is the point
in which FDI profitability exceeds the profitability of other foreign trade activities 1 . It repre-
sents the lowest level of productivity in which a multinational firm promotes FDI in a foreign
economy. The estimation seeks to verify if the characteristics of the countries reduce or enlarge
this cut-off point. Thus, the equation defined by:

                   lnPNi = β0 + β1 ∗ GDP + β2 ∗ GDPpc + β3 ∗ DIST + β4 ∗ RTA + εi                 (6)

Onde:
lnPNi is the logarithm of domestic revenue of firm i;
εi is the regression error.



3.2     Data
        The present work is based on the collection of data from a sample of 112 Brazilian
multinationals with the purpose of analyzing and, above all, evidencing the decisions of firms
to practice foreign direct investment, given their sectoral characteristics, their productivity levels
   1 vide   graph 1.0



                                                  9
and, and finally, the relations with the macroeconomic variables of the countries whose firms
have commercial activity.
       In this way, it is configured in a quantitative research. It should be emphasized that the
analysis proposed by this work only covers the year 2016, due to the restriction of information
regarding previous years. Finally, the data obtained are in cross-section format.
       Table 1 shows the variables used, the acronyms adopted for these variables, as well as
the measurement format and the location where they were obtained.

                               Table 1: Data source
          Variables      Digits Measure                      Source
 GDP                      GDP     US$                     World Bank
 GDP per capita          GDPpc    US$                     World Bank
 Population               POP     1000                    World Bank
 Distance                 DIST     Km                        NBRE*
 Domestic Revenue of the   PN     US$               Balanços Patrimoniais**
 Affiliates Revenue        SN     US$               ITC/ Investment Map***
 Number of Affiliates      Ni     Unit                ITC/ Investment Map
 Commercial Deals         RTA    1 ou 0               ITC/ Investment Map
 Source: Own elaboration (2018)
 Note: *National Bureau of Economic Research; **Brazillian website; ***International Trade Centre



4     Results

4.1   Descriptive Analysis
        The organizational structure of Brazilian multinational firms and their subsidiaries, ac-
cording to the various theoretical arguments made in the course of this research, should follow
a pecking order, of which, more productive firms, that is, with a larger number of domestic
sales, serve a greater number of external markets and, in addition, have a higher average value
of revenue in these markets. On the other hand, firms with low productivity enter less countries
and the average value of their revenues is lower.
        Graph 2 shows the distribution of Brazilian branches in foreign economies. Of the 61
multinational firms, 74% have only one branch in an overseas market, while only 2% have more
than 6 affiliates. We can see here a high concentration of firms with only one subsidiary, indi-
cating that, on average, these firms have lower productivity than the others and, consequently,
have lower revenues.




                                               10
                   Figure 2: Distribution of the number of brazillian affiliates




                                     Source:Own elaboration


       Graph 3 shows the composition of the Brazilian affiliates in the countries analyzed.
From the 61 Brazilian firms, 31 are located in Argentina and 15 are located in Mexico. Thus,
75% of the Brazilian multinational companies are concentrated in these two countries. This
implies that these a set of characteristics - economic, social and political - that make them more
favorable to the entry of the Brazilian subsidiaries

                    Figure 3: Geographic Distribution of brazilian affiliates




                                     Source:Own elaboration


        It should be noted that given the individual characteristics of the countries - such as dis-
tance, GDP of the recipient country, GDP per capita of the receiving country, size of population

                                                11
and level of country productivity - those with higher productivity levels are more likely of hav-
ing fewer Brazilian branches in their economies, while countries with low levels of productivity
are more likely to have a greater presence of these.
        Graph 4 shows the number of Brazilian branches by sector. The Chemical and Food
sectors are distinguished from the others, presenting, in that order, 16 branches each. Next, we
highlight the Metals sector, which has 15 branches. In total, three sectors jointly represent 41%
of the multinational activity of Brazilian firms.
        In addition, figure 5 shows the number of countries in which the Brazilian branches
of a certain sector are inserted. It is noted that the food industry branches are the most dis-
persed internationally, distributing in 11 countries, while the branches of the lumber sector are
concentrated in only 2 different countries.




    Figure 4: Number of affiliates by sector     Figure 5:     Number of countries by affili-
                                                 ate/sector

                                    Source:Own elaboration


        The sectorial distribution of the Brazilian subsidiaries is a fundamental aspect of the
analysis of inter-sectoral heterogeneity, especially with respect to the level of productivity of
a given industry and the extension of the multinational activity of the Brazilian subsidiaries,
within a specific sector, in foreign economies.
        Graph 6 lists the aggregate domestic revenues of Brazilian firms by country group (5
countries per group), ranked in ascending order by number of subsidiaries present. Group 1, for
example, has the smallest number of subsidiaries in a given country, while group 5 presents a
group of countries with a greater presence of subsidiaries.
        The behavior of the revenue logarithm is in a chaining order with a moderate growth
trend. However, this order is only partially obeyed. In this case, the assumption that the most
productive firms - higher levels of domestic revenue - invest in a larger set of countries, regard-
less of the individual characteristics of these firms fairly adjust for the brazilian case.




                                                12
           Figure 6: Logarithm of the aggregate domestic revenue by country group




                                    Source:Own elaboration.


         Graph 1, presented in section 2.2, is based on the assumption that firms differ in produc-
tivity in such a way that more productive firms opt for foreign direct investment from a certain
cut-off point, as they obtain larger profits through sales revenues of its subsidiaries, while firms
with lower levels of productivity access foreign markets via export.
         Thus, countries with individual characteristics that reduce the level of productivity re-
quired to become direct investment at least as profitable as exports will have a greater presence
of multinationals. This hypothesis about the effect of the country characteristics on the cut-off
point of the level of profitability and, consequently, on the investment decision of the multina-
tional firms will be tested empirically.
         Next, econometric tests will be carried out to estimate the relationship between the de-
gree of productivity of Brazilian firms and the scope and scale of the firms operations in foreign
markets.


4.2    Scope
        Table 1 shows the results of the estimation of the scope of multinational activity of
Brazilian firms in relation to productivity. In the first column, the linear probability model was
used to estimate the scope in relation to the level of productivity of the firm, controlling the
fixed effects country and sector.
        Thus, the firm’s participation in a given market is determined by its productivity, whose
dependent variable is binary: 1 if it participates and 0 otherwise. In the second column, the
PROBIT model is applied in order to verify the robustness of the model treated in column 1.

                                                13
                        Table 2: Scope of brazillian multinational activity
                                    Scope: OLS                      Scope: OLS
                                        (1)                              (2)
                                     0,0075**                        0,05418**
            Productivity
                                     (0,0036)                         (0,0247)
            Country fixed-effect        Yes                              Yes
                                        Yes                              Yes
            N Industry fixed-effect    1116                             1116
            R2                         0,014                            0,029
            Source: Own elaboration (2018)
            Note: The values in parentheses are the regression errors. The values of
            the columns (1) e (2) are in logarithm. (**) represent statistical significance in
            10% e 5% levels, respectivatly.


        The results in column 1 are statistically significant and positive. They suggest that the
greater the domestic proceeds of Brazilian firms, proxy for productivity, the more likely these
companies to open a subsidiary in a foreign market.
        Column 2 presents the result of the estimation of the same equation proposed for col-
umn 1, but in this case, using the PROBIT model. In this configuration, the result suggests
that, controlled country and sector fixed effects, there is statistical significance and positive re-
lation between domestic revenue and affiliated sales, corroborating with the results found in the
column 1.


4.3    Scale
        Table 2 shows the scale of the multinational activity of Brazilian firms. Columns 1 and
2 include the results of the estimations of equation 2 by the OLS model. In column 1, the sector
fixed effects were inserted in order to test the specification bias that this variable could cause
in the regression. Column 2, on the other hand, does not include sector fixed effects. This
procedure has the purpose of evidencing the robustness of the independent variable, similar to
the PROBIT model in the estimation of the scope of the Brazilian firms. Column 3 presents the
result of the estimation of the scale of the Brazilian firms on the productivity proxy, using the
TOBIT model.




                                                   14
                         Table 3: Scale of brazillian multinational activity
                                      Scale: OLS Scale: OLS               Scale: TOBIT
                                          (1)        (2)                       (3)
                                       0,2549*    0,2019*                  13,7807**
            Produtividade
                                        (0.1331)         (0,0110)             (5,5198)
            Country fixed-effect          Yes              Yes                  Yes
            Industry fixed-effect         Yes              No                   No
            N                             112              112                  90
            R2                           0,627            0,037
            Source: Own elaboration (2018)
            Note: The values in parentheses are the regression errors. The values of
            the columns (1) e (2) are in logarithm. Values in column 3 are in units
            (*), (**) represent statistical significance in the 10% e 5% levels, respectivatly.


       The results of column 3 indicate that the estimated values are statistically significant
and positive. In the specification of the model, there is a positive relationship between domestic
revenue and revenues of the subsidiaries of Brazilian multinational firms. Thus, the greater
the productivity of multinational firms - resulting in higher domestic revenues - the higher the
revenues of these firms’ branches from commercial activities in a given economy.


4.4    Country Characteristics
        Table 3 presents the results referring to the estimated values parameters of the regressors
estimates that associate the characteristics of the countries in relation to the variables of the
Brazilian multinational firms.
        Given the restriction of the number of observations of the country characteristics (limited
to the number of countries analyzed), it was decided to disaggregate the data in the country-
industry sample format. This approach allows, on the one hand, to indirectly control intra-
sectoral heterogeneity and, on the other hand, to extend the sample so that it is possible to
produce a statistically significant linear regression model.
        It should be noted that industrial dummy variables were included in the models presented
to control the industrial fixed-effect, but these were suppressed in Table 3, to facilitate the
visualization of the results.




                                                    15
                  Table 4: Multinational activity disaggregated by component
                                   Number        Affiliate sales     Average productivity
                                      (1)              (2)                   (3)
                                  0,1065***        1,8395*               1,4309***
         GDP
                                    (0,0407)           (1,0631)             (0,4066)
                                    0,0807*            -0,1220            -1,7463***
         GDPpc
                                    (0,0516)           (1,4260)             (0,6775)
                                  -0,3535***       -5,1624**               -2,5276**
         DIST
                                    (0,1111)           (2,5524)              (1,075)
                                    0,0677        -12,070***                -1,0920
         RTA
                                    (1,439)            (2,6013)             (1,2004)
         Industry fixed-effect        Yes                Yes                  Yes
         N                            76                 76                   76
         R2                         0,4158             0,2822               0,3709
         Source: Own elaboration (2018)
         Note: The values in parentheses are the regression errors. All variables, except RTA,
         are in logarithm. (*),(**) e (***) represent statistical significance in
         10%, 5% e 1% levels, respectivatly.


        Column 1 shows the results of the estimation of the number of subsidiaries by country-
industry in relation to the characteristic variables of the countries. The estimated coefficients
of the disaggregated sample for column 1 have the predicted signal. In this case, countries
with larger markets (higher GDP), richer in terms of per capita (higher GDP per capita) and less
distant (less DIST) have a higher number of Brazilian subsidiaries. All variables are statistically
significant at the significance level of 10%, but only GDP and DIST are statistically significant
at the significance level of 5%. The binary variable representing the existence of commercial
agreements (RTA) was statistically insignificant.
        In the specification of the linear regression model for affiliated sales, shown in column
2, only the per capita GDP coefficient is non-significant. Estimates for GDP and DIST have
the predicted signal and are statistically significant, indicating that a 1% increase in GDP re-
sults in a 1.71% increase in revenue from affiliated sales of Brazilian subsidiaries, while a 1%
increase in distance (DIST) reduces the revenues of subsidiaries by 4.52%. Nevertheless, the
RTA coefficient, although statistically significant, did not obtain the predicted signal.
        Column 3 presents the coefficients of the regression of the average productivity in rela-
tion to the country characteristics. In this context, the average productivity is the ratio between
the domestic revenue of Brazilian firms - proxy for productivity - and the number of subsidies,
in the sample disaggregated by country-industry.
        All variables except RTA are statistically significant. However, only the sign of GDP
per capita is similar to that predicted, that is, contrary to the sign of the coefficient of the
variables of column 1. The results indicate that the average productivity of firms is increasing
for GDP and decreasing for GDPpc and DIST. Thus, countries with higher GDP, lower GDP per
capita (China, for example) and closer to Brazil receive brazilian subsidiaries with increasing


                                                  16
productivity, in average.


4.5    Cut-Off Point
        The purpose of this section is to test whether country characteristics determine the cut-
off level of multinational activity. The cut-off point, in the context of firms that participate in
the international market, is the point at which FDI profitability outperforms export profitability.
Thus, only the most productive firms would be able to go beyond this point and engage in
foreign direct investment. However, Yeaple (2009) states that the characteristics of the countries
would induce a reduction or increase of the cut-off point, such that more productive firms would
perform FDI independently of the country characteristics, while less productive firms would
only promote FDI in the most attractive locations.
        The results of the estimation of the cut-off variable with the country characteristics are
shown in Table 4. According to Yeaple (2009), the cut-off variable, representative of the cut-
off point, is the value minimum of the logarithm of the domestic revenues of a Brazilian firm
that has a subsidiary in a given country-industry. In this way, it represents the lowest level of
productivity required to promote FDI in a sector of a foreign economy.

                                Table 5: Cut-off productivity level
                                                   Cut-off Standard error
                        GDP                       1,076**     0,4458
                        GDPpc                     -1,887**    0,6454
                        DIST                      -1,856**    1,0256
                        RTA                        -0,7471    1,0849
                        Industry fixed-effect        Yes         -
                        N                             76         -
                        R2                         0,1512        -
                        Source: Own elaboration (2018)
                        Note: All variabels are in logarithm.
                        (*),(**) e (***) represent statistical significance
                        in the 10%, 5% e 1% levels , respectivatly.


        The results obtained for the coefficients are statistically significant at the significance
level of 10 %, except the RTA. The signs of the coefficients are similar to those in column
3 of table 3. Following the results, the productivity cutoff point is higher in countries with
larger markets (GDP), with lower per capita income (GDPPC) and greater distance from Brazil
(DIST).




                                                  17
5    Conclusion
         This paper aimed to demonstrate the relationship between the heterogeneity of produc-
tivity levels and the decisions of multinational firms to participate in the international market
through FDI with a greater or lesser degree of intensity. In a broader context, the aim was to
evaluate if the characteristics of the countries affect the minimum level of productivity to per-
form FDI in a certain sector of a foreign economy, with positive profits and higher than the
export alternative. For this, the models of Helpman, Melitz e Yeaple (2004) and Yeaple (2009)
were used as theoretical and empirical basis for the case of Brazilian firms.
         It was analyzed whether the Brazilian multinationals met the pecking-order hypothesis,
from which more productive firms engage in higher FDI levels in locations considered less at-
tractive to foreign investment than the others, less productive. In this sense, it was evidenced
that more productive companies participate more actively, through a greater presence of sub-
sidiaries, for a certain set of countries. However, it should be noted that the strong presence
of zeros in the data regarding the domestic revenues of the firms implies that the productiviy
pecking-order found is not a sufficient condition to evaluate the foreign investment flows of
Brazilian firms. That is, the economic significance of zero-value revenues may not have been
captured by group aggregation, thus requiring an additional method to assess the robustness of
results.
         To verify the effect of productivity on the scope and scale of the multinational activity
of Brazilian firms, the PROBIT and TOBIT models were used on the number of subsidiaries
and affiliated sales of the Brazilian multinationals, respectively. The results presented suggested
a positive relationship between productivity and number of subsidiaries, and productivity and
affiliated sales, thus providing a favorable argument for the pecking-order of multinational com-
panies.
         The results found in this study met, for the most part, the objectives proposed initially.
However, it is worth mentioning that there is an informational problem about data on Brazil-
ian FDI. As Calderón (2014) pointed out, it became difficult to identify the final sectors and
recipient countries of FDI of Brazilian firms.
         New research carried out in this field should take into account the fact that more robust
techniques for the treatment of the strong presence of zeros and the concentration of the data
are employed in order to generate even more precise results.




                                                18
Appendix
       The country groups in Graph 3 are:

                            Table 6: Group of countries
         Group 1  Group 2       Group 3        Group 4               Group 5  Group 6
      Bahrein     Austrália     Bolívia     South Africa              Chile   Argentina
      Guatemala   Colombia       Egypt         Canada                 China    México
      Israel     Cape Verde Netherlands         India               Paraguay
      Japan       Ecuador       Malaysa         Peru                Uruguay
      Mozambique Singapore     Thailand        Turkey               Venezuela
      Source: Own elaboration (2018)


       The descriptive statistics of the groups are presented in table 7:

                    Table 7: Descriptive statistics of groups of countries
                      Number of affiliates firms        Level (Aggregate revenue)
                      Mean Standard deviation           Mean Standard deviation
            Group 1     1              0                 1,85         2,805
            Group 2    1,8           0,45                6,11         3,602
            Group 3    2,2           0,45                6,78         2,279
            Group 4    3,2           0,45                7,08         4,358
            Group 5     5            0,71                8,09         0,908
            Group 6    23           11,31               9,88          0,040
            Source: Own elaboration (2018)


       The frequency distributions of domestic revenues and affiliated sales of Brazilian multi-
national firms are shown in Figures 7 and 8, respectively.




Figure 7: The frequency distributions           Figure 8: The frequency distributions
to domestic revenue                             of affiliate firms sales




                                               19
References
AMAL, M.; KEGEL, P. L. Determinants of brazilian outward foreign direct investment: a
home country perspective. In: Impacts of emerging economies and firms on international
business. [S.l.]: Springer, 2012. p. 168–188.

BRAINARD, S. L. An empirical assessment of the proximity-concentration tradeoff between
multinational sales and trade. [S.l.], 1993.

CALDERÓN, A. A. B. Outward fdi in brazil: A matter of economic growth and institutional
configuration. In: FLACSO-ISA Joint International Conference, Buenos Aires, Argentina. [S.l.:
s.n.], 2014.

DUNNING, J. H. Trade, location of economic activity and the mne: A search for an eclectic
approach. In: The international allocation of economic activity. [S.l.]: Springer, 1977. p.
395–418.

FARIÑAS, J. C.; MARTÍN-MARCOS, A.; VELÁZQUEZ, F. J. Multinational activity of
european firms and heterogeneity. The World Economy, Wiley Online Library, v. 41, n. 5, p.
1166–1195, 2018.

HEAD, K.; RIES, J. Heterogeneity and the fdi versus export decision of japanese
manufacturers. Journal of the Japanese and international economies, Elsevier, v. 17, n. 4, p.
448–467, 2003.

HELPMAN, E. A simple theory of international trade with multinational corporations. Journal
of political economy, The University of Chicago Press, v. 92, n. 3, p. 451–471, 1984.

HELPMAN, E.; MELITZ, M. J.; YEAPLE, S. R. Export versus fdi with heterogeneous firms.
American economic review, v. 94, n. 1, p. 300–316, 2004.

MARKUSEN, J. R. Multinationals, multi-plant economies, and the gains from trade. Journal
of international economics, Elsevier, v. 16, n. 3-4, p. 205–226, 1984.

MCDONALD, J. F.; MOFFITT, R. A. The uses of tobit analysis. The review of economics and
statistics, JSTOR, p. 318–321, 1980.

YEAPLE, S. R. Firm heterogeneity and the structure of us multinational activity. Journal of
International Economics, Elsevier, v. 78, n. 2, p. 206–215, 2009.




                                              20
