    DOES BULLYING AFFECT THE SCHOOL PERFORMANCE OF BRAZILIAN
            STUDENTS? AN ANALYSIS THROUGH OF PISA 2015

                                                                          Marco Túlio Aniceto França*
                                                                              Júlia Sbroglio Rizzotto †


ABSTRACT
This work aims to analyze the impact of the different dimensions of bullying (physical,
psychological and indirect) on the school performance of Brazilian students. For this analysis
data from the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) from the year of 2015
were used. The methodology applied was the Propensity Score Matching (PSM) and the
Quantile Treatment Effects (QTE). Results show that physical bullying (being spanked and
having belongings destroyed) is harmful for the school performance of students. The
destruction of belongings of students negatively impacted only the Reading score, not being
statistically significant for the other grades. The psychological bullying (having rumors
spread, being made fun of and being threatened), paradoxically, did not affect negatively the
grade of students. Being excluded by the group, considered as indirect bullying, also did not
have significance in the studied subjects. Bullying carries several consequences for the
student, besides the decrease of school, performance because it can result in school evasion
and sometimes difficulties in the labor market. Thus, studying this phenomenon, by means of
school behavior, is an important subject for the society.

Key words: Bullying; School performance; Aggression; Pisa; Microeconometrics.

JEL: I24; I25; C21.

RESUMO
O presente trabalho tem como objetivo analisar o impacto das diferentes dimensões do
bullying (físico, psicológico e indireto) no desempenho escolar dos alunos brasileiros. Para
essa análise foram utilizados os dados do Programa Internacional de Avaliação de Estudantes
(PISA) do ano de 2015. A metodologia empregada foi o propensity score matching (PSM) e o
Efeito Quantílico de Tratamento (EQT). Os resultados mostraram que o bullying físico
(apanhar e ter pertences destruídos) é prejudicial para o desempenho escolar dos alunos. A
destruição de pertences dos alunos impactou negativamente apenas a nota de leitura, não
sendo estatisticamente significante para as demais notas. O bullying psicológico (ter boatos
espalhados, fizeram piadas e foi ameaçado), paradoxalmente, não afetou negativamente a nota
dos estudantes. Ser excluído pela turma, considerado bullying indireto, também não teve
significância nas disciplinas estudadas. O bullying traz diversas consequências para o
estudante além da redução no desempenho escolar, pois, pode acarretar abandono escolar e
por vezes dificuldades no mercado de trabalho. Portanto, estudar esse fenômeno, por meio do
comportamento escolar, é um assunto de importância para a sociedade.
Palavras-chaves: Bullying; School performance; Aggression; Pisa, Microeconometria.
                      Área 12 - Economia Social e Demografia Econômica

*
  Professor in the Postgraduate Program in Economics of Development from the Pontifical Catholic University
of Rio Grande do Sul (PUCRS). E-mail: marco.franca@pucrs.br
†
  Master Student in the Graduate Program in Economics of Development from the Pontifical Catholic University
of Rio Grande do Sul (PUCRS). Email: juliasbroglio@gmail.com
This study was financed in part by the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior—Brasil
(CAPES) - Finance Code 001. Errors and omissions are responsibility of the authors.
INTRODUCTION

        Bullying is defined as the conscious and deliberate desire of abusing another person
and to put them under tension (FANTE, 2015)1. A student is being intimidated or victimized
when he or she is repeatedly exposed, during time, to negative actions by one or more
students in a context of uneven power or force (OLWEUS,1993). To be a bully implies in
involving in repeated and intentional negative behaviors in the individual or in a group of
people with difficulty to defend themselves (OLWEUS, 1997). Bullying may have different
types such as physical, verbal, social or electronic (cyberbullying) (OLWEUS, 1993).
        Studies about school violence are recent and the first ones are from the 80‘s (EYNG,
2009). The theme is awakening the attention of the society, families and educators. Violence
in schools is a complex phenomenon affecting the daily life of students, threatening their
physical, psychological integrities, besides human dignity (EYNG, 2009). From the 90‘s,
interpersonal violence among students expressed normally in verbal aggressions and threats
increased (LEME, 2009).
        Bullying is one of the most recurrent types of violence in schools (BATSCHE, 1997).
Its practice during childhood is associated to problems of externalization, such as aggressive
and anti-social behavior in adult age, while victimization is associated with problems of
internalization such as depression and anxiety (KALTIANA-HEINO et al., 2000;
SOURANDER et al., 2000). The effects of being a victim of bullying may be confused
among the different effects associated to being a bully, a victim and a victim of bullying
regarding behavior (GEORGIOU; STAVRINIDES, 2008). Bullying affects individuals in
cognitive and psychological levels. Children involved with bullying had more behavioral
problems, hyper-activity and misconduct, when compared to students not involved with this
practice (WOLKE et al. 2000).
        Bullying is nothing more than a way of expressing the prejudice and intolerance to
social, personal and structural situations that are different from the standard idealized by the
consumer society (BACILA, 2005). Thus, its occurrence is related to actions of hostility and
stigmatization when the victim has, as stated by Bacila (2005), characteristics socially
represented as negative or inferior ones, generating the preconception.
        The negative relation between school performance and bullying may be explained by
the fact that the victim has a lower school attendance, less contact with their colleagues and a
greater incidence of depression (VAN DER WERF, 2014). According to the authors, the
victims learn less since they are less interested in studying, not only because they miss classes
but also because they learn less with their colleagues, since the school is a hostile
environment. Also, bullying must be a concern not only to the educational system, since the
victims present lower school performance, and greater evasion, but also to the health system
(AZEREDO et al., 2015). Children suffering from bullying have less class attendance due to
the fear of going to school, since they have already suffered violence within it (BERTHOLD
and HOOVER, 2001). Consequently, this results in possible evasions. Inside the context of
the health system, bullying brings consequences for the victims, because they have more risk
of psychosocial problems such as low self-esteem, anxiety, depression and suicide.
        Kibriya et al. (2015) observed that bullying has negative effects in the school
performance of students in Gana. Besides, the authors found that female students have their

1
   According to the Brazilian Multi-professional Association of Protection to Childhood and Adolescence
(ABRAPIA) as there is no word in Portuguese that represents all situations of bullying, the actions that may be
present in this practice are: putting nicknames, offending, mocking, enjoying, incarnating, messing, humiliating,
making suffering, discriminating, excluding, isolating, ignoring, intimidating, stalking, harassing, terrorizing,
frightening, bullying, dominating, aggressing, beating, shooting, pushing, harming, stealing/breaking belongings.
school performance more affected when compared to male students who suffered bullying.
However, the presence of a teacher reduces the effect of the bullying suffered by female
students. Oliveira et al. (2018) found an impact of bullying on the Mathematics grades of
students from the 6th grade of public schools in Recife. Also, socio-emotional skills may help
students to deal with bullying (OLIVEIRA et al., 2018). Thus, the authors conclude that
programs fighting this practice must evaluate non-cognitive skills.
        Being male, young, exposed to domestic violence and not living with the two parents
are variables associated with being a victim of bullying (AZEREDO et al, 2015). According
to UNESCO (United States Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization), bullying
affects both female as well as male children, however in different ways. Girls are more prone
to experience bullying based on appearance (psychological), while boys are more prone to
experience physical bullying.
        As reported by a study published by the United States Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization (UNESCO,2017)2, schools where only 5% of students, or less, suffered
bullying reached a grade of 517 points in the PISA test. In those unities with 10% or more of
students suffering bullying, the average grade was 470 points. It is worth to highlight that the
overall average of this test for Sciences is 493. Also, the youngsters who suffered bullying
feel more anxious before doing the tests.
        The objective of this paper is to analyze the impacts of bullying on the school
performance of adolescents and also to evaluate if the effect differs considering the quantile
of the student‘s grade. This phenomenon will be analyzed according to the six questions
elaborated in the questionnaire of the Programme for International Student Assessment
(PISA) disclosed in 2015 by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). Besides presenting the grades of Brazilian students, it approaches the cognitive
scope of the child, whereby means of the answers of the questionnaire it is possible to observe
if the child self-declared to have suffered bullying.
        The use of PISA is justified by means of studies showing that bullying normally
happens between nine and fifteen years of age, moment when the research takes place. The
dimensions investigated will be: being spanked, having gossip spread, having their belongings
destroyed, being threatened, being made fun of and being left out. Bullying was divided into
three categories: physical (being spanked, having their belongings destroyed), psychological
(having gossip spread, being made fun of, being threatened) and indirect (being left out) as
proposed by Olweus (1991). This way, it will be possible to analyze which type of aggression
more affects the school performance of students. The strategy of estimation will be to
compare students who suffered (treatment group) with those who did not suffer bullying
(control group) according to observable characteristics. The methodology applied will be the
Propensity Score Matching (PSM) in order to verify the effect on the average and the
Quantile Treatment Effects (QTE) in order to observe the effects along the performance
quantiles.
        According to a study made by The Institute of Economic Research Foundation (FIPE,
2009)3 in 501 public Brazilian schools in 2009, bullying has a significant correlation with the
averages of the ―Prova Brasil‖. Those correlations are negative, thus, in schools where there is
more occurrence of bullying, the averages in this test are lower. Brazil has low levels of
academic school performance in standardized international tests in addition to the existence of
school violence, and according to the Talis report (2018) there was a high percentage of
school Principals who stated that the students suffered bullying in Brazil compared to the rest
of the countries.

2
    Available at: http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0026/002657/265781e.pdf
3
    Available at: http://portal.mec.gov.br/dmdocuments/relatoriofinal.pdf
        The contribution of this work is to analyze the relation between bullying and school
performance in Brazil. Although there are texts with this theme, there are no, according to our
knowledge, studies that used the database of PISA in order to verify the several dimensions
related with bullying affecting school performance. The use of this database, nationally
representative, differs from the one used by Oliveira et al (2018) whose analysis was carried
out in Recife. Besides, it allows to investigate a transition period from elementary to high
school, because the students are between 15 and 16 years of age. This is an especially sensible
period since many students evade in this stage of school due to incentives for entering the
labor market. The investigation of those factors allows the development of more assertive
policies for mitigating the problem.
        This paper is organized in six sections, besides this introduction. Next a literature
review about the impact of bullying on the school performance of children is made.
Subsequently, the database, descriptive statistics and the empirical strategy are approached.
Finally, the results are discussed and the final considerations are elaborated.

2. LITERATURE REVIEW

        Pereira et al. (2004) analyzed bullying in Portuguese schools in students from 10 to 12
years old by means of a field research. The authors show that gender has a significant role in
victims and bullies. The social class also has significance and may derivate from the social
differences in the Portuguese society. The authors concluded that being male and being part
of lower social classes increases the risk of suffering bullying.
        Costa e Pereira (2010) evaluated school success and failure and the prevalence of
bullying at the different levels of basic schools. Students with school failure are more
involved in episodes of bullying. Besides, the result found corroborates the theory that the
greater the failure is, the more aggressive are the children. In addition, victimization results in
a lower school performance – during the period when the child is being victimized - such as
the one found by Carvalhosa (2009).
        The greater the contact with the school by the child is, the smaller is their association
with violence (RESNICK et al., 2000). The low levels of intelligence and the poor progress in
school emerge as risk factors associated with violence between children and youngsters.
Children having lower school performance have a tendency of emerging as targets for
bullying (SCHWARTZ et al., 2002).
        Contreras et al. (2009) evaluated the relation between bullying and the school
performance of students in Chile. Those with below the average school performance may be
negatively impacted by being victims of bullying. Paradoxically, being a victim has positive
effects in students with high school performance when compared to the other performances.
In other words, to suffer bullying increases the performance of students classified in the
interval from 6.5 to 7. It is worth to highlight that students with high performance are those
that, most of the times, are victims of bullying. The results found by the authors suggest that
there may be a heterogeneous relation between school performance and suffering/practicing
bullying, depending upon the skill of the student.
        Eriksen et al. (2014) analyzed the impact of bullying on the school performance of
children from 10 to 12 years old in Denmark. The authors found that the qualities of the
family environment as well as the individual characteristics of the child are predictive of the
bullying status. Besides, children that were victims of this practice had lower grades and these
effects have a tendency of increasing according to the severity of the act.
        Ponzo (2013) estimated the effect of being a victim of bullying on the educational
performance of Italian students enrolled in the fourth and eighth grades. The author estimated
the average effect of the treatment (suffering bullying) using the score of propensity to avoid
a possible bias of selection. Results found corroborate with the analyzed literature in which
having suffered bullying reduces the grades of Italian students.
        Rigby and Slee (1991) analyzed bullying in Australian schools. The authors found that
younger children are prone to suffer more bullying than the older ones, as well as the boys
were more intimated than the girls. Besides, bullying usually happens between nine and
fifteen years of age because the victims have characteristics that waken them before the
aggressor (CARNEY and MERREL, 2001). Bullying has a tendency of stopping along the
years, since people start to acquire social skills, improving the self-esteem (SMITH et al.,
1999).
        Children who are more exposed to domestic violence affect the grades on tests of
Mathematics and Reading of their classmates, and substantially increase the bad behavior of
other people in the classroom (CARREL et al., 2010). Furthermore, the authors found that the
externalities change according to the gender and family revenue of the child and seem to be
caused by boys of families exposed to violence.
        Children practicing bullying reported that the parents did not exercise the functions of
care and monitoring, sometimes being negligent (BOWERS, SMITH and BINNEY, 1992).
Contrary to victims of bullying who have a strong relationship with their parents being, thus,
over-protected. This study was also made in Italy by Finnegan, Hodges and Perry (1998) who
found similar results where the authors of bullying had relations of lower cohesion with their
families, while the victims were too closely linked to them.
        A consistency is observed in the international literature, since most of the studies find
that bullying negatively impacts the school performance. Studies about bullying in Brazil are
more recent. One of the first written texts was the one of Jaeger et al. (1997) whose authors
evaluated the aggressive behaviors in schools of Santa Maria by means of a questionnaire
adapted from Olweus (1989).
        Mello et al. (2017) evaluated the factors associated with the practice of bullying in
Brazil. The authors found that 19.8% of the aggressors are male, students of private schools
and sons of mothers with higher schooling. Those aggressors also missed more classes than
the other students, besides suffering more physical violence and having less supervision from
the parents. Most of the victims do not react or speak about the aggression suffered (NETO,
2005). And since those acts happen outside the view of an adult, it is possible to understand
why parents and teachers underestimate the prevalence of bullying and do not act in order to
interrupt this situation.
        There is a negative relation between maternal schooling and the victimization of
bullying, while domestic violence is positively related to this phenomenon (SILVA et al.,
2018). According to the authors, the advanced schooling of the mother makes her able to
impose limits, supervise and help the children when they have difficulties to relate in school.
The authors also found that the victims of bullying feel more alone, have less friends and have
insomnia – characteristics of depressive symptoms.
        Malta et al. (2014) analyzed factors associated to bullying by means of the National
Research of Health of the Scholar (PeNSe) under the perspective of the victim. The authors
found that males are more likely to suffer bullying. Besides, characteristics related to being
young, of black color, susceptible to domestic violence and smokers are more likely to being
victims of this phenomenon.
        When analyzing the prevalence of bullying in the South Eastern region of Brazil,
Mello et al. (2016) found that victims present greater depressive symptoms and high levels of
suicidal ideation in relation to non-victims. Besides, the authors point that the school is not
the only responsible for the production of violence, since bullying is a complex, multi-causal
and dynamic phenomenon whose origins are also matters of macro-social and macroeconomic
questions. Mello et al. (2016) suggest that educative actions are necessary where the juvenile,
the stimulus for social participation and the reflection involving the youngsters, educators and
families are valued. The prevention of bullying must be treated as a socio-cultural
phenomenon that must be approached in a holistic way, considering all aspects involved in
the problem according to Mello et al. (2016).

3. METHODOLOGY AND DATABASE

3.1 Database
         The Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) is an international
evaluation that measures the educational level of 15 years old youngsters by means of tests of
Reading, Mathematics and Sciences. This age cut happens because it is presupposed as the
end of compulsory basic schooling in most of the countries. PISA is held every three years by
the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) – which is formed by
30 countries that have as principles democracy and a market economy. Countries that are not
part of OECD can also take part in the exam, as is the case of Brazil. The National Institute
for Educational and Research ―Anísio Teixeira‖ (INEP) is responsible for carrying out the
tests of the program in the country.
         PISA has the objective of producing indicators that contribute to the discussion of the
quality of basic education and that may help national policies for the improvement of
education. Besides, by means of the tests the program aims to identify not only how the
student reproduces their knowledge, but the ability of using this knowledge inside and outside
the school context.
         A knowledge area is highlighted every year that PISA is carried out, in other words,
most of the questions are directed towards this area. In 2015 the highlighted area was
Sciences. The program is among the most recognized global evaluations of education. In
Brazil, the National Plan of Education (NPE), Law number 13,005 in its seventh goal contains
the strategy of improving the school performance of students in Basic Education in order to
reach the averages observed every year in schools from member countries of the OECD.
         PISA is applied in a sample form in which the records of the schools in each
participating country are used in the data selection process. In the case of Brazil, the data used
are from the School Census. The organization of PISA establishes that each country has at
least 150 schools participating in the test. Brazil since 2006 is increasing its sample and in the
year of 2015, there were 841 participating schools, 23,141 students and 8,287 teachers.
Therefore, the size of the sample may ensure a greater reliability of the representativeness of
results reached by Brazil.
         By means of PISA 2015, it is possible to identify youngsters that suffered or not
bullying in the last twelve months at school from the following statements answered by the
students: i) ―other students left me out on purpose‖, ii) ―other students made fun of me‖, iii) ―I
was threatened by other students‖, iv) ―other students removed or destroyed my belongings‖,
v) ―I was spanked or pushed by other students‖ and vi) ―others students spread gossip about
me‖. The students could answer with the following options: ―never or almost never‖,
―sometimes during the year‖, ―sometimes during the month‖ and ―once per week or more‖.
The construction of each one of the aspects regarding bullying was made by means of
dummies for each one of the questions above, where the answer ―never or almost never‖
configures that students did not suffer the type of threat mentioned and the other options
represented students who suffered it, according to the definition of PISA. The variables of
bullying were split in three categories: physical (being spanked and having their belongings
destroyed), psychological (having gossip spread, being made fun of and being threatened) and
indirect (other students leaving them out on purpose) as proposed by Olweus (1991) for a
better comparison.
        In addition, dummies were created regarding the perception of the student inside the
school. In other words, if the student feels out of place, weird, alone or part of the school
unity. Through those variables it will be possible to analyze if those students who suffered
bullying identify themselves as strange in the school environment when compared with those
that did not suffer it. The more students perceive the school as an unsafe place, the more they
report to be victims of bullying (MATOS and GONÇALVES, 2009).

Table 1 - Descriptive Statistics
                                                                             Did not
                                                                             suffered   Suffered some kind
       Variables                            Description                      bullying   of bullying
                                                                              Average
                                                                                           Average (dp)
                                                                                (dp)
Dependent
                                                                               385.9          400.08
grade_mathematics    Score obtained in the test of mathematics                 (84.3)         (86.58)
                                                                              421.15          429.09
grade_reading        Score obtained in the test of reading                     (91.7)         (95.46)
                                                                               409.9          420.59
grade_sciences       Score obtained in the test of sciences                    (83.3)         (86.71)
Independent                  Individual and Family Characteristics
                     Child of male sex =1,                                     0.45             0.5
Male                 c/c =0                                                    (0.5)           (0.5)
                     Schooling level of the father measured from 1 to 5        2.93            3.09
scholarity_father    where each number corresponds to a level of schooling     (1.93)         (1.95)
                     Schooling level of the mother measured from 1 to 5        3.18            3.37
scholarity_mother    where each number corresponds to a level of schooling     (1.9)          (1.91)
                                                                               -1.28           -1.2
assets_home          Assets of the house                                       (1.06)         (1.07)
                                                                               -0.37           -0.32
assets_cultural      Cultural assets of the house                              (0.79)          (0.8)
                                                                               -1.17           -1.09
assets_family        Wealth of the family                                      (1.05)         (1.05)
                                                                               0.28            0.29
grade_repetition     Child repeated grade = 1, c/c = 0                         (0.45)         (0.46)
                                                                               15.88          15.88
Age                  Age of the child in years                                 (0.28)         (0.28)
                     Child has the perception of other students                0.78            0.75
like_me              liking them =1, c/c=0                                     (0.41)         (0.43)
                                                                               0.13            0.22
feel_dislocated      Child feels dislocated at school =1, c/c=0                (0.34)         (0.41)
                                                                               0.73            0.72
feel_belongging      Child feels part of the school =1, c/c=0                  (0.44)         (0.45)
                                                                               0.70            0.69
friendship_easy      Child makes friendship easy=1, c/c=0                      (0.46)         (0.46)
                                                                               0.15            0.25
feel_weird           Child feels weird at school =1, c/c=0                     (0.35)         (0.43)
                                                                               0.14            0.23
feel_alone           Child feels alone at school =1, c/c=0                     (0.35)         (0.42)

Independent                          School Characteristics
                     Child studies in the private network =1,                  0.14            0.18
Private              c/c =0                                                    (0.35)         (0.38)

                                                                               36.22          35.88
size_class           Total number of students at the class of the child         (8)           (8.07)
number_teachers      Total number of teachers at the school                    34.72          34.81
                                                                                  (20.84)   (20.91)
                                                                                  13.23     13.03
number_girls             Number of girls divided by the size of the class         (7.23)     (7.3)
                                                                                  12.28     12.04
number_boys              Number of boys divided by the size of the class          (6.78)    (6.86)

Independent                         Different Dimensions of Bullying
                                                                                             0.51
                                                                                    0
spread_gossip            Child had gossip spread at school =1, c/c=0                         (0.5)
                                                                                             0.17
                                                                                    0
Spanked                  Child was spanked at school =1, c/c=0                              (0.37)
                                                                                             0.29
                                                                                    0
belongings_destroyed Child had their belongings destroyed at school =1, c/c=0               (0.45)
                                                                                             0.24
                                                                                    0
Threatened               Child was threatened at school =1, c/c=0                           (0.43)
                                                                                             0.56
                                                                                    0
made_fun of              Child was made fun of=1, c/c=0                                      (0.5)
                                                                                             0.51
                                                                                    0
 left_out                Child feels left out by colleagues at school =1, c/c=0              (0.5)
 N (number of obs)                                                                6,693     4,230
Source: Self elaboration from data of PISA (2015)

        From Table 1 it is possible to identify that the age of students is between fifteen and
sixteen years old. It is possible that there is an age-grade distortion, since PISA is applied to
children of 15 years old that are enrolled from the 7th grade of elementary school until the
third year of high school. The cut of age happens because the end of compulsory schooling in
Brazil is assumed. It is worth to highlight that only observations that had no missings in any
variable were kept. So, the final number of observations of the sample was 10,923.
        The columns of the table were divided into a control group – students who did not
suffer any of the dimensions of bullying – and a treatment group – students who suffered
from at least one of the dimensions of bullying. Besides, it presents the six dimensions of
bullying studied.
        Regarding the variables about the perception of the student within the school, students
who suffered bullying are the ones feeling more dislocated, alone and weird. However, those
that did not suffer it are the ones easily making friendships, feeling that they are part of the
class and that the colleagues like them.
        Variables representing the socioeconomic level of the family – ―assets_home‖,
―assets_cultural‖ and ―assets_family‖ – were higher for students that did not suffer bullying.
It is worth to highlight that those variables were created by PISA by means of the item
response theory. Besides that, students who suffered bullying have higher educated parents,
despite the averages being similar.
        In order to eliminate the outliers of the sample, the size of some variables was limited.
Schools that had no teachers, and those declaring to have 120 or more teachers in their staff
were removed from the sampleThis strategy was made by observing the frequency table,
whose accumulated percentage corresponded to 99.13% of the sample. The cutting number
was thus defined, because the frequency was small and less relevant above this percentage.
The same happened with the variables ―number_girls‖ – which was limited to school unities
declaring to have 1,282 girl students or more - and ―number_boys‖ – which was limited to
schools that had 1,195 boy students or more.
3.2 Methodology

        3.2.1 Propensity Score Matching
        By means of the PISA questionnaire, adolescents can answer with what frequency,
during the last twelve months, they suffered practices related to bullying. Therefore, the
proposed identification strategy is to compare those students that answered that they never
suffered bullying with those that were victims of it.
        In order to estimate the effect of the several dimensions of bullying on the grade of
students the method of Propensity Score Matching (PSM) was used. The methodology was
developed by Rosembaum and Rubin (1983) and aims to analyze the probability of a group
receiving the treatment, taking into consideration the several observable characteristics, X, in
common between the two groups. Thus, it is assumed that each member of the treatment
group (student who suffered some of the dimensions related to bullying) has a pair in the
control group (student who did not suffer it). In order to avoid the problem of dimensionality,
the vector X of observable characteristics was replaced by p(X), which is defined as the score
of propensity:

                                                           ( )                 (                )                    (1)

Being valid the hypothesis of selection in the observable, the independence between the
potential result in the absence of treatment and the decision of participating or not will also be
valid. Thus,

                                            ( )                        ( )                    ( )                   (2)

Where       is the variable to be explained (school performance of students in Sciences,
Mathematics and Reading),        is the treatment (suffering bullying) and      is the vector of
explanatory variables. Thus, it is possible to estimate the average effect of the treatment over
the treated making the pairing between individuals who suffered each one of the dimensions
of bullying and those who did not suffer it based only on the propensity score. However, for
estimating the propensity score it is necessary to apply a logit or probit model, since it is not
known. In the case of this paper the logit model will be used:

                                                                   (       )
                          (                        )
                                                                       (       )
                                                                                                                    (3)


Where     is the vector of parameters that will be estimated in a first stage. Being ̂ the
estimator of β, then the score of propensity is estimated as:

                                                                                   ( ̂)
 ̂ ( )                            (4)
                                                                                    ( ̂)


One of the most used estimators to define the proximity of the propensity score of individuals
who suffered some of the types of bullying regarding the propensity score of those individuals
who did not suffer it, is by means of a pairing by the nearest neighbor. This estimator uses
results of the N individuals in the group of not treated (that did not suffer bullying) having
propensity scores closer to the propensity score of the individual i who suffered some of the
types of bullying to estimate what would be the result of this individual i if they did not suffer
bullying. Besides, in this paper the method of closer neighbor with replacement was used,
because the counterfactual may be paired with different observations treated. The advantage
of using this method is that the quality of the pairing increases, as well as the bias is reduced
(CALIENDO; KOPEINIG, 2008).
        Being       the set of the M observations with lower value of ̂ ( )            ̂ ( )it is
possible to build the sample analogue for the potential result of the individual if they were not
treated (did not suffer bullying):

 ̂ ( )       ∑       ()                                                         (5)

The Average Treatment Effect on the Treated (ATT) ones, when the Hypothesis of
Conditional Independence (HIC) is supposed, is ,                  -. Supposing HIC, the
resulting ATT from the direct pairing of the values of propensity between treated and not
treated, applying the law of iterated expectation on  is:

                    ,                          -        * ,       ( )           -       , ( )                  -            +       (6)

The typical estimator of the pairing by propensity score is described below:
                                [∑          ∑       ( ) ]                                                                           (7)

Where       is the number of treated individuals belonging to the region of common support
and ( ) is the scheme of weight used to aggregate the potential result of individuals from
the control group and depends on the propensity score of the participant i, ( ), and of the
propensity score of the non-participant j, ( ).

           3.2.2 Rosenbaum Tests

        Factors that are not observed in the estimation may skew the results of the effect of the
treatment on the treated ones. Thus, the bounds analysis measures the potential impact of the
selection bias that arises due to the non-observed variables. In this work it was used the
method known as Rosenbaum Bounds (ROSENBAUM, 2002). The purpose of the test is to
estimate what should be the influence of an eventual variable omitted over the existing
selection bias in the probability of participation in the treatment and that may eventually
undermine the conclusions regarding the causal effects.
        This sensitivity analysis may be used to test the robustness of the results to the
presence of an omitted co-variable. In this paper, the test aims to evaluate the impact of an
eventual variable omitted on the grades of students. The Rosenbaum Bounds may be
expressed by the equality:

                                                              (       )
                                                    (8)
                                                              (       )
Where and are two individuals with observable characteristics inside a logistic distribution
and expresses the measurement of the degree of rupture of a sample free from the selection
bias. Thus, when         , the degree of association will be equal to one, implying in the non-
existence of a selection bias.

           3.2.3 Quantile Treatment Effects (QTE).

       In order to analyze the impacts of the dimensions of bullying among the different
quantiles of the students‘ grades, the model of Firpo (2007) was used for estimating the
Quantile Treatment Effects (QTE). Through this model it is possible to capture the
characteristics of the distribution, since the effect along the quantiles are estimated. Thus, the
QTE and the Quantile Treatment Effect on the Treated (QTT) are alternative approaches
allowing to verify the impact of public policies and still show robust results regarding the
possible presence of outliers. The model of Firpo (2007) is defined next.
       Being T the variable indicating the treatment (suffering bullying) that assumes values
equal to 0 for the individual who did not suffer some of the dimensions of bullying, or 1 for
the individual who suffered it. Being          the response variable (performance in Sciences,
Mathematics and Reading) the result observed is defined as:

                     ( ( ) )       ( ( )(          ))                                             (9)

        Thus,         is defined as a real number between [0,1], the quantile treatment effect (QTE)
is given by:

                       (10)
Where                        [ ()                ]           

        This expression demonstrates that the QTE is the difference between the quantile τ
values of the cumulative distribution functions of the response variable regarding the
treatment group and the control group, for a given quantile. In order to estimate QTE it is
necessary to follow two stages: first, the propensity score is estimated (by means of a logit or
probit model – in this paper the logit model was used) and later, the difference between
treated and not treated is calculated. Estimators of the propensity score are defined as the
conditional probability of receiving a treatment, given by pre-treatment characteristics that
can be observed, Pr[T = 1 | X = x] or p(x). Next, the propensity score is used to build the
weights to be used in a modified version of the quantile regression estimator of Koenker and
Bassett Jr (1978).
        In short, the QTE and the QTT proposed by Firpo (2007) consist of an exogenous and
non-conditional quantile estimator that calculates the difference between treated and not
treated for each quantile of the distribution (from the conditional distribution until treatment)
obtained by means of weights based on propensity estimators obtained in a first stage.

RESULTS

        The logit estimation for the probability of suffering bullying according to several
dimensions (physical, psychological and indirect) controlling by means of observable
characteristics is in Table A.1 (Appendix). Besides, through Figure A (Appendix) it is
possible to observe the density of the propensity score for the non-paired and paired samples
for each one of the dimensions of bullying. It is possible to observe that the distributions are
quite similar after the procedure of pairing, since overlap is verified between the distributions
of the treated and control groups. Table A.2 (Appendix) presents the robustness of the pairing.
Through the table it is possible to observe a reduction in Pseudo-R² as well as in the mean and
median bias in the paired sample. Besides, both the Likelihood Ratio test (LR) as well as the
Pseudo-R², show that the statistic difference among the groups post-pairing no longer exists.
It is worth to highlight that the p value becomes significant after the pairing, showing
robustness in the results. Thus, these results point out that post-pairing groups are similar,
from a vector of observable variables.
       Subsequently, the results of the PSM estimation with a closer neighbor and with
replacement is found in Table 24 below.

Table 2 – Results
            Variable                        Math Grade      Reading Grade      Sciences Grade
Physical Bullying
         Being spanked                       -13.02***         -33.77***          -20.82***
  Having Belongings Destroyed                   2.17           -10.73***            -1.21
Psychological Bullying
     Having Gossip Spread                      5.51*              1.99              1.72
        Being Threatened                     -12.42***         -21.09***          -15.94**
          Made fun of                         8.39***             5.7*            7.52***
Indirect Bullying
          Being left out                         2.1             0.85                2.4
Source: Self Elaboration from data of PISA (2015).
Grade: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.


         Among the aspects composing the physical bullying, to suffer a physical aggression
inside the school environment causes a reduction of the average school performance of
Brazilian Students. Students that were spanked had lower grades compared to peers that did
not suffer this type of violence. This student had their grade reduced in 13, 33 and 20 points
in the subjects of Mathematics, Reading and Sciences, respectively. This type of aggression
among the ones analyzed in this paper is the easiest to identify by the victims. Besides,
students who had belongings destroyed had grades near ten times smaller on the Reading test.
However, no similar effect is verified for the other disciplines.
         Among the variables that compose the psychological bullying, to have gossip spread
and being made fun of had positive effects on the grades of students. While the aspect related
to being made fun of had a positive and significant effect in all disciplines, to have gossip
spread was only significant in the test of Mathematics. However, being threatened had a
negative effect on the grades of students regardless of the subject. This behavior, different
from the others, may be due to the fact of the variable being more tangible and clear to the
victim.
         Regarding indirect bullying we may find an identification problem by the victim. This
type of bullying happens ―behind the back‖ of the student, making its recognition more
difficult, because the victim may not know the identity of the aggressor (RAIMUNDO and
SEIXAS, 2009). The more difficult the identification is, the harder it is to attack the problem,
which may explain the non-significance of this variable in the grades of the students.
However, the aspect related to the victim feeling left out by the colleagues was not
statistically significant for none of the analyzed disciplines.
         One of the limitations of this work is linked to the identification of psychological and
indirect bullying since the victim, sometimes, does not know that they are suffering the
aggression. Thus, results may be underestimated, which could justify the positive behavior in
the grades of the students.
         In addition, it is possible to observe that the subject with the greatest differences of
grade is Reading. It is probable that students with Reading deficit are targets of bullying
because this deficit may lead to rejection by the colleagues through bad interpretation of
social situations by the affected students (LUCIANO and SAVAGE, 2007). Thus, students
who already have difficulties in the subject of Reading, when they are targets of bullying,


4
  Other methods of pairing were tested, and results were similar. Those may be made available upon request to
the authors.
they may have worsened their performance, which would explain the high differentials of
grades between the treatment and the control groups.
       By means of the results it is possible to identify that psychological bullying is less
tangible than the others. However, among the aggressions involving this type of bullying it is
perceived that being threatened is the clearest of them. Therefore, the student knows that they
are being threatened, which negatively impacts their school performance. The other variables
composing the psychological bullying may not be identified by the victims of the aggression.
        According to the Rosenbaum tests, Table 3, the results showed to be satisfactory since
they reinforce the non-existence of bias in possible non-observable characteristics affecting
the result. When gamma approaches the unit it may be an indicative of non-observable bias
that may influence the result (DEHEJIA, 2005). Therefore, the distancing from the unit is a
parameter that gives to the result the confidence that the pairing adjusts to the observable
characteristics and stays stable for the effects of the treatment.

Table 3 – Tests of Rosenbaum
   Variable       Gamma sig+ sig-      t-hat+          t-hat-          CI+          CI-
                      1   0   0        389.63         389.63           388         391.27
     Grade
                     1.5  0   0        374.55         404.98         372.92        406.67
  Mathematics
                      2   0   0        364.13         415.88         362.48        417.63
                      1   0   0        423.78         423.78        421.973        425.58
 Grade Reading       1.5  0   0        406.93          440.7          405.1        442.54
                      2   0   0        395.18         452.57         393.32        454.47
                      1   0   0        412.04         412.04         410.39        413.69
Grade Sciences       1.5  0   0        396.82         427.58         395.19        429.28
                      2   0   0        386.35         438.61          384.7        440.37
Source: Self Elaboration

        Boards A.3 and A.4 (Appendix) present the results from the Firpo model. It is
observed that students that reported they were made fun of and that had gossip spread
continue to positively affect along the quantiles. Besides, students spanked as well as those
threatened kept the negative behavior among the quantiles of grades.
        However, this model became important for variables capturing the feeling of the
student of being left out by the colleagues (composing the indirect bullying, of difficult
identification) and those that had their belongings destroyed. Regarding the first one, a
crescent and positive behavior is observed from the sixth quantile in the discipline of
Mathematics. Thus, when the student is in the upper tail (with higher grades) they mark six
more points in the test of Mathematics compared to that student who did not suffer the
aggression. The student that had their belongings destroyed has a different behavior according
to the analyzed discipline. In Mathematics, the effect of the variable is positive and greater in
the upper tail, while in Reading and Sciences the effect is negative in the lower tails. In other
words, the student with lower grades in Reading and Sciences is negatively impacted by the
bullying, while the student with higher grades has positive impact in Mathematics.
        The analysis by the grades quantiles is important for the creation of public policies.
The effect of bullying is devastating, however, the effects show to be stronger for those with
lower performance. These students may have greater chances of evasion, since the low
performance leads to dropping out. Thus, it is necessary the elaboration of public policies
protecting this public against this type of problem.
      FINAL CONSIDERATIONS

               In the Brazilian context, violence has a great importance in the social impact and in
      the capacity of making vulnerable the victims and their families. Besides, children and
      adolescents are among the groups more victimized by the violence. Thus, studies involving
      child and violence in society – intra-family violence, in school and community - are
      necessary.
               Bullying negatively affects the formation of human capital in schools. Thus,
      understanding the causal effects of the several aspects related with this variable in students‘
      learning becomes an important subject for the creation of public policies. Bullying impacts
      the mental and personal development of the student, which sometimes may continue in
      adulthood. Through this work it was possible to identify which types of bullying negatively
      impact the grades of students.
               This type of violence brings several consequences for the student besides the decrease
      of school performance, because it may lead to an early abandonment of the student life and,
      sometimes, difficulties in the labor market. The victims of bullying have greater risk to fail
      academically, as well as greater chances of weak performance at work (WOLKE et al., 2016).
      Studies point for psychological problems that children facing this type of aggression have
      anxiety, depression and shyness.
               One country with an anti-bullying police that is having effect is Finland. The method
      is called KiVa (acronym of Kiusaamista Vastaan, which means ―against bullying‖ in Finnish)
      and has already been expanded for more than twenty countries in Europe and some nations of
      Latin America (Argentina, Peru and Colombia) decided to use the program. KiVa works not
      only after the identification of bullying with a trained team working with the victim,
      aggressors and witnesses, but also with the prevention of this practice. In Brazil there is a law
      that establishes the Program of Fight against Systematic Intimidation (Bullying)5. In article 6
      it is established the provision of bi-monthly reports regarding the occurrence of bullying in
      States and Municipalities in order to plan the next actions. However, this law has not being
      fulfilled and there is no notice regarding the reports.
               The present work highlights the importance of articulating different social actors and
      different sectors of society in order to implement public policies focusing on attitudes of
      peace and healthy coexistence. In addition, it is necessary to alert parents, teachers and
      students about this theme, since acts of bullying, mostly, happen outside the view of adults
      and a great part of the victims do not report them. Its prevalence is still underestimated by the
      society, however intervention is needed in order to reduce and interrupt such situations.

      REFERENCES

AZEREDO, C. M.; LEVY, R. B.; ARAYA, R; MENEZES, P. R. Individual and contextual factors
     associated with verbal bullying among Brazilian adolescents. BMC pediatrics, vol. 15, n. 1,
     p. 49, 2015.
BACILA, C.R.; Estigmas: um estudo sobre os preconceitos. Rio de Janeiro: Lumen Juris; 2005.
BATSCHE, G.M. Bullying. In: G.G. BEAR; K.M. MINKE; A. THOMAS (eds.), Children’s needs,
     Part II: Development, problems, and alternatives. Bethesda, MD, National Association of
     School Psychologists, p. 171-179, 1997.
BERTHOLD, K. A; HOOVER, J. H. Correlates of bullying and victimization among intermediate
     students in the midwestern USA. . School Psychology International,v. 21, p.65-78, 2000.


      5
          Available at: http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/_ato2015-2018/2015/lei/l13185.htm
BOWERS, L.; SMITH, P.K.;BINNEY, V. Cohesion and power in the families of children involved
     in the bully/victim problems at school. Journal of Family Therapy, n. 14, p. 371-387, 1992.
CALIENDO, M.; KOPEINIG, S. Some practical guidance for the implementation of propensity
     score matching. Journal of economic surveys, v. 22, n. 1, p. 31-72, 2008.
CARNEY, A.G.; MERRELL, K.W. Bullying in schools: Perspective on understanding and
     preventing an international problem. School Psychology International, v. 22, p.364-382,
     2001.
CARRELL, S.; HOEKSTRA, M. Externalities in the Classroom: How Children Exposed to
     Domestic Violence Affect Everyone's Kids. American Economic Journal - Applied
     Economics, vol. 2, n.1, p. 211-228, 2010.
CARVALHOSA, S.; MOLEIRO, C.; SALES, C. A situação do bullying nas escolas portuguesas.
     Interacções, vol. 5, n. 13, p. 125-146, 2009.
CONTRERAS, D.; ELACQUA, G.; MARTINEZ, M.; MIRANDA, Á. Bullying, identity and school
     performance: Evidence from Chile. International Journal of Educational Development, vol.
     51, p. 147–162, 2016
COSTA, P.; PEREIRA, B. O bullying na escola: a prevalência e o sucesso escolar. I Seminário
     internacional “Contributos da Psicologia em Contextos Educativos”, Braga: Universidade
     do Minho, 2010.
DEHEJIA, R. Practical propensity score matching: a reply to Smith and Todd. Journal of
     Econometrics, v.125 n. 1-2, p. 355-364, 2005.
DELPRATO, M.; AKYEAMPONG, K.; DUNNE, M. The impact of bullying on students‘ learning
     in Latin America: A matching approach for 15 countries. International journal of
     educational development, v. 52, p. 37-57, 2017.
GEORGIOU, S.N.Ç STAVRINIDES, P. Bullies, victims and bully-victims‘ psychosocial profiles
     and attribution styles. School Psychol. Int, v. 29, n. 5, p. 574– 589, 2008.
EYNG, A. M; GISI, M. L; ENS, RT. Violências nas escolas e representações sociais: um diálogo
     necessário no cotidiano escolar. Diálogo Educação Magazine, v.9, n.28, p.467-480, 2009.
ERIKSEN, T.L.M., NIELSEN, H.S., SIMONSEN, M., 2014. Bullying in elementary school.
     Journal of Human Resources, vol. 49 n. 4, pp. 839–871
FANTE, C. Fenomeno bullying: como prevenir a violência nas escolas e educar para a paz.
     Campinas, Verus, 2005 p.27.
FINNEGAN, R. A; HODGES, E. V.E.; PERRY, D. J. Victimization in the peer group: associations
     with children´s perceptions of mother-child interaction. Journal of Personality and Social
     Psychology, v. 75, p. 1076-1086, 1998.
FIRPO, S. Efficient semiparametric estimation of quantile treatment effects. Econometrica, v. 75,
     n.1, p. 259–276, 2007.
HIRANO, K.; IMBENS, G. W. Estimation of Causal Effects using Propensity Score Weighting: A
     Application to Data on Right Heart Catheterization. Health Services & Outcomes Research
     Methodology, v.2, n.3-4, p.259-278, 2001.
JAEGER, A. A.; DORNELES, D. S.; GRIGOLETTI, M. S.; CANFIELD, M. S.; PEREIRA, S. R.;
     BELTRAME, V. Agressividade escolar. Kinesis, n. 18 , p 51-75, 1997.
KALTIALA-HEINO, R.; RIMPELÃ, M.; RANTANEN, P.; RIMPELÃ, A. Bullying at School – An
     Indicator of Adolescents at Risk for Mental Disorders. Journal of Adolescence, v. 23, p.
     661–74, 2000.
KIBRIYA, S., XU, Z.P., ZHANG, Y., 2015. The impact of bullying on educational performance in
     Ghana: A bias-reducing matching approach. In: 2015 AAEA & WAEA Joint Annual
     Meeting, July 26–28, San Francisco, California (No. 205409). Agricultural and Applied
     Economics Association & Western Agricultural Economics Association.
KOENKER, R. BASSETT, G J. Regression quantiles. Econometrica, v. 46, p. 33–50, 1978.
LEME, M.I.S. A gestão da violência escolar. Diálogo Educação Magazine, v. 9, n. 28, p.541-
     555,2009.
LUCIANO, S.; SAVAGE, R. S. Bullying risk in children with learning difficulties in inclusive
     educational settings. Canadian Journal of School Psychology, v. 22, p.14–31, 2007.
MALTA, D. C.; PRADO, R. R.; DIAS, A. J. R.; MELLO, F. C. M.; SILVA, M. A. I.; COSTA, M.
     R.; CAIAFFA, W. T. Bullying e fatores associados em adolescentes brasileiros: análise da
     Pesquisa Nacional de Saúde Escolar (PeNSE 2012). The Brazilian Journal of
     Epidemiology, v. 17, p. 131-145, 2014.
MALTA, D. C.; SILVA, M. A. I. A prática de bullying entre escolares brasileiros e fatores
     associados, Pesquisa Nacional de Saúde do Escolar 2015. Ciência & Saúde Coletiva, v. 22,
     p. 2939-2948, 2017.
MATOS, M. G.; GONÇALVES, S. M. P. Bullying nas escolas: comportamentos e
     percepções. Psicologia, saúde & doenças, v. 10, n. 1, p. 3-15, 2009.
MELLO, F. C. M.; MALTA, D. C.; PRADO, R. R. D.; FARIAS, M. S.; ALENCASTRO, L. C. D.
     S.; SILVA, M. A. I. Bullying e fatores associados em adolescentes da Região Sudeste
     segundo a Pesquisa Nacional de Saúde do Escolar. The Brazilian Journal of
     Epidemiology, v. 19, p. 866-877, 2016.
NANSEL, T.R.; OVERPECK, M.; PILLA, R.S.; RUAN, W.J.; SIMONS-MORTON, B. SCHEIDT,
     P. Bullying behaviors among US youth - Prevalence and association with psychosocial
     adjustment. JAMA. 2001;285(16):2094–100.
NETO, A. A. L. Bullying – comportamento agressivo entre estudantes. Jornal de Pediatria, v. 81,
     n. 5, p. 164-172, 2005.
OLIVEIRA, R. F.; MENEZES, A. T.; IRFFI, G.; OLIVEIRA, R. G. Bullying effect on student‘s
     performance. EconomiA, vol. 19, n. 1, p. 57-73, 2018.
OLWEUS, D. (1991). Bully/ victim problems among schoolchildren: Basic facts and effects of a
     school based intervention program. In D. J. Pepler & K. H. Rubin (Eds.), The development
     and treatment of childhood aggression, p. 441-448, 1991.
OLWEUS, D.Bullying at School. What We Know and What We Can Do. Blackwell, Oxford, 1993.
OLWEUS, D. Bully/victim problems in school: facts and intervention. Journal Psychol. Educ, v.
     12, n. 4, p. 495–510, 1997.
PEREIRA, B.; MENDONÇA, D.; NETO, C.; VALENTE, L; SMITH, K. P.Bullying in Portuguese
     schools. School psychology international, v. 25, n. 2, p. 241-254, 2004.
PONZO, M., 2013. Does bullying reduce educational achievement? An evaluation using matching
     estimators. Journal of Policy Model, v. 35, n. 6, p. 1057–1078, 2013.
RAIMUNDO, R.; SEIXAS, S. Comportamentos de bullying no 1º ciclo: estudo de caso numa escola
     de Lisboa. Interacções Magazine, p. 164p.-186p., 2009.
RIGBY, K;. SLEE, P. T. Bullying among Australian schoolchildren: Reported behavior and attitudes
     toward victims. Journal of Social Psychology, v. 131, p. 615– 627, 1991.
RESNICK, M., BEARMAN, P., BLUM, R., BAUMAN, K., HARRIS, K., JONES, J., et al. (1997).
     Protecting Adolescents from harm: Findings from the National Longitudinal Study on
     Adolescent Health. In Jama (Eds.),v. 278, 1997.
ROSENBAUM, P.; RUBIN, R. The Central Role of the Propensity Score in Observational Studies
     for Causal Effects. Biometrika, n. 70, v.1, p. 41-55,1983.
ROSENBAUM, P. Observational Studies. Springer, New York, 2002.
SASSAKI, A. H.; DI PIETRA, G.; MENEZES FILHO, N; KOMATSU, B. Por que o Brasil vai Mal
     no PISA? Uma Análise dos Determinantes do Desempenho no Exame. Policy paper, n. 31,
     2018.
SCHWARTZ, D. FARVER, J. M., CHANG, L., LEE-SHIN, Y et al. Victimization in South Korean
     children's peer groups. Journal of abnormal child psychology, v. 30, n. 2, p. 113-125, 2002.
SILVA, J. L.; DE MELLO, M.; CARVALHO, F.; DE OLIVEIRA, W. A.; DO PRADO, R. R.;
     SILVA, M. A I.; MALTA, D. C. Vitimização por bullying em estudantes brasileiros:
     resultados da Pesquisa Nacional de Saúde Escolar (PENSE). Texto & Contexto
     Enfermagem, v. 27, n. 3, 2018.
SHARP, S. How much does bullying hurt? The effects of bullying on the personal wellbeing and
     educational progress of secondary aged students. Educ. Child Psychol, 1995.
SMITH, P.K.; MADSEN, K.; MOODY, J. What causes the age decline in reports of being bullied at
     school? Towards a developmental analysis of risks of being bullied. Educational
     Research,v. 41, p. 267-285,1999.
SOURANDER, A., HELSTELA, L., HELENIUS, H. and PIHA, J. ‗Persistence of Bullying from
     Childhood to Adolescence – Longitudinal 8-Year Follow-Up Study‘, Child Abuse and
     Neglect, v. 24, n. 7, p. 873–81, 2000.
ERIKSEN, T. L.M.; NIELSEN, H. S.; SIMONSEN, M. Bullying in elementary school. Journal of
     Human Resources, v. 49, n. 4, p. 839-871, 2014.
VAN DER WERF, C. Desempeño académico y ambiente escolar: efecto de la intimidación. Revista
     Desarrollo Y Sociedad, n. 74, p. 275-309, 2014.
WOLKE, D., WOODS, S., BLOOMFIELD, L., KARSTADT, L. The association between direct and
     relational bullying and behavior problems among primary school children. Journal Child
     Psychol. Psychiatry, v. 41, n. 8 ,p. 989–1002, 2000.
WOLKE, D., COPELAND, W. E., ANGOLD, A., COSTELLO, E. J. Impact of bullying in
     childhood on adult health, wealth, crime, and social outcomes. Psychological science, n. 24,
     v. 10, p.1958-1970, 2013.
WOOLDRIDGE, J. M. Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. 2ed. MIT
Appendix

Figure A: Distribution of sample before (left) and after pairing (right)
Table A.1– Results of logit
                                                     Being       Being      Having belongings
                           Having gossip spread                                                 Made fun of   Being left out
       Variable                                     spanked    threatened       destroyed

        private                  0.22**                -0.13    -0.4***           -0.03          0.24***         0.3***
         male                      0.04             0.66***     0.45***        0.37***            0.5***         0.2***
 schoolarity_father              0.0002               -0.019       0.03          0.017             0.004          0.001
schoolarity_mother             0.068***             0.09***     0.06***        0.05***            0.03**         0.03**
     assets_home                   -0.1              -0.32**    -0.28**           -0.16            -0.11          -0.12
    assets_cultural               0.08*             0.18***     0.19***        0.15***           0.11***          0.07*
    assets_family                  0.13               0.21*      0.25**           0.14              0.04           0.04
  grade_repetition                0.06*             0.36***     0.39***        0.22***            0.0009           0.05
          age                     -0.13             -0.38***    -0.26**        -0.29***            -0.12        -0.17**
      size_class               -0.008***              -0.003     -0.007          -0.001         -0.007**       -0.007**
  number_teachers                 0.002              -0.0008     -0.001         -0.0002          0.003**         0.0009
     number_girls                 0.009               -0.004     -0.007          -0.006           -0.001          0.001
    number_boys                  -0.02**              0.003       0.013          0.003            -0.008          -0.01
       like_me                  -0.28***            -0.27***   -0.27***           -0.02            -0.02       -0.25***
   feel_dislocated              0.34***             0.51***     0.49***        0.42***          0.264***        0.31***
  feel_belongging                  0.06               0.015        0.12          -0.015             0.05          0.027
   friendship_easy              0.16***                0.07        0.07           0.04              0.06          0.067
      feel_weird                0.31***             0.46***     0.39***        0.46***           0.45***        0.61***
      feel_alone                0.27***               0.2**       0.135           0.09           0.31***        0.36***
         _cons                     0.61                2.56       1.216           2.02             0.092           1.18
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10
Source: Self elaboration from data of PISA (2015)
Table A.2 – Balancing pre and post pairing
                                                               Average         Average
                        Pseudo-R2      LR chi²      P-value
                                                               Bias            Median
non_paired              0.024          260.72       0          10.3            9.3
paired                  0.002          9.73         0.973      1.4             1.1
Source: Self elaboration from data of PISA (2015)

Board A.3 – Results QTE
                            Having Gossip Spread                             Being spanked                                      Being Threatened
            grade_mathematics grade_reading grade_sciences grade_mathematics grade_reading      grade_sciences grade_mathematics grade_reading     grade_sciences
Quantile 1       5.22 (3.24)       3.97 (3.79)   1.89 (3.24)   -12 (6.46)*   -26.9(6.4)***      -13.57(5.88)**    -10.24(5.83)*   -18.22 (5.3)***   -6.81 (4.14)*
Quantile 2       4.83 (3.06)       2.09 (3.59)   0.143 (2.72)  -8.4 (5.68)   -31.2 (5.7)***     -12.5(4.16)***      -5.11(4.37)  -19.41(5.17)*** -12.86 (3.59)***
Quantile 3       6.65 (3)**        4.26 (3.41)    0.8 (2.88)  -6.41 (5.16)   -27.8 (5.9)***     -19.4(4.78)***      -2.78(4.33)   -12.63 (4.7)*** -10.54 (4.53)***
Quantile 4     9.38 (2.8)***      7.05(3.33)**   2.76 (3.26)  -5.49 (5.22)   -27.39 (6.11)*** - 15.45 (6.19)***      0.7 (3.96)  -14.85 (4.59)*** -8.26 (4.96)*
Quantile 5     7.7 (2.86)***     8.42(3.31)*** 8.15 (3.09)*** -5.32 (5.16)   -27.49 (5.99)*** -12.36(5.94)**        -3.75(3.62)  -13.44 (5.17)***    -2.71(4.46)
Quantile 6     7.15 (3.03)**     7.06 (3.19)** 7.4 (3.03)***    -6.1(5.13)     -25.62(7)***     -10.97(5.73)**     -6.63(3.93)*   -11.09(5.1)***    -6.14(4.21)*
Quantile 7     8.59 (3.2)***      5.95 (3.44)*   4.333 (3.19) -9.25 (5.77)    -21.5 (7.04)*** -13.99 (5.95)**    -10.04(4.52)**  -12.38 (5.17)*** -8.98(4.44)**
Quantile 8      6.25 (3.42)*     8.25 (3.66)** 6.88 (3.54)**   -8.02(6.71)   -16.41 (7.79)***    -11.04(7.47)     -10.28(5.16)*  -13.18 (5.11)*** -11.68(4.91)**
Quantile 9     8.08 (4.09)**        4.2 (3.83)   5.52 (3.79)  -7.65 (8.44)     -7.66 (11.73)       -9.26 (8)     -10.19(5.63)**    -14.84(6.1)** -12.9(5.68)**
Source: Self elaboration

Board A.4 – Results QTE
                                  Made fun of                                      Being Left Out                             Having Belongings Destroyed
              grade_mathematics    grade_reading    grade_sciences grade_mathematics grade_reading grade_sciences grade_mathematics grade_reading grade_sciences
Quantile 1       5.43 (3.347)        4.5 (3.77)      9.44 (2.95)***    1.22 (3.37)     -1.15 (3.8)    4.4 (3.08)      -0.57 (4.26)    -11.1(4.6)**     -2.6 (3.79)
Quantile 2       5.77 (2.98)*        5.17 (3.47)     6.17 (2.66)**     1.48 (3.12)    -1.39 (3.49)  -0.002 (2.67)      1.29 (3.9)     -11.2(4.7)** -6.9(3.32)**
Quantile 3      8.04 (2.82)***      6.62(3.09)**     6.48 (2.75)**    5.21 (2.95)*    -0.24 (3.39)   -0.27 (2.82)       0.67 (4)         -6.01(4.2)   -6.43 (3.75)*
Quantile 4      9.59 (2.77)***      7.4 (3.25)**     6.24 (2.94)**    5.16 (2.87)*     3.36 (3.44)   -0.04(3.14)       4.79 (3.81)      -7.85 (4.3)*   -5.11 (4.5)
Quantile 5      9.35 (2.92)***    10.62(3.27)***     10.4 (2.98)***   5.73 (3.03)*     3.03 (3.45)   3.89 (3.21)       4.44 (3.84)        -2.1(4.9)    3.21 (4.64)
Quantile 6      11.05 (3.15)***    9.41 (3.14)***   11.14 (3.11)***   4.98 (3.03)*     5.53 (3.27)   5.26 (3.17)       6.33 (4.02)      -0.22 (4.15)   6.21 (4.22)
Quantile 7      13.84 (3.19)***    8.57 (3.38)**     11.42 (3.3)***   5.47 (3.31)*     1.84 (3.31)   1.89 (3.33)       7.19 (4.63)        -4.3 (4.3)    4.62 (4.1)
Quantile 8      13.6 (3.46)***    10.65 (3.56)***   12.46 (3.57)***   6.23 (3.83)*     0.25 (3.61)   3.63 (3.64)     9.98 (4.67)**       -3.45 (4.7)   2.42 (4.46)
Quantile 9      14.81 (3.93)***   11.31 (4.37)***   12.92 (3.83)***    0.84 (3.71)     -2.35 (4.1)   (0.99) (4.1)   13.91 (5.44)***     -3.86 (5.49)    4.06 (5.4)
Source: Self elaboration
