Causes and Consequences of Hysteresis: Aggregate Demand,
             Productivity and Employment
       M. C. Pereira1,2 , G. Dosi2 , A. Roventini2,3 , and M. E. Virgillito4,2
                         1
                           Universidade Estadual de Campinas (Brazil)
                              2
                                Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna (Italy)
                                  3
                                    OFCE, Sciences Po (France)
                         4
                           Universita’ Cattolica del Sacro Cuore (Italy)



                                             Abstract
      In this work we develop an agent-based model where hysteresis in major macroeconomic vari-
  ables (e.g., GDP, productivity, unemployment) emerges out of the decentralized interactions of
  heterogeneous firms and workers. Building upon the model in Dosi et al. (2016, 2017), we spec-
  ify an endogenous process of accumulation of workers’ skills and a state-dependent process of
  firms entry, studying their hysteretic impacts. Indeed, hysteresis is ubiquitous. However, this is
  not due to market imperfections, but rather to the very functioning of decentralised economies
  characterised by coordination externalities and dynamic increasing returns. So, contrary to the
  insider-outsider hypothesis (Blanchard and Summers, 1986), the model does not support the
  findings that rigid industrial relations may foster hysteretic behaviour in aggregate unemploy-
  ment. On the contrary, this contribution provides evidence that during severe downturns, and
  thus declining aggregate demand, phenomena like decreasing investment and innovation rates,
  skills deterioration, and declining entry dynamics are better candidates to explain long-run un-
  employment spells and reduced output growth. In that, more rigid labour markets dampen
  hysteretic dynamics by supporting aggregate demand, thus making the economy more resilient.


  Keywords
  Hysteresis, Aggregate Demand, Multiple Equilibria, Skills Deterioration, Market Entry, Agent-
  Based Model


  JEL codes
  C63, E02, E24




                                                  i
                                             Resumo
     Neste trabalho, desenvolvemos um modelo agent-based, onde a histerese nas principais va-
riáveis macroeconômicas (por exemplo, PIB, produtividade, desemprego) surge de interações
descentralizadas entre empresas e trabalhadores heterogêneos. Com base no modelo de Dosi
et al. (2016, 2017), especificamos processo endógenos de acumulação de habilidades pelos tra-
balhadores e de entrada das empresas no mercado e estudamos seus impactos histeréticos. A
histerese é onipresente nos resultados. No entanto, isso não se deve às imperfeições do mer-
cado, mas sim ao próprio funcionamento das economias descentralizadas, caracterizadas por
externalidades de coordenação e retornos crescentes dinâmicos. Assim, ao contrário da hipótese
insider-outsider (Blanchard and Summers, 1986), o modelo não suporta as conclusões de que re-
lações industriais rı́gidas possam promover o comportamento histérico no desemprego agregado.
Pelo contrário, esta contribuição fornece evidências de que, durante recessões severas e o asso-
ciado declı́nio da demanda agregada, fenômenos como a diminuição das taxas de investimento
e inovação, a deterioração das habilidades e a diminuição da dinâmica de entrada são melhores
candidatos para explicar o aumento do desemprego de longo prazo e o reduzido crescimento do
produto. Nesse sentido, mercados de trabalho mais rı́gidos atenuam a dinâmica histerética ao
apoiar a demanda agregada, tornando a economia mais resiliente.


Palavras-chave
Histerese, Demanda Agregada, Equilı́brio Múltiplo, Deterioração de Habilidades, Entrada no
Mercado, Modelo Baseado em Agente


Área ANPEC
Área 6 - Crescimento, Desenvolvimento Econômico e Instituições




                                                 ii
1       Introduction
In this work, we develop an agent-based model able to display the endogenous emergence of hysteresis
out of the interaction of heterogeneous firms and workers. The paper focuses on both the causes
and the consequences of the hysteretical properties of macroeconomic time series, including GDP,
productivity, and unemployment. Further, refining upon Dosi et al. (2016, 2017), we introduce an
endogenous process of accumulation of workers’ skills, and a state-dependent process of firms entry,
studying their hysteretic effects.
    As we shall briefly discuss below, there are different notions of hysteresis. Basically, they boil
down to three different interpretations of the phenomenon (more in Piscitelli et al., 2000, Hallett
and Piscitelli, 2002, Amable et al., 2004). The first is formulated in terms of the persistence in
the deviations from some equilibrium path; the second is defined as a random-walk dynamics in
equilibrium itself; the third, we believe a more genuine one, is in terms of the heterogeneous and non-
linear responses of a system characterised by multiple equilibria or path-dependent trajectories. Even
if Piscitelli et al. (2000) (p. 59-60) define the former two as bastard usages of the notion of hysteresis,
they have been the most common in economics, at least. In a representative example, Blanchard and
Summers (1986) famous paper used the second of the foregoing interpretations in attempt to explain
the structural unemployment in the late 1980’s in many European countries, at around 10% and
quite far from the predicted 2-3% equilibrium level. Two alternative hypotheses were proposed by
these authors in order to explain the emergence of hysteresis, a first one resting on the membership
channel according to which only insider workers are able to exert pressure in the wage setting process,
and a second one based on the duration channel, because the long-term unemployed are less relevant
in the wage determination process. In the latter case, unemployment duration can (a) induce a
process of worker skills deterioration, implying that the long-term unemployed experiences a fall in
their productivity; (b) trigger search discouragement in unemployed people, less re-employable, and
so less prone to search in the labour market.
    Together with the supply side channels emphasized from the eighties, some acknowledgement has
gone to aggregate demand shocks conceived as potential sources of hysteresis in the current economic
crisis. Therefore, the notion of hysteresis has been extended from unemployment to permanent
output loss. Blanchard et al. (2015) revisit hysteresis as the permanent effect exerted by crises on
the the levels of output relative to the pre-crises one. The work suggests a sustained output gap in
69% of the cases, among 22 countries in the period 1960-2010, where in 47% of them the recession
was followed by an increasing output gap, meaning that recessionary periods affected not only the
levels but also the subsequent growth rates, an effect named by Ball (2014) as super-hysteresis. In
fact, Ball (2014) reports that over 23 countries in the period 2007-2014, most of them have been hit
by severe recession, and some of them, like Greece, faced up to 30% losses in potential output.
    The empirical detection of hysteresis, of course, goes together with the analysis of its determi-
nants. Agent-based models (Tesfatsion and Judd, 2006; LeBaron and Tesfatsion, 2008) are particu-
larly suitable to the task as one knows by construction the micro data-generating process and thus
can explore the possible hysteretic features of aggregate variables as emergent properties of the evo-
lutionary dynamics.1 The model, built upon the “Keynes meets Schumpeter” family of models (Dosi
et al., 2010, Napoletano et al., 2012, Dosi et al., 2013, Dosi et al., 2015, 2016, 2017), as we shall see,
is able to generically yield hysteresis in the macro variables under scrutiny both inter-regimes and
intra-regimes. Indeed, hysteresis is ubiquitous.
    According to our analysis, hysteresis is not due to market imperfections but rather to the very
functioning of decentralised economies characterised by coordination externalities and dynamic in-
creasing returns. Contrary to what is suggested by Blanchard and Summers (1986), our model does
    1
    See Fagiolo and Roventini (2012, 2017) for critical surveys on macro ABMs. See also Bassi and Lang (2016) for
an agent-based model with investment hysteresis. For related ABMs which consider a decentralised labour market,
see Dawid et al. (2014), Russo et al. (2015), Caiani et al. (2016) and Caiani et al. (2016), among the others.


                                                       1
not support the hypothesis that rigid industrial relations, via the insider-outsider channel, are the
driving source of hysteresis in aggregate unemployment. On the contrary, more in line with Ball
et al. (2014), our work indicates that during severe downturns and thus declining aggregate demand,
phenomena like decreasing investment and innovation rates, skills deterioration, and declining en-
try dynamics are better candidates to explain long term unemployment spells and reduced output
growth. In such a framework, more rigid labour markets, by supporting aggregate demand, do not
foster hysteresis but rather dampen it, thus making the economy more resilient.
    The paper is organised as follows. After this introduction, Section 2 discusses the nature and
the sources of hysteresis. In Section 3, we present the model structure. The empirical regularities
matched by the K+S model are discussed in Section 4. In Section 5, we study the emergence and
the causes of hysteresis. Finally, Section 6 concludes.


2     The nature and determinants of hysteresis
In this section, we provide a brief exploration on the sources and potential channels which might
induce hysteretic behaviours in the macroeconomic variables. Hysteresis, a concept adopted from the
natural sciences but with similar instances in economics, is a nonlinear mechanism, often implying
multiple (alternative) time trajectories and equilibria. In a very broad perspective, a dynamical
system can be considered hysteretical when the time trajectories of some or all of its variables do
exhibit path-dependency, in turn also implying in non-ergodicity. The very notion of multiple paths
for the development of both socio-economic and natural complex systems ultimately rests on the idea
that history is an essential part of the interpretation of many dynamic phenomena. The property
that history matters is also intimately related to that of time irreversibility, that is, a situation where
it is not possible, even theoretically, to “reverse the arrow of time” and still expect to recover invariant
properties of the system under investigation.
     However, in tackling path-dependent phenomena in the social sciences, an intrinsic difficulty rests
also in the fact that frequently only one of the many possible realizations of the system, dependent
on its initial state, is empirically observed. In fact, is history-dependence only shaped by initial
conditions or does it relate also to irreversible effects of some particular unfolding events (e.g., crises
or regime changes)? Related, how do the set of all possible evolutionary paths are shaped and
constrained by the structure inherited from the past?
     In economics, the very notion of hysteresis has only been acknowledged with some scepticism
and often in the most restrictive interpretations. In the 1980’s and 1990’s, a stream of literature has
faced head-on the challenge of non-linearity of growth processes and thus the multiplicity of alter-
native paths and the related hysteretic properties (good examples are the contributions in Anderson
et al., 1988 and Day and Chen, 1993).2 However, such a stream of investigation was progressively
marginalized, possibly due to its “revolutionary” theoretical implications, particularly in terms of
equilibria selection and the welfare theorems. A usual “safer” path has been that of formalizing the
phenomenon based on linear stochastic models with close-to-unit-root auto-regressive processes. In
their seminal contribution, Blanchard and Summers (1986) identify hysteresis in the unemployment
series whenever the coefficient of persistence ρ in the equation Ut = ρUt−1 + αt + t + θt−1 was
estimated to be greater or equal to one.
     Whether or not a (close to) unit-root process is an adequate signal of hysteresis has been strongly
debated. Recently, Galı́ (2015) explores, without conclusive results, three alternative sources to a
unit-root process of the European unemployment rate, testing whether it lies (i) in the natural rate
of unemployment (Utn = Ut−1   n
                                  + t ), (ii) in the central bank inflation target (πt∗ = πt−1∗
                                                                                                   + ∗t ), or
(iii) in the insider-outsider hypothesis (à la Blanchard-Summers) via alternative specifications for
   2
     The hysteretic properties of economic systems is also emphasized in the Post Keynesian literature: see Davidson,
1991, 1993.


                                                         2
the New Keynesian Wage Phillips Curve. In general, this modelling approach has been based on a
somewhat naive epistemology – like “Which processes should present unit-roots? The natural rate
of unemployment, the inflation target, or the wage setting curve?” –, but without jeopardizing the
underlying unique equilibrium assumption. The obvious dissatisfaction with the (linear) unit-root
process approach is currently bringing a revival on the importance of the detection of nonlinearities in
empirical macroeconomics, therefore questioning the widespread use of such methods. For example,
Beaudry et al. (2016) do find evidence of cyclical recurrent patterns, not detectable when estimating
auto-regressive linear stochastic models, while examining empirical time series like unemployment
and working hours.
    However, the critique to the unit-root process approach is deeper and concerns its very underlying
theory: as suggested by Piscitelli et al. (2000), Hallett and Piscitelli (2002), Amable et al. (2004) and
Bassi and Lang (2016), genuine models of hysteresis should embed a nonlinear structure – or at least
do not discard nonlinearity in advance. According to Piscitelli et al. (2000), three features characterise
hysteretic processes, namely, non-linearity, selectivity, and remanence. Being this memory process
nonlinear, reversing a shock may not drive the system to recover its starting point. Moreover,
selectivity means that not all shocks affect the system in the same way in different circumstances.
Finally, remanence entails that temporary or non-recurrent shocks may lead to permanent new system
states.
    Widespread origins of hysteresis in the socio-economic domain are, first, feedback mechanisms
related to coordination externalities, and, second, amplification processes stemming from some form
of increasing returns.3 In particular, it is frequently derived from (i) positive feedbacks between levels
of aggregate activities and innovative search, and (ii) powerful interactions between the aggregate
demand and the diffusion of innovations. Whenever one abandons the unfortunate idea that the
macroeconomic system is held up to some mysteriously stable and unique equilibrium path, it could
well be that negative demand shocks exert persistent effects, because less aggregate demand entails less
innovative search, which in turn entails less innovation stemming from technological shocks (Stiglitz,
1994).
    Despite the 2008 crisis, many economists continue to believe in some version of the model un-
derlying the example A in Figure 1: the economy is bound to “spring back”, with no permanent
loss to its long-run equilibrium rate of growth. The econometric side of this belief is the Frisch-like
idea of the economy as a “pendulum”, responding to exogenous shocks.4 In this perspective, it seems
almost a “miracle” that in the empirical literature one recently finds impulse response functions with
multipliers significantly greater than one. This, we suggest, is a witness of the depth of the current
crisis (see Blanchard and Leigh, 2013).
    However, a small but significant minority of the profession has been forced by the evidence to
accept case B in Figure 1: recession-induced output losses are permanent because even if the system
goes back to the pre-crisis rate of growth, that is associated with an absolute level gap growing
exponentially over time. Moreover, as discussed in Stiglitz (1994), imperfect capital markets and
credit rationing may well exacerbate the effects of recessions, hampering the recovery of the growth
rate even further. Beyond that, recurrent negative demand shocks, such as those deriving from
austerity or labour market flexibilization policies, might yield reduced long-term rates of growth: this
is what is shown in Dosi et al. (2016) and Dosi et al. (2016). In the latter scenario, as in the example
C in Figure 1, the pre- and post-crisis growth trajectories diverge, implying a reduced long-run rate
of the output growth.
  3
      See Dosi and Virgillito (2016) for a further discussion.
  4
      For an enticing reconstruction of the discussion between Frisch and Schumpeter, see Louca (2001).




                                                          3
          (A) ln Q                                             (B) ln Q




                                                       Time                                                Time
                                   (C) ln Q




                                                                                 Time



Figure 1: Effects of recessions: (A) short-run (no hysteresis), (B) long-run (hysteresis), (C) perma-
nent/divergent (super hysteresis). Source (A and B): Stiglitz (1994), p. 123.


2.1       Innovation, diffusion and investment
At the empirical level, a first microeconomic channel5 which might induce hysteresis is the lower
innovation rate associated with a reduction in the aggregate demand, which turns out in a decline
in the productivity growth. Indeed, R&D expenditures are pro-cyclical. Moreover, the diffusion of
new technologies and the adoption of capital-embodied, best-practice techniques slows down during
crises. Reifschneider et al. (2015) document a drop in the yearly rate of growth of R&D expenditure
in the U.S. from 3.6% during the pre-crises period (1990-2007), on average, to 1.6% after 2007. Not
only the propensity to innovate, but also the process of adoption and diffusion of innovation is slowed
down by the contraction of aggregate demand. Both phenomena have been emphasized long ago by
Freeman et al. (1982) in their search for the patterns and determinants of long term fluctuations in
growth and employment, and, more recently, theoretically investigated in Dosi et al. (2016, 2017).
    Together with the slower rates of innovation, a process of destruction of the installed productive
capacity, due to the lack of sales prospects, seems markedly happening in the post-2008. Indeed,
even non-Keynesian commentators have identified the current economic crisis as one stemming from
the lack of aggregate demand. As the interest rate reached its zero lower bound without fostering
any surge in the investment rate, only accelerator-type investment processes seem able to explain
the deteriorating dynamics of the productive capacity. Consistently with the accelerator hypothesis,
Kothari et al. (2013) report that investments are ultimately affected by the dynamics of sales, rather
than by the interest rate. According to their estimates, of the 23% total drop in investment during
2008-2009, “more than three-quarters (18.1%) can be explained by the drop in GDP and corporate
profits in the fourth quarter of 2008” [ibid, p. 6].
    Overall, lower innovation, diffusion and investment rates seem very plausible candidates to explain
the current slowdown in productivity. In turn, the fundamental point is that such changes may well
bear a long-term impact, that is hysteretic effects, on the future dynamics of productivity, GDP and
employment.
  5
      The order the channels are presented is not relevant in terms of the impact produced by each one upon hysteresis.



                                                           4
2.2    Entry dynamics
The second microeconomic channel is the declining entry rate of firms in the market, which has
been recently investigated especially in the U.S., as discussed in Gourio et al. (2014). Entry rates
have declined since 2006 by about 27%, a widespread phenomenon across all sectors of the economy.
This has been accompanied by steady exit rates and, consequently, also shrinking net entry rates.
One direct effect of less entry is the reduced creation of new job opportunities. Decker et al. (2016)
document a long term pattern in the declining business dynamism which the authors attribute,
mainly, to the contracting share of young firms. In a similar vein, Siemer (2014) introduces the
hypothesis of a missing generation of entrants after the 2008 crisis, as the results of the tightening
financial constraints, primarily affecting young firms. According to his estimates, the more finance-
dependent entrant firms reduced their the rates of job creation between 4.8 and 10.5 percentage
points relative to the less finance-constrained incumbents. In fact, constrained access to credit may
represent an important barrier to entry, together with the usual set-up costs, particularly during
crises and the associated tight finance availability. In a Minskian perspective, on the other hand,
periods of easy access to debt may induce a higher entry rate. Kerr and Nanda (2009) studied the
effect of the banking deregulation in the U.S. upon the entry rate from the 1970s and estimated
an increase of 10% in the start-ups rate after the reforms. Similar findings have been reported by
Bertrand et al. (2007) at the industry level for France.
    All in all, both in relatively bad or good times, the entry dynamics, affected by credit and other
conditions, seems to be a potentially relevant source of hysteresis.

2.3    Skills deterioration
A third microeconomic channel which might trigger hysteresis is the workers’ skills deterioration
process. Once the economy enters a longer recessionary phase, firms tend to fire workers. During
severe recessions, like the 2008 ongoing crisis, the incentive to firms to hire is significantly weakened,
so unemployment which could be in principle temporary and cyclical turns out to be persistent,
implying that many workers experience long unemployment periods. Unemployed workers, as they
stop learning-by-doing and lose contact with the new practices and techniques being introduced by
firms, gradually deteriorate their existing skills during the unemployment period. As the economy
recovers and the unemployed are finally hired, their productivity is lower than incumbent workers,
reducing the overall productivity.
    Looking at the recent figures, Reifschneider et al. (2015) document that the share of workers
who have been unemployed for more than 26 weeks peaked at 45% in 2011 and it was still about
30% in 2013. On a similar vein, Jaimovich and Siu (2012) analyse the speed of economic recovery
during different economic recessions (1970, 1975, 1982, 1991, 2001, 2009) in the United States. Their
findings suggest that while in the first three recessions aggregate employment begun to expand
within six months of the peak of the downturn, during the last three crises employment continued
to contract for about 20 months before turning around. Yet, at the end of 2013 employment had
not returned to the pre-crisis level. Finally, Abraham et al. (2016) studying the effect of long-
term unemployment on employment probability and earnings find evidence that long unemployment
duration is negatively associated with both job-finding rates and earning opportunities. On a similar
vein, Ghayad (2013), based on a résumé review study, reports that employers have a strong rejection
for long-term unemployed applicants, even in case of equivalent or superior résumé qualification.
    Hence, the effects of long unemployment shocks upon skills and job-finding probabilities are yet
another important candidate as a source of macroeconomic hysteresis.




                                                    5
3       The model
We build a general disequilibrium, stock-and-flow consistent, agent-based model, populated by het-
erogeneous firms and workers who behave according to bounded-rational rules. More specifically, we
extend the Keynes Meets Schumpeter (K+S) model (Dosi et al., 2010) with decentralized interac-
tions among firms and workers in both the product and the labour markets (Dosi et al., 2016, 2017),
introducing an endogenous process of workers’ skills accumulation and variable number of firms in
the markets.
    The two-sector economy in the model is composed of three populations of heterogeneous agents,
  1
Ft capital-good firms, Ft2 consumption-good firms, LS consumers/workers, plus a bank and the
Government.6 Capital-good firms invest in R&D and produce heterogeneous machine-tools whose
productivity stochastically evolves over time. Consumption-good firms combine machines bought
from capital-good firms and labour in order to produce an homogeneous product for consumers.
There is a minimal financial system represented by a single bank that provides credit to firms to
finance production and investment plans. Credit is allocated to each firm according to their own
demand, which is constrained by their past performance, according to a loan-to-sales cap rule ap-
plied by the bank. Conversely, credit supply is completely elastic, adapting to the approved credit
demand. Workers submit job applications to a small random subset of firms. Firms hire according
to their individual adaptive demand expectations. The government levies taxes on firms profits, pays
unemployment benefits and set minimum wages, according to the policy setting, absorbing excess
profits and losses from the bank and keeping a relatively balanced budget in the long run.7

3.1     The entry and exit processes
We expanded the K+S model accounting for a variable number of firms in both the consumption-
and the capital-good sectors (Ft1 , Ft2 ). In the new version of the model, entry and exit are now
independent processes. As before, firms leave the market whenever their market shares get close to
zero or their net assets turn negative (bankruptcy). However, and in line with Dosi et al. (1995), we
now define the number of entrants by means of the random variables b1t and b2t :
                          bzt = Ft−1
                                  z
                                     [(1 − o)M Azt + oπtz ]        (lower bounded to 0),                            (1)
                                                                                      z
where z ∈ {1, 2} denotes the sector (capital- or consumption-good, respectively), Ft−1   is the existing
                                    z
number of incumbent firms, M At the market current financial attractiveness, 1 ≤ o ≤ 1 is a mix
balance parameter and πtz is a random draw from a uniform distribution on the fixed support [x2 , x̄2 ],
                                                                                                 ¯
representing a stochastic component in the entry process. This entry criterion states that the financial
conditions do affect the decision of each firm evaluating to enter into the respective market, subject
to a certain level of uncertainty, together with the current number of incumbent firms.
    The market-specific entry attractiveness M Azt in period t is defined as:
                              M Azt = M C zt − M C zt−1  (bounded to [x2 , x̄2 ]).                    (2)
                                                                        ¯
M C zt represents the overall sector’s financial conditions, calculated based on firms’ balance sheets as
the (log) ratio between the aggregate stocks of liquid assets N Wy,t (bank deposits) and bank debt
Deby,t :                                              !                       !
                                          X                      X
                          M C zt = log       N Wy,t−1 − log          Deby,t−1 ,                       (3)
                                               y                         y

    6
     The subscript t indicates time dependence, one time unit representing roughly one quarter. From now on, agent
specific variables are denoted by a subscript i, in case of capital-good firms, j, for consumption-good firms, or `, for
workers.
   7
     Due to space restrictions, we do not present in details the firms’, the workers’ and the Government behavioural
rules already set in the original model. For more details, including the model configuration, the timeline of events and
the parameter set-up, please see Dosi et al., 2010 and Dosi et al., 2017.


                                                           6
in each sector, y ∈ {i, j}, accordingly. So, M C zt measures the sectoral liquidity-to-debt ratio and thus
the tightness of the credit market, and M Azt is a proxy to its dynamics. Correspondingly, negative
(positive) values of M Azt represent leveraged (deleveraged) markets, meaning debt is growing faster
(slower) than the accumulation of cash equivalents. This means that whenever the incumbents’
financial conditions are sound – the overall liquidity-to-debt ratio is shrinking – firms are more
inclined to enter, and vice versa.
    The adopted formulation for the entry process tries to model some well known facts in the
industrial dynamics and business cycle literature: (i) the number of entrants is proportional to the
number of incumbent firms (Geroski, 1991, 1995), (ii) entry is affected by the easiness of access to
credit (Kerr and Nanda, 2009; Bertrand et al., 2007), (iii) the process is pro-cyclical (Gomis et al.,
2017; Lee and Mukoyama, 2015).

3.2     The labour market and skills dynamics
The labour market in the model implements a fully-decentralized search and hiring process between
workers and firms (more on that in Dosi et al., 2016, 2017). The aggregate supply of labour LS is
fixed and all workers are available to be hired in any period. Also, the labour market is characterised
by imperfect information. When unemployed, workers submit a certain number of job applications to
firms. Employed workers may apply or not for better positions, according to the institutional set-up
(see Section 3.3 below). Larger firms, in terms of market share, have a proportionally higher prob-
ability of receiving job applications, which are organized in separated, firm-specific queues. Firms
decide about their individual labour demand based on the received orders (capital-good sector), the
expected demand (consumption-good sector), and the expected labour productivity level. Consid-
ering the number and the productivity of the already employed workers, firms decide to (i) hire
new workers, (ii) fire part of the existing ones, or (iii) keep the existing labour force. Each hiring
firm defines a unique wage offer for the applicant workers, based on its internal conditions and the
received applications. Workers select the best offer they get from the firms to which they submitted
applications, if any. If already employed, they quit the current job if a better wage offer is received.
There is no second round of bargaining between workers and firms in the same period and, so, firms
have no guarantee of fulfilling all the open positions (no market clearing). Moreover, there are no
firing or hiring transaction costs.
     We extended the K+S model to account for the process of workers’ skills accumulation and
deterioration. Such a process is driven by the worker-specific job tenures, assuming a learning-by-
doing process when employed and a gradual deterioration of skills while unemployed, assuming firms
keep introducing new techniques all the time, deprecating the skills of unemployed workers. The skill
level s`,t > 0 of each worker ` evolves over time as a multiplicative process:
                                    
                                    (1 + τ )s`,t−1 if employed in t − 1
                             s`,t =    1                                                             (4)
                                          s`,t−1    if unemployed in t − 1,
                                      1+τ
with the learning rate τ ≥ 0 a parameter. As a consequence, when worker ` is employed her skills
improve over time, as she becomes more experienced in her task. Conversely, unemployed workers
lose skills. In particular, when a worker is hired, she may immediately acquire the minimum level
of skills already present in the firm (the existing worker with the lowest skills), if above her present
level. Also, workers have a fixed working life. After a fixed number of periods Tr ∈ N∗ in the labour
market, workers retire and are replaced by younger ones,8 whose skills are equivalent to the current
minimum level in the incumbent firms.
   8
     In the start of the simulation, initial workers ages are randomly draw in the integer range [1, Tr ] and all start from
the same skills level.



                                                             7
      Workers’ skills define their individual (potential) productivity A`,t :

                                                s`,t τ                     1 X
                                       A`,t =       A ,           s̄t =        s`,t ,                        (5)
                                                 s̄t i                    LS `

where s̄t is the average worker skills level and Aτi , the expected productivity of the machinery vintage
the worker operates. The ratio s`,t /s̄t , or the worker normalized productivity, represents her ability
to produce more (if s`,t > s̄t ) or less (otherwise) when using a certain machine technology, in relation
to the expected vintage productivity. The worker effective production depends, yet, on its utilization
in the production process, according to the firms desired production level Qdj,t . Note that the sectoral
aggregation over the firm-level effective productivities Aj,t is a truly emergent properties of the model,
resulting, simultaneously, from the technical innovation dynamics (mainly, the introduction of new
vintages Aτi ), the worker skills accumulation/deterioration process and the effective demand, which
guides firms when deciding Qdj,t , the capital stock dynamics and the employed machine mix (see Dosi
et al., 2010 for more details).
    The influence of the workers’ skills upon production reflects a learning by tenure/doing mechanism
well established in the literature at least since the seminal contribution of Arrow (1962). On the
empirical side, for the links between job tenure, capability accumulation and firm productivity, see
Zhou et al. (2011) and Lucidi and Kleinknecht (2009), among others.

3.3      Alternative labour-market policy regimes
We employ the model described above to study two alternative policy regimes, which we call Fordist
(our baseline) and Competitive.9 The policy regimes are telegraphically sketched in Table 1.
    Under the Fordist regime, wages are insensitive to the labour market conditions and indexed to
the productivity gains of the firms. There is a sort of covenant between firms and workers concerning
“long term” employment: firms fire only when their profits become negative, while workers are loyal to
employers and do not seek for alternative jobs. When hiring/firing, firms aim to keep the more skilled
worker. Labour market institutions contemplate a minimum wage fully indexed to the aggregate
economy productivity and unemployment benefits financed by taxes on profits. Conversely, in the
Competitive regime, flexible wages respond to unemployment and the decentralised labour market
dynamics, and are set by means of an asymmetric bargaining process where firms have the last say.
Employed workers search for better paid jobs with some positive probability and firms freely adjust
(fire) their excess workforce according to their planned production. Hiring/firing workers by firms
are based on a balance between skills and wages, using a simple payback comparison rule. The
Competitive regime is also characterized by different labour institutions: minimum wage is only
partially indexed to productivity and unemployment benefits – and the associated taxes on profits –
are relatively lower.

                                                              Fordist (baseline)         Competitive

                       Wage sensitivity to unemployment          low (rigid)            high (flexible)
                       Workers search activity                unemployed only      unemployed and employed
                       Labour firing restrictions             under losses only               none
                       Workers hiring priority                  higher skills           lower payback
                       Workers firing priority                  lower skills           higher payback
                       Unemployment benefits                         yes                 yes (reduced)
                       Minimum wage productivity indexation          full                   partial



                            Table 1: Main characteristics of tested policy regimes.

    The simulation exercises in Section 5 are configured so that there is a regime transition at a
certain time step, capturing a set of labour-market “structural reforms”. This institutional shock is
  9
    The two regimes roughly capture two alternative wage-labour nexus in the words of the Regulation Theory (see,
within a vast literature, Boyer and Saillard, 2005 and Amable, 2003).


                                                              8
meant to spur flexibility on the relations among agents in the labour market and implies that the
social compromise embodied in the Fordist regime is replace by the Competitive one.


4      Empirical validation
The K+S model is able to generate endogenous growth and business cycles, emergent crises, and
to reproduce a rich set of macro (e.g., relative volatility, co-movements, etc.) and micro (firm size
distributions, firm productivity dynamics, etc.) stylized facts (see Dosi et al., 2010, 2013, 2015,
2017). In addition, the labour-enhanced version of the model (Dosi et al., 2016, 2017), which explic-
itly accounts for microeconomic firm-worker interactions, has already proved to be able to robustly
reproduce most of the labour market macro empirical regularities.10

                   Fordist              t-4         t-3      t-2       t-1       0      t+1      t+2      t+3      t+4

                   Net entry            0.09       0.13     0.14     0.07     -0.05    -0.18    -0.25    -0.25    -0.17
                                        (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)    (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)
                   Total firm debt      0.21       0.29     0.34     0.35      0.30     0.21     0.11     0.02    -0.03
                                        (0.02)   (0.03)   (0.03)   (0.04)    (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.03)   (0.02)
                   Liquidity-to-sales   -0.12     -0.31    -0.52    -0.65     -0.66    -0.51    -0.26    -0.00     0.19
                                        (0.03)   (0.03)   (0.02)   (0.03)    (0.03)   (0.03)   (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)
                   Competitive          t-4         t-3      t-2       t-1       0      t+1      t+2      t+3      t+4

                   Net entry            0.07      0.12      0.15     0.15      0.11     0.03    -0.07    -0.16    -0.21
                                        (0.02)   (0.02    (0.02)   (0.02)    (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)
                   Total firm debt      0.11      0.11      0.08     0.03     -0.03    -0.08    -0.09    -0.07    -0.03
                                        (0.03)   (0.04    (0.04)   (0.03)    (0.03)   (0.03)   (0.02)   (0.03)   (0.03)
                   Liquidity-to-sales   -0.24    -0.50     -0.72    -0.85     -0.83    -0.64    -0.35    -0.02     0.25
                                        (0.02)   (0.01    (0.01)   (0.01)    (0.01)   (0.01)   (0.01)   (0.02)   (0.02)



Table 2: Correlation structure with respect to GDP on selected variables. All results significant at 5%
level. MC standard errors in parentheses. Non-rate series are Baxter-King bandpass-filtered (6,32,12).

    The extensions to the K+S model proposed here added some new empirical regularities matched
by the model. First, the new labour force learning dynamics dynamics produce fat-tailed skills
(worker level) and productivity (firm level) distributions, consistent with the empirical evidence
suggesting the presence of both firm- and worker-specific heterogeneity. Second, the improved entry
dynamics increased the number of the model variables that match the usual cross-correlation/lag
structure among aggregated macro indicators. As shown in Table 2, net entry is pro-cyclical and
lagging with respect to GDP, coherently with the specified state-dependent entry dynamics, but also
counter-cyclical and leading on GDP. Time series correlation structure of some financial variables
also added new insights. While the Fordist regime presents the same lag structure already revealed
in Dosi et al. (2013), at least in terms of debt pro-cyclicality, in the Competitive regime debt is just
mildly pro-cyclical and more lagged. In fact, credit (debt) is now also a slightly counter-cyclical
leading indicator to GDP, as suggested by empirical data.


5      At the roots of hysteresis
Let us study the emergence of hysteresis in our model, addressing the possible causes and discussing
the consequences for the economic dynamics. We will first study inter-regime long-run hysteresis (cf.
Figure 1), also testing the Blanchard-Summers hypothesis (Section 5.1). We will then analyse the
emergence of intra-regime transient hysteresis (Section 5.2).
  10
     For a detailed discussion upon the configurations and the parameter settings producing the above mentioned
stylised facts we refer to Dosi et al. (2010, 2017). In the following we focus on the innovation, entry and skills
processes and on the related variables and parameters.




                                                                   9
5.1      Regime change: super hysteresis
We begin with the long-run dynamics of the model, when affected by an institutional shock, namely
the introduction of “structural reforms” aimed at increasing the flexibility of the labour market,
leaving however untouched the technological fundamentals. In our policy typology, the reforms are
supposed to move the labour market regime from a Fordist to a Competitve set-up (see Section 3.3
above). In that, we are implicitly testing the insider-outsider hypothesis of hysteresis proposed by
Blanchard and Summers (1987). The normative implication of such hypothesis is the advocacy of
a more flexible labour market, where unions have lower bargaining power in the wage formation
process, with the aim of making wages more respondent to unemployment conditions. In our model,
the transition from a Fordist toward a Competitive type of labour relations captures the structural
reforms, aimed at achieving both numerical (easier firing) and wage flexibility (wages more respondent
to unemployment), as illustrated in Table 1.11
    In Figure 2, we report the time series of the main macroeconomic variables in the two regimes.12
The institutional shock occurs at time t = 100 (the vertical dotted line). The widening GDP gap
between the two regimes, as presented in Figure 2.a, shows how the structural reforms determine
not only super hysteresis (i.e., a permanently lower growth rate of the GDP), but even a form of
asymptotic hysteresis, whereby the effects propagate in the very long-run (see also Dosi et al., 2017,
2016). The actual level of the long-run capacity utilization increases from the 85% to 90% after the
introduction of the Competitive regime (cf. Figure 2.b), hinting at a process of underinvestment
due to the worsened business opportunities for firms. In the Competitive regime, as a result of the
depressed wage dynamics, increased GDP volatility, and their effect on the aggregate demand, firms
reduce the average expansionary investments, which depend on the difference between (demand-led)
desired and installed production capacity, pushing down the number of machines ordered from the
capital-good sector. As a result, firms decrease the gap between the effective production and the
potential capacity, which leads to a cyclical surge in the capacity utilization, that is, during good
times firms utilize almost all the available capital to produce goods. The capital accumulation is
slower when structural reforms are in place: the long-run growth rate falls from 1.55% to 1.44% per
period. Figure 2.c shows the dynamics of unemployment and vacancy rates, which are negatively
correlated, consistent with a Beveridge Curve, while unemployment is significantly higher in the
Competitive regime. The negative effects of structural reforms spill over the long-run: the number
of successful innovations in the capital-good sector takes a sustained lower trajectory (Figure 2.d)
and the average level of workers skills is significantly reduced (Figure 2.e). Finally, the trend of the
net entry13 of firms in the market is more turbulent after the reforms, indicating a higher level of
volatility in credit conditions (Figure 2.f).14
    The different performance of the two regimes is quantitatively summarised in Table 3, which
presents the averages and the ratios between selected variables of the two set-ups and also the p-
values for a t test comparing the averages. The results confirm, at a 5% significance level, that
after the introduction of structural reforms the short- and long-run performance of the economy
significantly worsens. Note that as the technological configuration of the model is invariant between
the two regime specifications, the significant effects on the productivity, innovation and imitation
rates are entirely caused by the institutional shock.15
   11
      Indeed, the change of the political structure and of the balance of power between capitalists and workers and
the related results of a class struggle are phenomena which, if might have some economic roots, did occur at the
socio-political level. For this reason, we perform a comparative static analysis, mimicking a quasi-natural experiment
with a “treated” and “control” group.
   12
      The presented series are the averages of 50 Monte Carlo simulation runs, over 500 periods. The initial 100
“warm-up” periods are not presented.
   13
      The use of the two-sided H-P filter produces the diverging patterns of the two curves before time t = 100.
   14
      Entry decision in the model is also driven by the average financial conditions of the firms in each sector.
   15
      In accordance with the behavioural rules set in the model (cf. Dosi et al., 2010 and Dosi et al., 2017), the dynamics
of innovation, of imitation, of new machines introduction and, consequently, of the firms productivity growth is directly


                                                            10
                         Time series                Fordist (1)     Competitive (2)   Ratio (2)/(1)   p-value

                         GDP growth rate              0.0148            0.0135           0.9118       0.044
                         Capacity utilization         0.8712            0.9038           1.0374       0.000
                         Productivity growth rate     0.0147            0.0134           0.9084       0.034
                         Innovation rate              0.0937            0.0719           0.7677       0.001
                         Imitation rate               0.0253            0.0189           0.7476       0.004
                         Unemployment rate            0.0152            0.2640           17.400       0.000
                         Vacancy rate                 0.0976            0.1439           1.4749       0.000
                         Worker tenure                27.861            4.9561           0.1779       0.000
                         Worker skills                1.7288            1.3418           0.7762       0.000
                         Wages std. deviation         0.0618            0.1710           2.7672       0.000



Table 3: Comparison between policy regimes, selected time series. Averages for 50 MC runs in period
[200, 400] (excluding warm-up). p-value for a two-means t test, H0 : no difference between regimes.


    What are the drivers of the soaring super hysteresis in the model? The huge surge in unemploy-
ment reflects the widening gap between the long-run dynamics of real wages in the two regimes,16
which, in turn, leads to the emergence of Keynesian unemployment due to the contraction of aggre-
gate demand and the slowdown on the skills accumulation and on the productivity growth. Figure
3 shows the box-plot comparison between the Monte Carlo simulation runs for the two regimes, for
the long-term consequences in terms of the innovation and imitation rates, productivity growth, job
tenure, workers skills and net entry of firms (see Section 2). The results in the first row of plots
(Figure 3.a, b and c) indicate a reduction in the innovation and imitation rates in the majority of the
simulation runs – the latter variables are calculated as the rate of successful innovators and imitators
in the capital-good sector – and, as a consequence, in the productivity growth rate. This is an indi-
rect outcome of the fall in the aggregate demand, which yields lower R&D expenditure by firms.17
In the same direction, the results in the second row of Figure 3 show the quite significant fall on the
average tenure period (plot d) and the ensuing slower pace of the workers skills accumulation (plot
e), which, in turn, also has a direct and negative effect on the growth of productivity. Finally, the
dynamics of net entry (number of entrants minus the exiting firms) is presented in plot f.18 According
to the adopted entry rule, the financial conditions of incumbents do affect the decision to enter in the
market. In the presence of overall improving financial state of firms, e.g., whenever there is a grow-
ing sectoral difference between net worth (liquid assets) and debt, firms are more inclined to enter.
However, note that in the Competitive regime the financial cycle is amplified due to the increased
volatility, exacerbating the entry dynamics: in good times there are more entrants in Competitive
than in the Fordist regime, which exhibits a stabler financial cycle, while the opposite occurs in bad
times. Both phenomena, the more pronounced leverage cycle and the tighter availability of credit,
have been documented by Ng and Wright (2013) as emerging business cycle stylised facts from the
last three recessions (1990, 2001, 2007).
    The transmission channels in the model operate through both numerical and wage flexibility.
First, higher numerical flexibility, where workers are more freely fired, determines a sharp drop in
workers job tenure and, indirectly, has a negative effect on skills accumulation and, consequently,
on productivity. Not only the firing rule, but also the firing order criteria affect the dynamics of
productivity growth. In the Fordist regime, firms hire (fire) first workers with higher (lower) skills.19




affected by the overall macroeconomic conditions, including those directly impacted by the reforms. This creates a
(potentially hysteretic) reinforcing feedback process between the macro and the technological domains, which in part
explains the observed results.
   16
      The real wages growth rates are 1.47% and 1.35% per period, respectively.
   17
      See Dosi et al., 2010 for details on the innovation process.
   18
      The diverging trend before time t = 100 is due to the two-sided H-P filter we employ to detrend the series.
   19
      This is a necessary consequence of the firms unilaterally decided and homogeneously applied wage adjustments,
so skills are the only heterogeneous metric among workers in a Fordist firm.


                                                               11
                                                                                                                                                   Figure 2: Macroeconomic dynamics in alternative policy regimes.
                                                                                                                                          Lines represent 50 MC runs time step averages (Fordist: black | Competitive: blue).

                                                                        (a) Actual and     full
                                                                                    GDP ( all       capacity
                                                                                              experiments )  GDP                                                                                                                        (b) Capacity utilization
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Capacity utilization and participation rates ( all experiments )                                                                                                   (c) Unemployment             and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Unemployment and vacancy         vacancy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     experiments ) rates
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         rates ( all




                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.00
                                                          Fordist                                                                                           Effective GDP                                              Fordist                                                                                            Utilization                                                             Fordist                                                                                         Unemployment
                                                          Competitive                                                                                       GDP @ 100% utilization                                     Competitive                                                                                        Participation                                                           Competitive                                                                                     Vacancy
                                               22




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.95
                                               20




                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.90




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.2
     Log GDP




                                                                                                                                                                                     Rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rate
                                               18




                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.85




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.1
                                               16




                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.0
                                               14




                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.75
12




                                                      0                          100                              200                                 300                      400                                 0                    100                                200                                 300                   400                                                      0                     100                           200                              300                       400

                                                                                                                    Time                                                                                                                                                    Time                                                                                                                                                                     Time
                                                                                         ( vertical dotted line: regime change / MC runs = 50 )                                                                                      ( vertical dotted line: regime change / capacity in sector 2 only / MC runs = 50 )                                                                                                   ( vertical dotted line: regime change / MC runs = 50 )

                                                                                Innovation and and
                                                                        (d) Innovation         imitation (imitation
                                                                                                           all experiments ) rates                                                                                                         Workers skills (worker
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (e) Average          all experimentsskills
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          )                                                                                                                                   Net entryof
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (f ) Net entry             firms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        of firms          (HP-filtered
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 in the market ( all experiments ) trend)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.8
                                                          Fordist                                                                                                       Innovation                                     Fordist                                                                                            Tenure skills                                                           Fordist                                                                                Consumption−good sector
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.8




                                                          Competitive                                                                                                   Imitation                                      Competitive                                                                                        Vintage skills                                                          Competitive                                                                            Capital−good sector




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.6
                                               0.15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Number of net entrant firms (HP−filtered)
     Share of innovating and imitating firms




                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                     Average skills level
                                               0.10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.0
                                               0.05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       −0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       −0.4
                                               0.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.0




                                                      0                          100                              200                                 300                      400                                 0                    100                                200                                 300                   400                                                      0                     100                           200                              300                       400

                                                                                                                   Time                                                                                                                                                      Time                                                                                                                                                                    Time
                                                                                  ( vertical dotted line: regime change / sector 1 only / MC runs = 50 )                                                                                          ( vertical dotted line: regime change / MC runs = 50 )                                                                                                                  ( vertical dotted line: regime change / MC runs = 50 )
     Figure 3: Performance comparison between policy regimes (Fordist: left | Competitive: right).
     Summary statistics for 50 MC runs in period [200, 400] (excluding warm-up). Bar: median | box: 2nd-3rd quartile | whiskers: max-min | dots: outliers.

                                                                                          (a) Innovation
                                                                                                  Innovation rate                                                                                                                                         (b) Imitation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Imitation rate                                                                                                                          (c) Productivity        growth rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Productivity growth
                                                      0.16




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.020
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●                                                                                           ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.05
                                                      0.14




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.04
                                                      0.12
     Innovating firms share in sector 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Average productivity growth rate
                                                                                                                                                                                  Imitating firms share in sector 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.015
                                                      0.10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.03
                                                      0.08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.010
                                                      0.06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.01
                                                      0.04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                      0.02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
13




                                                                                Fordist                                                           Competitive                                                                                   Fordist                                                           Competitive                                                                                   Fordist                                                           Competitive


                                                             ( bar: median / box: 2nd−3rd quartile / whiskers: max−min / points: outliers / MC runs = 50 / period = 300 − 500 )                                              ( bar: median / box: 2nd−3rd quartile / whiskers: max−min / points: outliers / MC runs = 50 / period = 300 − 500 )                                              ( bar: median / box: 2nd−3rd quartile / whiskers: max−min / points: outliers / MC runs = 50 / period = 300 − 500 )

                                                                                          (d) Worker      tenure
                                                                                               Workers tenure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.8                                  (e) Worker         skills
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Workers tenure skills                                                                                                                                             entry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (f ) Net Net             of firms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    entry of firms
                                                      30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.7
     Average employment time in same firm (periods)

                                                      25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                  Average workers skills level




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Net entries in both markets
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.6
                                                      20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.5
                                                      15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.0
                                                      10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     −0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.4




                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     −0.4
                                                      5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●




                                                                                Fordist                                                           Competitive                                                                                   Fordist                                                           Competitive                                                                                   Fordist                                                           Competitive


                                                             ( bar: median / box: 2nd−3rd quartile / whiskers: max−min / points: outliers / MC runs = 50 / period = 300 − 500 )                                              ( bar: median / box: 2nd−3rd quartile / whiskers: max−min / points: outliers / MC runs = 50 / period = 300 − 500 )                                              ( bar: median / box: 2nd−3rd quartile / whiskers: max−min / points: outliers / MC runs = 50 / period = 300 − 500 )
    Conversely, in the Competitive case, firms use the skills-to-wage “payback” ratio as a decision
guide to preferentially hire (fire) workers with superior (inferior) ratios. Such a behaviour has a
negative impact on the aggregate skills level of the incumbent workers over time. On the other hand,
higher wage flexibility, by limiting the wage indexation upon the productivity gains, causes a straight-
forward drop in the aggregate demand via the reduced consumption of workers. In turn, the shrinking
sales opportunities drive a fall in investment and labour demand, which induces more unemployment,
characterising a typical Keynesian feedback-amplified downturn. Moreover, the slower economy also
impacts upon the entry/exit and the innovation/imitation rates, via the overall cut in total R&D
expenditure and the higher volatility in the number of operating firms. In fact, Table 2 show the
significant level of correlation between the business cycle and the net entry of firms in the market.
    To sum up, our simulation experiments on the K+S model – extended with endogenous firms
entry and workers skills accumulation/deterioration – generically yield super hysteresis stemming
from an institutional shock. Indeed, institutions are a “carrier of history” (David, 1994) also here.
However, contrary to the insider-outsider hypothesis (Blanchard and Summers, 1987) “pro-market”
institutions bear a negative hysteretic effect. However, our results seem to provide a more consistent
explanation for its main causes and also bring a critical warning. The model suggests that structural
reforms aimed at increasing the flexibility in the labour market, may well spur even more hysteresis
instead of reducing it. Considering that, in the next section, we focus on intra-regime hysteresis
phenomena.

5.2     Detecting intra-regime hysteresis
Assessing the emergence of intra-regime hysteresis is not a trivial task as there is no unifying test or
even widely accepted criteria for this. However, there are several properties and techniques which do
help uncover particular aspects of hysteresis. In the following, we present a set of analytical methods,
summarized in Table 4, which provide evidence of the presence of hysteretical properties in the K+S
model. In line with the literature, we study whether the time series generated by the model present
evidence of (i) remanence, (ii) persistency, (iii) nonlinearity, (iv) path-dependency, and (v) super
hysteresis. Needless to say, these properties are to some degree overlapping.
    Figure 4 illustrates the number of periods (grey area) necessary to put the economy back to
the pre-crisis growth trend (dashed line) in typical simulation runs.20 The analysis is inspired by
(Blanchard et al., 2015) and simply performs an extrapolation of the long-run GDP trend to detect
the recovery from crises under the presence of hysteresis. The results show the coexistence of shorter
business cycle downturns with longer, hysteretical crises, requiring significant more times for the
economy to recover. Note also the presence of super hysteresis, revealed by the different slopes of
the peak to to peak GDP trends (dashed lines).
    Table 5 reports the average recovery duration for both the GDP and the mean unemployment
time (the average period a worker takes to find a new job). While the duration of the GDP trend
recovery is similar among regimes (around 16 quarters), the unemployment time takes almost five
times more to return to its pre-crisis level in the Competitive case. In order to better assess the
severity of the crises, we also track the peak GDP trend deviation during the recovery period (the
farther the GDP gets from the pre-crisis trend) and the accumulated GDP losses in comparison to
the trend (the crisis “cost”). The model robustly shows how Competitive regime crises are about
two times deeper than in the Fordist scenario. The accumulated GDP losses comparison leads to a
similar conclusion.
    In Table 6, we report a set of statistical tests to detect unit-roots/stationarity (Augmented
  20
     A crisis is defined by a 3% drop of the GDP in a single period which is not recovered in the next three periods.
The pre-crisis level is calculated as the average GDP for the four periods before the crisis and the trend, as the output
of an H-P filter at the period just before the crisis. The crisis is considered recovered when the GDP reaches back the
pre-crisis trend level.


                                                           14
                                             Property                                        Test                                                                            Reference

                                             Remanence                                       Duration of recovery of                                                         Jaimovich and Siu, 2012
                                                                                             employment and GDP after crises
                                             Persistency                                     Unit-root tests for stationarity                                                Blanchard and Summers, 1986
                                             Nonlinearity                                    Brock-Dechert-Scheinkman test                                                   Broock et al., 1996
                                             Path dependence                                 Ergodicity tests                                                                Wald and Wolfowitz, 1940
                                             Super hysteresis                                Different GDP growth trend (slope) after crises                                 Blanchard et al., 2015



                                           Table 4: Selected tests to evaluate hysteretic properties in times series.

Figure 4: GDP recovery after crises.
Typical simulation runs. Dashed line: pre-crisis trends | Gray boxes: recovery periods.

                                                       (a) Fordist
                                   GDP long−term trend recovery after crisis sample ( Fordist )                                                                                           (b) Competitive
                                                                                                                                                                           GDP long−term trend recovery after crisis sample ( Competitive )
          22




                                                                                                                                                   20
          21




                                                                                                                                                   19
Log GDP




                                                                                                                                        Log GDP
          20




                                                                                                                                                   18
          19




                                                                                                                                                   17




               200                   250                               300                                350                    400                    200                     250                               300                                350                    400

                                                                         Time                                                                                                                                       Time
                      ( dashed line: pre−crisis trend / gray boxes: trend recovey period / MC case = 32 / period = 300 − 500 )                                   ( dashed line: pre−crisis trend / gray boxes: trend recovey period / MC case = 39 / period = 300 − 500 )




Dickey-Fuller/ADF, Phillips-Perron/PP, and Kwiatkowski-Phillips-Schmidt-Shin/KPSS tests),
i.i.d./nonlinearity (Brock-Dechert-Scheinkman/BDS test), and ergodicity (Kolmogorov-Smirnov/KS
and Wald-Wolfowitz/WW tests).21 Except for the WW case, the tests are applied for individual
Monte Carlo simulation runs (or multiple run-pair combinations, in the case of KS) and, so, the
results present the frequency of the rejection of the null hypothesis for the set of 50 runs at the usual
5% significance level (see Table 6 for the definition of H0 in each case).

                                                                                                                                                  Fordist     Competitive

                                                                                                       Number of crises                            6.15          5.77
                                                                                                                                                  (0.44)        (0.28)
                                                                                                       Crises peak                                 0.23          0.51
                                                                                                                                                  (0.01)        (0.02)
                                                                                                       Crises losses                               2.38          4.18
                                                                                                                                                  (0.33)        (0.42)
                                                                                                       Recovery duration
                                                                                                       - GDP                                      15.64         16.97
                                                                                                                                                  (1.43)        (1.04)
                                                                                                       - Unemployment time                         6.83         31.22
                                                                                                                                                  (0.55)        (9.04)



Table 5: Comparison between policy regimes: GDP and unemployment time recovery.
Averages for 50 MC runs in period [200, 400] (excluding warm-up), MC standard errors in parentheses.

    The results of the tests suggest that GDP, productivity and wage growth rates more frequently
exhibit stationary (no unit-roots) behaviour in both regimes. More borderline, the unemployment
rate time series seems to be more commonly stationary among simulation runs in the Fordist regime,
while more likely non-stationary in the Competitive case. The nonlinearity test indicates a more
nuanced situation: the unemployment series is the one more frequently nonlinear (not i.i.d.), partic-
ularly in the Competitive regime, while the wage growth rates series are more likely linear (i.i.d.).
Finally, the less powerful KS test cannot reject ergodicity for the majority of run pairs tested, while
WW indicates the non-ergodicity of all series.
    There are a few take-home messages from the tests. The first is that mixed results, e.g., on
          21
               We report alternative tests for each property because of possible test lack of power in some circumstances.


                                                                                                                                       15
ergodicity or stationarity, militate in favour of path-dependency. In fact, they show the different
statistical properties of alternative sample-paths: only an outright non rejection of the null hypothesis
could be claimed in support of the the lack of hysteresis. Second, but related, the tests aimed at
the detection of some underlying, emergent, non-linear structure, are quite encouraging despite the
limited length of the sample paths.22

                               Fordist                    ADF         PP     KPSS   BDS    KS     WW

                               GDP growth rate            0.80        1.00   0.00   0.30   0.23   0.00
                               Productivity growth rate   0.76        1.00   0.02   0.44   0.12   0.00
                               Wage growth rate           0.60        1.00   0.12   0.16   0.40   0.00
                               Unemployment rate          0.40        0.60   0.16   0.50   0.33   0.01
                               Competitive                ADF         PP     KPSS   BDS    KS     WW

                               GDP growth rate            0.54        0.98   0.00   0.42   0.11   0.00
                               Productivity growth rate   0.64        1.00   0.02   0.62   0.19   0.00
                               Wage growth rate           0.42        1.00   0.14   0.30   0.38   0.02
                               Unemployment rate          0.24        0.00   0.26   1.00   0.49   0.00



Table 6: Comparison between policy regimes: statistical tests for detecting hysteresis.
Frequencies of rejection of H0 for 50 MC runs in period [300, 350] (excluding warm-up)
except for WW test (p-value presented), at 5% significance.
ADF (Augmented Dickey-Fuller)/PP (Phillips-Perron) H0 : non-stationary | KPSS (Kwiatkowski-
Phillips-Schmidt-Shin) H0 : stationary | BDS (Brock-Dechert-Scheinkman) H0 : i.i.d., KS (Kolmogorov-
Smirnov)/WW (Wald-Wolfowitz) H0 : ergodic.

    We performed a global sensitivity analysis (SA) to explore the effects of alternative model
parametrisations and to gain further insights on the robustness of our exercises on institutional
shocks.23 Out of the 57 parameters and initial conditions in the K+S model, we reduce the rele-
vant parametric dimensionality to 29, by means of an Elementary Effect screening procedure which
allowed discarding from the analysis the parameters which do not significantly affect the selected
model outputs.24 In order to understand the effect of each of the 29 parameters over the selected
metrics, we perform a Sobol decomposition.25 Because of the relatively high computational costs to
produce the decomposition using the original model, a simplified version of it – a meta-model – was
build using the Kriging method and employed for the Sobol SA.26 The meta-model is estimated by
numerical maximum likelihood using a set of observations (from the original model) sampled using a
high-efficiency, nearly-orthogonal Latin hypercube design of experiments (Cioppa and Lucas, 2007).27
    The main indicator used for the SA is the accumulated GDP losses during the crises’ recovery
periods, as defined above. It seems a sensible choice, as it conveys information about both the
  22
     The choice of the adequate time window length is quite relevant when analysing hysteresis, as detailed in Section
2.1, and it is not driven by the availability of simulated data. For this reason we split the analysis in inter-regime
hysteresis, where the patterns are of long term type, and the intra-regime hysteresis. For comparability with empirical
data, to check for the intra-regime hysteresis we restricted the time span to 50 runs (12.5 years), which is closer to
the empirical time horizons. Note that taking longer time spans would simply “dilute” some hysteretic properties of
the series, like non ergodicity or non-stationarity: in the very long run most real economic series look stationary and
ergodic.
  23
     For technical details on the global sensitivity analysis methodology, see Dosi et al. (2016).
  24
     Briefly, the Elementary Effects technique proposes both a specific design of experiments, to efficiently sample the
parameter space under a one-factor-at-a-time, and some linear regression statistics, to evaluate direct and indirect
(nonlinear/non-additive) effects of parameters on the model results (Morris, 1991, Saltelli et al., 2008).
  25
     The Sobol decomposition is a variance-based, global SA method consisting in the decomposition of the variance
of the chosen model output into fractions according to the variances of the parameters selected for analysis, better
dealing with nonlinearities and non-additive interactions than traditional local SA methods. It allows to disentangle
both direct and interaction quantitative effects of the parameters on the chosen metrics (Sobol, 1993, Saltelli et al.,
2008).
  26
     In summary, the Kriging meta-model “mimics” our original model by a simpler, mathematically-tractable approx-
imation. Kriging is an interpolation method that under fairly general assumptions provides the best linear unbiased
predictors for the response of complex, non-linear computer simulation models (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006, Salle
and Yildizoglu, 2014).
  27
     Due to space restrictions we cannot present all the tests statistics here but they can be requested to the authors.


                                                                 16
Figure 5: Global sensitivity analysis: response surfaces.
Surfaces modelled using the fitted Kriging meta-model. z axis: recovery losses (rec loss).
Red dot: calibration settings | Markers: maximum (blue) and minimum (green) predicted crises losses.
                        Meta−model response surface ( F2max = 400 )
                                    (a) Fordist                                                                          Meta−model
                                                                                                                                 (b)response surface ( LS0 = 250000 )
                                                                                                                                       Competitive




     1.8



         1.6
     rec_lo
       ss




              1.4

                                                                                                 4.0
               1.2


                                                                                                                            ●
                                                                                                     3.5
                                                                                                                      200
                     200             ●




                                                                                                 rec_lo
                                                                                                          3.0         150
                                                                                  0.10




                                                                                                                  Tr
                         150
                                                                           0.08
                       Tr




                                                                                                   ss
                                                                   0.06                                     2.5
                                                                                                                  100
                               100                        0.04       tau
                                                                                                                                                                                   0.10
                                                                                                                2.0                                                     0.08
                                                 0.02                                                                                                       0.06
                                                                                                                                                0.04
                                                                                                                                    0.02                     tau



                    95% confidence interval: rec_loss = [0.51,1.96] at defaults (red dot)                             95% confidence interval: rec_loss = [0.52,4.7] at defaults (red dot)



duration and the intensity of the crises, as such among the key properties of hysteresis. Interestingly,
this indicator is significantly influenced only by a limited set of parameters (and no initial condition),
namely the learning rate parameter (τ ), the retirement age (Tr ), the replicator equation parameter
(χ), the maximum technical advantage of the capital-good entrants (x5 ), and the minimum capital
ratio (Φ1 ) and the expected capacity utilization (u) of the consumption-good entrants. The two
parameters associated with the skills accumulation process, learning rate (τ ) and retirement age
(Tr ), are jointly responsible for almost 80% of the variance of the losses indicator over the entire
parametric space in both policy regimes.
    Figure 5.a and 5.b presents an exploration of the model response surface, using the Kriging
meta-model, for the two critical skills-related parameters. The rugged surfaces, in particular in the
Competitive regime, clearly indicate the nonlinear nature of the system, in tune with the require-
ments for hysteretic behaviours. The sensitivity analysis of the model seems to suggest that the
prominent parameters influencing the level of hysteresis observed in the losses indicator are those
directly connected with the workers skills accumulation process (τ and Tr ), the firm entry mecha-
nism (Φ1 , u and x5 ) and the market competitiveness (χ). Directly or in interaction among them,
these 5 parameters account for 95% of the variation of the GDP crises losses in the model for the
two scenarios. This ensures that the comparisons between policy regimes presented above are not
influenced by specific configuration settings. As can be seen in Figure 5, the Competitive regime
tends to produce significant higher GDP crises losses irrespective of the model set-up (notice that
the peak losses in plot (a), the blue dot, are at a lower z axis level than the deepest valley in plot
(b), the green dot). Finally, the response surfaces in both regimes show that in general the higher
the learning rate (τ ), the higher is the accumulated GDP losses during the crises’ recovery periods.
The latter positive marginal effect hints at the fact that the higher the firm specific capabilities, the
more difficult is to rebuilt the firm skills destroyed by a crisis, and to be back to the pre-crisis level.
    All in all, the statistical tests results indicate that model has a rather frequent tendency to
produce runs which show the properties usually associated with hysteresis in its main variables, in
particular the unemployment rate, whenever hit by an endogenously-produced crisis. Recoveries can


                                                                                            17
take quite long times and the losses experienced by the economy, both in terms of the GDP and the
social cost of unemployment, are severe. It is also significant that such losses seem to increase after
the introduction of structural reforms of the type discussed above.


6     Conclusions
A revival of the debate on hysteresis has emerged in the aftermath of the Great Recession. Together,
the evidence forced revisiting the standard approach of modelling unit-root processes as good can-
didates to explain the persistent deviations from the pre-crisis trends. Not only the level trends of
GDP and unemployment, but even the growth rates in many countries are still persistently bellow
the pre-2008 figures, leading to the importance of a stronger notion of hysteresis.
    As an alternative, an expanding tradition of scholars have been discussing the notions of hys-
teresis and path dependence, identifying in coordination failures and persistent effects of aggregate
demand upon productivity the main sources of long-term deviation from stable growth trajectories.
Nested into the latter literature, here we have presented an ABM which intertwines a Schumpeterian
engine of growth and a Keynesian generation of demand, declined under two institutional labour-
market variants, labelled as Fordist and Competitive regimes. The transition from the Fordist to the
Competitive regime captured “structural reforms” aimed at increasing labour market flexibility.
    The model is able to generically exhibits path dependence, nonlinearity and non-ergodicity in
its main macroeconomic variables, presenting both inter-regime and intra-regime hysteresis as a
bottom-up emergent property. In a more specific instance, the model fails in providing support to
the Blanchard and Summers (1986) insider-outsider hypothesis, according to which more flexible
labour relations might reduce hysteresis. On the contrary, the model suggests that both numerical
and wage flexibility are quite prone to increase the hysteretic properties of the macroeconomic system.


References
Abraham, K. G., J. C. Haltiwanger, K. Sandusky, and J. Spletzer (2016). The consequences of long term unemployment:
  Evidence from matched employer-employee data. NBER Working Paper 22665, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Amable, B. (2003). The diversity of modern capitalism. Oxford University Press.
Amable, B., J. Henry, F. Lordon, and R. Topol (2004). Complex remanence vs. simple persistence: Are hysteresis and
  unit-root processes observationally equivalent? In W. Barnett (Ed.), Economic Complexity, pp. 67–89. Emerald
  Group Publishing Limited.
Anderson, P., K. Arrow, and D. Pines (1988). The economy as a complex evolving system. Addison-Wesley.
Arrow, K. J. (1962). The economic implications of learning by doing. The Review of Economic Studies 29 (3), 155–173.
Ball, L., B. DeLong, and L. Summers (2014). Fiscal policy and full employment.
Ball, L. M. (2014). Long-term damage from the great recession in oecd countries. NBER Working Paper 20185,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bassi, F. and D. Lang (2016). Investment hysteresis and potential output: A post-keynesian–kaleckian agent-based
  approach. Economic Modelling 52, 35–49.
Beaudry, P., D. Galizia, and F. Portier (2016). Is the macroeconomy locally unstable and why should we care? NBER
  Working Paper 22275, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bertrand, M., A. Schoar, and D. Thesmar (2007). Banking deregulation and industry structure: Evidence from the
  french banking reforms of 1985. The Journal of Finance 62 (2), 597–628.
Blanchard, O., E. Cerutti, and L. Summers (2015). Inflation and activity–two explorations and their monetary policy
  implications. NBER Working Paper 21726, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Blanchard, O. and D. Leigh (2013). Growth forecast errors and fiscal multipliers. NBER Working Paper 18779,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Blanchard, O. J. and L. H. Summers (1986). Hysteresis and the european unemployment problem. NBER macroeco-
  nomics annual 1, 15–78.
Blanchard, O. J. and L. H. Summers (1987). Hysteresis in unemployment. European Economic Review 31 (1-2),
  288–295.
Boyer, R. and Y. Saillard (2005). Régulation Theory: the state of the art. Routledge.


                                                        18
Broock, W., J. A. Scheinkman, W. D. Dechert, and B. LeBaron (1996). A test for independence based on the correlation
  dimension. Econometric reviews 15 (3), 197–235.
Caiani, A., A. Godin, E. Caverzasi, M. Gallegati, S. Kinsella, and J. E. Stiglitz (2016). Agent based-stock flow
  consistent macroeconomics: Towards a benchmark model. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 69, 375 –
  408.
Caiani, A., A. Russo, and M. Gallegati (2016). Does inequality hamper innovation and growth? Available at SSRN
  2790911 .
Castaldi, C. and G. Dosi (2006). The grip of history and the scope for novelty: some results and open questions on
  path dependence in economic processes. In A. Wimmer and R. Kössler (Eds.), Understanding change, pp. 99–128.
  Springer.
Cioppa, T. M. and T. W. Lucas (2007). Efficient nearly orthogonal and space-filling latin hypercubes. Technomet-
  rics 49 (1), 45–55.
David, P. A. (1994). Why are institutions the ‘carriers of history’ ?: Path dependence and the evolution of conventions,
  organizations and institutions. Structural change and economic dynamics 5 (2), 205–220.
Davidson, P. (1991). Is probability theory relevant for uncertainty? a post keynesian perspective. The Journal of
  Economic Perspectives 5 (1), 129–143.
Davidson, P. (1993). The elephant and the butterfly: Or hysteresis and post keynesian economics. Journal of Post
  Keynesian Economics 15 (3), 309–322.
Dawid, H., P. Harting, and M. Neugart (2014). Economic convergence: policy implications from a heterogeneous agent
  model. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 44, 54–80.
Day, R. H. and P. Chen (1993). Nonlinear dynamics and evolutionary economics. Oxford University Press Oxford.
Decker, R. A., J. Haltiwanger, R. S. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2016). Declining business dynamism: Implications for
  productivity? Hutchins center working paper, Brookings Institution.
Dosi, G., G. Fagiolo, M. Napoletano, and A. Roventini (2013). Income distribution, credit and fiscal policies in an
  agent-based keynesian model. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 37 (8), 1598–1625.
Dosi, G., G. Fagiolo, M. Napoletano, A. Roventini, and T. Treibich (2015). Fiscal and monetary policies in complex
  evolving economies. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 52, 166–189.
Dosi, G., G. Fagiolo, and A. Roventini (2010). Schumpeter meeting keynes: A policy-friendly model of endogenous
  growth and business cycles. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 34 (9), 1748–1767.
Dosi, G., O. Marsili, L. Orsenigo, and R. Salvatore (1995). Learning, market selection and the evolution of industrial
  structures. Small Business Economics 7 (6), 411–436.
Dosi, G., M. Napoletano, A. Roventini, J. Stiglitz, and T. Treibich (2016). Expectation formation, fiscal policies
  and macroeconomic performance when agents are heterogeneous and the world is changing. Lem Paper Series
  Forthcoming, Laboratory of Economics and Management (LEM), Sant’Anna School of Advanced Studies.
Dosi, G., M. Napoletano, A. Roventini, and T. Treibich (2016). The short-and long-run damages of fiscal austerity:
  Keynes beyond schumpeter. In J. Stiglitz and M. Guzman (Eds.), Contemporary Issues in Macroeconomics, pp.
  79–100. Palgrave Macmillan UK.
Dosi, G., M. Napoletano, A. Roventini, and T. Treibich (2017). Micro and macro policies in the keynes+ schumpeter
  evolutionary models. Journal of Evolutionary Economics 27 (1), 63–90.
Dosi, G., M. C. Pereira, A. Roventini, and M. E. Virgillito (2016). The Effects of Labour Market Reforms upon
  Unemployment and Income Inequalities: an Agent Based Model. LEM Papers Series 2016/27, Laboratory of
  Economics and Management (LEM), Sant’Anna School of Advanced Studies, Pisa, Italy.
Dosi, G., M. C. Pereira, A. Roventini, and M. E. Virgillito (2017). When more Flexibility Yields more Fragility: the
  Microfoundations of Keynesian Aggregate Unemployment. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control . Forthcom-
  ing.
Dosi, G., M. C. Pereira, and M. E. Virgillito (2016). On the robustness of the fat-tailed distribution of firm growth
  rates: a global sensitivity analysis. LEM Papers Series 2016/12, Laboratory of Economics and Management (LEM),
  Sant’Anna School of Advanced Studies, Pisa, Italy.
Dosi, G., M. C. Pereira, and M. E. Virgillito (2017). The footprint of evolutionary processes of learning and selection
  upon the statistical properties of industrial dynamics. Industrial and Corporate Change 26 (2), 187–210.
Dosi, G. and M. E. Virgillito (2016). The “schumpeterian” and the “keynesian” stiglitz: Learning, coordination hurdles
  and growth trajectories. Lem Working Paper Series 2016/20, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Pisa.
Fagiolo, G. and A. Roventini (2012). Macroeconomic policy in dsge and agent-based models. Revue de l’OFCE 5 (124),
  67–116.
Fagiolo, G. and A. Roventini (2017). Macroeconomic policy in dsge and agent-based models redux: New developments
  and challenges ahead. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation 20 (1), 1.
Freeman, C., J. Clark, and L. Soete (1982). Unemployment and technical innovation. London and New York: Pinter
  Publisher.
Galı́, J. (2015). Hysteresis and the european unemployment problem revisited. NBER Working Paper 21430, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.



                                                          19
Geroski, P. (1991). Market dynamic and entry. Wiley-Blackwell.
Geroski, P. (1995). What do we know about entry? International Journal of Industrial Organization 13 (4), 421 –
   440. The Post-Entry Performance of Firms.
Ghayad, R. (2013). The jobless trap. Technical report, Northeastern University.
Gomis, R. M., S. Khatiwada, et al. (2017). Firm dynamics and business cycle: What doesn’t kill you makes you
   stronger? Technical report, Economics Section, The Graduate Institute of International Studies.
Gourio, F., T. Messer, and M. Siemer (2014). A missing generation of firms? Aggregate effects of the decline in new
   business formation. In CES Ifo Conference.
Gualdi, S., M. Tarzia, F. Zamponi, and J.-P. Bouchaud (2015). Tipping points in macroeconomic agent-based models.
   Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 50, 29 – 61. Crises and ComplexityComplexity Research Initiative for
   Systemic InstabilitieS (CRISIS) Workshop 2013.
Hallett, A. H. and L. Piscitelli (2002). Testing for hysteresis against nonlinear alternatives. Journal of Economic
   Dynamics and Control 27 (2), 303–327.
Jaimovich, N. and H. E. Siu (2012). The trend is the cycle: Job polarization and jobless recoveries. NBER Working
   Paper 18334, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kerr, W. R. and R. Nanda (2009). Democratizing entry: Banking deregulations, financing constraints, and en-
   trepreneurship. Journal of Financial Economics 94 (1), 124–149.
Kothari, S. P., J. Lewellen, and J. Warner (2013). The behavior of aggregate corporate investment. Technical report.
Lamberson, P. and S. Page (2012). Tipping points. Quarterly Journal of Political Science 7 (2), 175–208.
LeBaron, B. and L. Tesfatsion (2008). Modeling macroeconomies as open-ended dynamic systems of interacting agents.
   American Economic Review 98, 246–250.
Lee, Y. and T. Mukoyama (2015). Entry and exit of manufacturing plants over the business cycle. European Economic
   Review 77, 20 – 27.
Louca, F. (2001). Intriguing pendula: founding metaphors in the analysis of economic fluctuations. Cambridge Journal
   of Economics 25, 25–55.
Lucidi, F. and A. Kleinknecht (2009). Little innovation, many jobs: An econometric analysis of the italian labour
   productivity crisis. Cambridge Journal of Economics 34 (3), 525–546.
Morris, M. D. (1991). Factorial sampling plans for preliminary computational experiments. Technometrics 33 (2),
   161–174.
Napoletano, M., G. Dosi, G. Fagiolo, and A. Roventini (2012). Wage formation, investment behavior and growth
   regimes: An agent-based analysis. Revue de l’OFCE 5 (124), 235–261.
Ng, S. and J. H. Wright (2013). Facts and challenges from the recession for forecasting and macroeconomic modeling.
   Journal of Economic Literature 51 (4), 1120–1154.
Piscitelli, L., R. Cross, M. Grinfeld, and H. Lamba (2000). A test for strong hysteresis. Computational Economics 15 (1-
   2), 59–78.
Rasmussen, C. and C. Williams (2006). Gaussian processes for machine learning. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Reifschneider, D., W. Wascher, and D. Wilcox (2015). Aggregate supply in the united states: recent developments
   and implications for the conduct of monetary policy. IMF Economic Review 63 (1), 71–109.
Russo, A., L. Riccetti, and M. Gallegati (2015). Increasing inequality, consumer credit and financial fragility in an
   agent based macroeconomic model. Journal of Evolutionary Economics, 1–23.
Salle, I. and M. Yildizoglu (2014). Efficient sampling and meta-modeling for computational economic models. Com-
   putational Economics 44 (4), 507–536.
Saltelli, A., M. Ratto, T. Andres, F. Campolongo, J. Cariboni, D. Gatelli, M. Saisana, and S. Tarantola (2008). Global
   sensitivity analysis: the primer. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Seppecher, P., I. Salle, and M. Lavoie (2017, January). What drives markups? Evolutionary pricing in an agent-based
   stock-flow consistent macroeconomic model. CEPN Working Papers 2017-03, Centre d’Economie de l’Université de
   Paris Nord.
Siemer, M. (2014). Firm entry and employment dynamics in the great recession. Technical report.
Sobol, I. M. (1993). Sensitivity analysis for non-linear mathematical models. Mathematical Modelling and Computa-
   tional Experiments, 407–414.
Stiglitz, J. (1994). Endogenous growth and cycles. In Y. Shionoya and M. Perlman (Eds.), Innovation in Technology,
   Industry and Institutions, pp. 121–156. The University of Michigan Press.
Tesfatsion, L. and K. Judd (Eds.) (2006). Handbook of Computational Economics II: Agent-Based Computational
   Economics. North Holland, Amsterdam.
Wald, A. and J. Wolfowitz (1940). On a test whether two samples are from the same population. The Annals of
   Mathematical Statistics 11 (2), 147–162.
Zhou, H., R. Dekker, and A. Kleinknecht (2011). Flexible labor and innovation performance: evidence from longitudinal
   firm-level data. Industrial and Corporate Change 20 (3), 941.




                                                          20
