            Dissecting Brazilian business agricultural cycle in
             high-dimensional and mixed-frequency context∗.
                                           André Nunes Maranhão†
                                            Nicole Rennó Castro‡

       Resumo

         A análise de ciclos de negócios tem se deparado nos anos recentes com o desafio de base de dados
em alta-dimensão e com frequências mistas em termos do inicio das séries temporais disponíveis. O presente
estudo trata essas questões para o caso do ciclo agropecuário brasileiro, propondo um teste entrópico de
informação relativa para ambiente de hiper-dimensão e uma versão de frequência mista para o modelo
dinâmico fatorial generalizado apresentado por Forni et al. [2000]. Os resultados mostram um conjunto
maior de séries temporais selecionadas no período corrente em relação às demais defasagens, concentradas
nas categorias relacionadas ao crédito agropecuário e à produção agropecuária. O ciclo agropecuário brasileiro
estimado evidencia a alta comunalidade da categoria climáticas, pró-cíclicas e antecedentes, e de crédito, com
efeitos tanto pró-cíclicos quanto contra cíclicos, defasados e antecedentes.



Palavras Chave: Ciclo agropecuário brasilieiro, Teste entropico de informação relativa para hiper-
dimensão, Modelo dinâmico fatorial generalizado, Frequência mista em séries temporais.
JEL Code: C58, G15, G17.
Indicação da Área: 11 - Economia Agrícola e do Meio Ambiente.

       Abstract

         Business cycle analysis has in recent years been faced with the challenge of a high-dimensional
database with mixed frequencies in terms available time series starting points. The present study addresses
these issues in the case of the Brazilian agricultural cycle, proposing an hyper-dimension environment entropic
test of relative information, and proposes a mixed-frequency version for the generalized factorial dynamic
model presented by Forni et al. [2000]. The results show a larger set of time series selected in the current
period in relation to the other lags, concentrated in the categories related to agricultural credit and agri-
cultural production. The Brazilian agricultural cycle has evidenced the high commonality of the categories:
climatic, pro-cyclical and leading, and credit with both pro-cyclical and counter-cyclical, lagged and leading
effects.


Key Words: Brazilian agriculture cycle, Hyper-Dimensional entropic relative information test, Gener-
alised dynamic factor model, Time series mixed-frequency.

   ∗
     This is a preliminary version, without proper english text revision. Any errors in this context should be disregarded
at this time in favor of the presented results.
   †
     Economista, Estatístico, Doutor em Economia pelo Programa de Pós-Graduação em Economia da Universidade
de Brasília (UNB). Assessor Sênior da Diretoria de Crédito do Banco do Brasil. Email: andrenmaranhao@gmail.com
   ‡
     Economista, Doutora em Economia Aplicada - Esalq/USP, Pesquisadora Equipe Macroeconomia CEPEA-
Esalq/USP


                                                            1
1    Introduction

    The classical business cycle considers the fluctuations of the level of economic activity, see Harding
and Pagan [2002], while the deviation cycle considers the fluctuations around some trend. A third
approach to business cycle representation is the so-called growth-rate cycle. The calculation of
growth rates can, however, also be interpreted as a detrending device, see for a discussion Harding
and Pagan [2006]. The recession in the classical cycle is characterized by an absolute decline in
the level of economic activity, i.e. negative growth rates. The recession in the deviation cycle is
characterized by economic growth rates below potential growth. The classic recession phases are
therefore always a subsample of the recession phases of deviation cycles. Deviation cycles have
gained popularity as periods of negative growth rates have been rare in industrialized countries since
World War II. Thus, deviation cycles were more naturally related to fluctuations in employment and
unemployment. Moreover, the concept of a deviation cycle as the gap between actual and potential
output has gained political relevance through a stronger focus on Taylor-rule driven monetary policy
and cyclically adjusted government balances.
    Over the years, studies of economic business cycles have become the basis of theoretical instru-
ments for empirical models; This happened slowly, with the emergence of theoretical advances and
new estimation methodologies in different periods. There has been important advance in the liter-
ature on the subject since the presentation of the theoretical basis for the cycles by Kydland and
Prescott in the work "Time to build and aggregate fluctuations" (Kydland and Prescott [1982]). Two
main views were counterbalanced, one related to market failures and another to failures in the infor-
mation mechanism. In the first case, the hypothesis is that the cycles are the result of market failures,
and that when the economy is in recession times, the economic agents would not reach equilibrium –
see Summer [1986]. The other line argues that the cycles are the result of a dynamic equilibrium; it is
argued that economic agents have complete information on economic shocks (Kydland and Prescott
[1990]) and incomplete information on real wages (Lucas Jr [1972]; Lucas [1973]). In this framework,
the recession would occur when workers underestimate the value of real wages and the cycles would
be the result of a failure in the information mechanism.
    Applied studies on business cycles have emerged more intensely since the 1990s, and the new
methodology proposed by Hamilton [1989] became widely used. In his paper, Hamilton [1989] con-
siders that the American GDP series does not follow a linear process, that is, that it is subject to
discrete changes in its data generating process that follow non-observed Markov Switching chain. At
the same time, the econometrics of business cycles began to be studied with the factorial dynamic
models that seek to capture the co-movement of a set of variables, see Stock and Watson [2011].
The econometric advances were incorporating new topics to the proposed models, and the Markov
Switching was included in DFM by Chauvet [1998], Kim and Nelson [1998] and Kim and Yoo [1995].
As databases became increasingly large, econometric methods had to be adapted to this new real-
ity. An unexplored situation was the context of high-dimensional time series, in which the number
of variables may exceed the number of observations. In the econometric field of study of business
cycles, this adaptation to the high dimension data in applied context occurred recently with the
generalized factorial dynamic models, although the model was presented by Forni et al. [2000]. In
young economies, the number of time series available for study of the economy has only recently
been consolidated (at least 30 years or less). This creates a new challenge, related to the fact that
the data series begin to have information available at different points in time. Econometric models
have also recently adjusted to this challenge in the field of economic business cycles, with the study
of Bańbura and Modugno [2014].
    The Brazilian agricultural business cycle (growth) currently faces these challenges, high-dimensional
database and series with mixed-frequencies starting point. The present study proposes an alternative
solution to these questions, with special focus on the relation between climate and agriculture. Given


                                                   2
the high-dimensional characteristics of the database, the study goes through the process of selection
of variables that considers not only the contemporary effects but the cyclical characteristic to be
estimated. The issues addressed in this study make it a pioneer in literature.
    Until the early years of the twentieth century, scientists who analyzed the growth of nations
understood that the climate was among its main determinants; but from the middle of this century
the climate would have disappeared from the literature of economic development, giving rise to
analyzes of investments, trade policies and education (Nordhaus [1993]). According to Nordhaus
(1993), in the years before and close to 1993, the climate reemerged in the literature on international
environmental issues due to growing concern about climate change and global warming. Gradually,
climate has returned to appear in the literature with an economic focus. Nordhaus (1993) points
out that climate change vulnerability should be greater for those sectors that depend on naturally
occurring rainfall and temperatures. Therefore, agriculture is likely the most vulnerable sector to
climate variability and change (Nordhaus [1993]; Mendelsohn et al. [1996]; Mendelsohn et al. [1996];
Rosenzweig et al. [2014]). Many uncertainty factors affect agricultural production and climate and
weather are among those factors, having major impacts on agricultural productivity (Gornall et al.
[2010]; Anwar et al. [2013]).
    For several reasons, Brazil is an important case study to assess the subject. The country has
significant participation in the world commodity market – the gross value of Brazil’s agricultural
products is the fourth-largest in the world and the country is a major exporter of several food products
(Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Statistic Division (FAOstat), 2014). In
addition, the negative effects of climate on agriculture have more severe negative consequences in
countries whose economy is most heavily tied to this sector (Belloumi, 2014); and agribusiness has a
major impact on Brazil’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP), its trade balance, its employment level, and
its level of technological innovation and adaptation. Namely, in 2017, agribusiness was responsible
for about 20% of the county’s GDP and employment (Center for Advanced Studies on Applied
Economics - Cepea, 2016) and 45% of the total exports revenue in 2014 (Ministry of Agriculture,
Livestock, and Food Supply - MAPA, 2014).
    Besides, the vulnerability of agriculture to climate is accentuated in countries with a predomi-
nantly poorer population due to the limited adaptability of producers, with restrictions on access to
technologies and resources to adapt to or mitigate the impacts caused by climate variables (Morton
[2007]; Millner and Dietz [2015]). Brazil has an extremely heterogeneous agriculture, so that negative
effects of climate on the sector contribute to increase inequality between poor and capitalized farm-
ers. The relationship between climate and agricultural supply is also important in terms of its effect
on the level of consumer prices and, therefore, on the purchasing power of the population, especially
lower income. Focusing on climate change, Wheeler and Von Braun [2013] highlight that food secu-
rity is strongly affected by staple food prices for the poor, and depending on the world food equation
level, small supply shocks can have large impacts on prices. Data from the Consumer Expenditure
Survey (POF) - IBGE (2008) show that, in 2008, food accounted for 19.8% of family consumption
expenditures in Brazil, reaching 30% for the poorest families. Finally, agricultural production can be
more sensitive to climate in low latitude areas, as most of Brazilian territory (Gornall et al. [2010];
Rosenzweig et al. [2014]).
    Several questions will be answered at each stage of the study. In Section 2.1 we present the
chronology of Brazilian agriculture events; in section 3, focused on the methodology, we present the
procedures of selection of variables and estimation of the cycle in the high-dimensional and mixed
frequency context. In Section 4 we describe in detail the treatments applied to the high-dimensional
database. The results are presented in Section 5, in which we present, sequentially, the results of
the test of hyper-dimensional entropic relative information test, of the estimation of the Brazilian
agricultural cycle and of the dissection of this cycle by category level. Finally, we concluded in section
6.



                                                    3
2    Brazilian agriculture chronology

    The Brazilian agricultural GDP had a consistent growth trend between 1979 and 2017, growing
281 % in the whole period. Of the 38 years analyzed, in 31 the agricultural GDP expanded Estatística
[2018a]. The most intense growth occurred in the 1990s, and continued in the 2000s. In the 1980s,
the sector’s GDP grew relatively little from 1985 to 1990, although it grew rapidly in the first half
of the decade (Table 1).

                                     Year    5-years    10-years
                                     1985     20,6%
                                     1990     5,6%        27,4%
                                     1995     22,6%
                                     2000     17,4%       44,0%
                                     2005     26,9%
                                     2010     17,4%       49,0%
                                     2015     17,8%

                                 Table 1: Agriculture GDP growth.

    The conditions for the expansion of modern agriculture in Brazil arose in the 1960s, with the
institution of the Rural Credit System and policies of subsidized credit, rural extension and agricul-
tural research by public institutions Buainain et al. [2013]. This modernization process was based on
the conception of the Green Revolution between the 1960s and 1970s, characterized by crop genetic
improvement and the intensive use of fertilizers and agrochemicals.Garcia [2014].
    Beginning in 1965, the Brazilian agriculture underwent advanced technification and industrial-
ization, with the mechanization of the sector and the internalization of the sectors producing inputs
and machinery and equipment, so that their use was no longer limited to import capacity (Kageyama
et al. [1987] and Staduto et al. [2004]). During this period, the foundation of institutions that played
an important role in the mentioned processes took place: the Brazilian Agricultural Research Cor-
poration (Embrapa) in 1973 and the Brazilian Entity for Technical Assistance and Rural Extension
(Embrater) in 1974.
    From the 1980s, the modernization of agriculture spread throughout the territory and traditional
productive systems began to be replaced by new practices and organizational forms; a process that
resulted in productivity increases for the country’s agriculture Garcia [2014]. But at the same time,
from 1987, macroeconomic and sectoral policies started to reduce the incentive to agriculture in the
face of the government fiscal crisis Bacha [2004]. The contractionary policies led to the reduction of
subsidies, affected the rural credit policy (with reduction of volume and increase of interest rates)
and the Minimum Price Guarantee Policy (PGPM), and also implied in a reduction of public services
of rural extension and of agricultural research Bacha [2004]. In general, between 1987 and 1989, the
federal government’s applications for agriculture fell by 46 % Barros et al. [2002].
    The 1980s was also characterized by a significant reduction in real agricultural prices, following
the international trend, and reversing the scenario of high prices of the 1970s Barros [2014]. The
continuity of agricultural growth in the 1980s, even in the face of this scenario, is explained by the
increase in productivity Barros [2014]. In addition, in the first half of the 1990s, the set of reforms
related to the Washington Consensus, aimed at economic liberalization, led to trade liberalization and
the agricultural sector started to face international competition and the high subsidies of developed
countries Garcia [2014], Barros [2014].
    The Brazil’s Real Plan was also a milestone for agriculture and livestock, since with inflation
control the sector was able to plan and not restrict itself to the differences between the evolution of
its financial commitments (inflation-adjusted) and the evolution of agricultural prices Gasques et al.

                                                   4
[2004]. The negotiation of agricultural debt in 1995 also impacted on a more favorable scenario for
the sector from that period Gasques et al. [2004]. However, despite the economic stability and record
harvests, the appreciation of the exchange rate promoted by the Real Plan, and maintained until
1998, implied a loss of competitiveness of the national export sector with negative impacts on the
agricultural area Bacha [2004], Garcia [2014].
     Also in the 1990s, the mechanization of agriculture and livestock was generalized to traditional
and important crops in Brazil, such as coffee, sugar cane and cotton; before that, the focus of
mechanization was mainly on the production of grains, since the same technologies developed for the
developed countries were implanted in Brazilian agriculture Staduto et al. [2004]. From the end of
the 1990s onwards, agricultural development changed radically, and the significant results obtained
by the agricultural sector resulted from the improvement of an environment of innovations, with the
diffusion of knowledge and technical apparatus and the continuous search for productivity Buainain
et al. [2013]. Also in the 1990s, another important milestone that positively influenced the process of
technological modernization in the sector was the adoption of the Kandir Law in 1996 Garcia [2014].
     Since the 2000s, the favorable situation in the international commodity market, coupled with
new stimuli of agricultural policy and the maturity achieved by some agricultural chains that were
restructured in the 1990s, boosted agriculture and livestock Garcia [2014]. In more recent years, there
has been the widening and deepening of the innovation process, characterized by the introduction of
harvesting and post-harvest technologies, genetically modified seeds, precision agriculture, increased
confinement / semi-confinement practices, genetic improvement animals, among others Garcia [2014].
     Summarizing, data from Gasques et al. [2014] show that the growth of the Brazilian agricultural
product accelerated between 1990 and 2012, with the average annual growth rate going from 3.38%
in the period from 1980 to 1989 to 4.71% between 2000 and 2012. These data also show that this
result was mainly due to the expansion of the sector Total Factor Productivity (TFP), whose growth
rate also grew at increasing rates during the period: 2.17 % in 1980 to 1989, 3.13 % in 1990 to 1999
and 4.06 % in 2000 to 2012.
     About specific annual shocks it can be said that greater deviations from the growth trend of
agricultural GDP are usually explained by climatic events or health issues Barros and Castro [2017].
From the perspective of the negative shocks of the 38 years between 1979 and 2017, agricultural GDP
fell only in 1982 e 1983, 1986, 1990, 2009, 2012 and 2016. On the other hand, intense crop growth,
with annual rates exceeding 8% occurred in 1980, 1985, 1987, 2002 and 2003, 2013 and 2017 (results
also explained by a small harvest in previous years for the relevant growths of 1987, 2013 and 2017).
     Data from Estatística [2006] show that the period 1981-1983 was characterized by crop loses
for products such as cassava, maize, soybean, rice, cashew, coffee, potato and beans. In 1990, the
reduction of agricultural production mainly responded to the grain dynamics. From the regional
perspective, wheat production in the South decreased 44 %; for soybeans, reductions were around 30
% in the Southeast and Midwest and almost 5 % in the South (the main producer at the time); in
the case of corn, the crop loss was 30 % in the Southeast region (second largest producer) Estatística
[2018b]. Marquetti et al. [1991] point out that this reduction was due to climatic problems in the
summer crops.
     The drop in agricultural GDP in 2009 resulted mainly from the reduction in production of grain
and coffee crops Estatística [2018b]. For the grains, the most intense losses were verified in the South
of the Country, due to climatic problems with prolonged drought in critical period. In the case of
coffee production, 2009 is a year of decline in the biennial crop cycle, which occurs in practically all
producing states.
     In 2012, the strong loss in Brazilian soybean production occurred due to the long drought in South
America during periods of grain development, a fact related to the occurrence of La Ninã (Cepea/Soja
[2013]). The Research Center also points out that the occurrence of heavy rains and hail damages
the rice and wheat harvests in Rio Grande do Sul in the same year (Cepea/Arroz [2012]). In 2016,
agricultural GDP had the biggest drop in 20 years. According to information from the Brazilian


                                                   5
Agriculture and Livestock Confederation (CNA), this fall was related to the climatic problems that
affected several regions and crops in Brazil, with negative effects of the prolonged drought at the
beginning of the year in Mato Grosso do Sul, Mato Grosso, Goiás and in the Matopiba region, as well
as excessive rains in the Rio Grande do Sul State. Excessive heat in Minas Gerais and São Paulo
also undermined the orange crops, according to information from the Fund for Citrus Protection
(Fundecitrus).
    In relation to the most expressive crop growth observed in the period, in 1980, important pro-
duction increases for sugarcane, oranges, and grains influenced the results. A similar scenario was
repeated in 1985 and 1987, but with increases in coffee production as well Estatística [2018b]. In
2002, sugarcane, orange and soybeans stood out in the boost to agricultural production, and in 2003,
soybeans, corn, wheat and sugarcane presented important expansions.
    In 2013, increases in area and productivity, especially for soybeans and the winter corn crops,
were responsible for the increase in production in the year, according to Conab [2013]. In that year,
according to the Company, although climatic conditions were not favorable, they did not affect the
productivity of these crops. By 2017, the area planted with grains was the largest in history, which,
coupled with favorable climatic conditions for most crops and producing regions, has led to a record
level of production of tons of grains Conab [2017]. The chronology of this section will be used to
evaluate the quality of the dating process and the agriculture cycles estimated by different models.
In this way it will serve as a qualitative reference for the obtained empirical results.


3     Methodology
3.1    Hyper-Dimensional entropic relative information test procedure
    This section we propose relative information measures for mixed-frequency data, connected to
Kullback-Leibler numbers, this measure was use in a formal statistical test. By ordering the series
of the data set according to these measures, we are able to obtain a subset of the data set that is
most informative to model a variable of interest. The method can be used as a first step in the
construction of a dynamic factor model. The objective is confine attention to a subset of the series
instead of having to monitor all series in a data set. The question seems especially relevant for factor
models, which exploit the idea that movements in a large number of series are driven by a limited
number of common ‘factors’. For a recent overview see Bai et al. [2008]. Although convergence of
factor estimates requires large cross-sections and large time dimensions, see e.g. Forni and Lippi
[2001] and Bai [2003], the data set need however not be very large to obtain reasonably precise factor
estimates. Bai and Ng [2002] also conclude that the number of series need not be very large to get
precise factor estimates.
    Oversampling refers to the situation in which the data are more informative about some factors
than the other ones. Including more variables in an oversampled data set could result in more
precise factor estimates, which do however not improve the forecasting performance for the target
variables that depend on the less dominant factors. Building upon ?, this paper exploits concepts
from information theory, in particular Kullback-Leibler numbers, to analyse information in the data.
We propose a relative information measures based on gaussian distributed data with a clear link to
Kullback-Leibler numbers for mixed-frequency data. We follow the same idea of Jacobs and Otter
[2008], they apply similar information concepts to derive a formal test for the number of common
factors and the lag order in a dynamic factor model, however in mixed-frequency context. Ordering
the series of the data set according to these measures enables us to identify a subset of the data set
that is most informative to modelling a variable of interest. The method can be used as a first step
in the construction of a dynamic factor model.




                                                   6
3.1.1        Defining hyper-dimension.
    The definition of hyper-dimension and high-dimension is not consensual in time series econo-
metrics. The simple rule that N > T was adopted by Belloni and Chernozhukov [2011] and Stock
and Watson [2014]. However, the databases treated by these authors in the applications had the N    T
ratio a little above 1. Other authors like Bai et al. [2008] denominate N > T as being large panel
data, while other authors like Song and Bickel [2011] name it as a rich data environment. In the
computational field of Big Data the definition of hyper-dimension deals with data with millions (or
even billions) of record, according to Mohapatra and Majhi [2015]. Thus, for our study we will define
hyper-dimension for time series analysis as being:
                                                                            N
                                 Yi,tHyper−dimensional , if dHyD =            ≥5
                                                                            T
      with

                                            i = 1, ..., N ; t = 1, ..., T
                                            2571                      2571
      Our case, we’ll work with dHyD =      152
                                                   > 16 or dHyD =      95
                                                                             > 27.

3.2      Entropy relative information
                                                                  0
   First, defining f1 (x̃) : x̃ ∼ NN (0, Γ), withΓ = CΛC be the density function of an N-dimensional
data vector x1 , so f1 (x) : x ∼ NN (0, Λ), let’s also define f2 (x̃) : x̃ ∼ NN (0, I), then f2 (x) : x ∼
                                0
NN (0, I), in all cases x = C x̃. The so-called Kullback-Leibler numbers are defined as:
                                                                            
                                           f1 (x)                          f2 (x)
                        G1 = Ef1 log                 and G2 = Ef2 log                                  (1)
                                           f2 (x)                          f1 (x)
    with G = G1 + G2 is the measure of information for discriminating between the two density
functions with G = 0 when f1 (x) = f2 (x) and G = ∞ when we have perfect discrimination, as
we can see in Golan and Maasoumi [2008], Young and Calvert [1974] and Burnham and Anderson
[2002]. Note that, tr(Λ) = tr(Γ) = N , in this case we have G1 = − log det(Λ) and G2 = log det(Λ) +
1
2
  (tr(Λ−1 ) − N ), so


                                 2G2 = 2 log det(Λ) + +(tr(Λ−1 ) − N )
                                 2G1 = −2 log det(Λ)

      Then

                                                                              N
                                       −1                    −1
                                                                              X (1 − λ2j )
                        2G = tr(Λ ) + N = tr(Λ ) + tr(Λ) =                                                (2)
                                                                               j=1
                                                                                     λj

    Therefore, G is small (not discriminating) if the eigenvalues λj are close to 1, but becomes large
(discriminating) for “small” eigenvalues. When we considered Gaussian case, alternative measures
of entropy and information can be used, for this propose, we define xt as N-dimensional vector of
observed data at time t = 1, ..., T 2 normalized, and normally distributed with mean zero and variance,
  1
    The index of time was suppressed without loss of generality.
  2
    Nothing was said about data with mixed frequencies, however we will present the general case, and then its
adjustment for this particular case.




                                                         7
                               0
so x ∼ N (0, Γ) with E(xt xt ) = Γ, tr(Γ) = N .The entropy as measure of disorder for a stationary,
normally distributed vector can be defined as Golan and Maasoumi [2008]:


                                             2Ex = cN + log det(Γ)

  with c = log(2π) + 1 ≈ 2.84, where 2Ex,max = cN when Γ = IN as we ca see in Golan and
Maasoumi [2008] and ? Therefore, the information or negentropy is defined as


                              2Infx = 2(Ex,max − Ex ) = − log det(Γ) ≥ 0                                    (3)

    If Γ = IN then we have zero value. Considering all the details, we can then define relative
information (RI) as

                                                         2Ex,max − Ex(N )
                                         RI(N,t) =
                                                             2Ex,max
                                                          2Infx
                                                       =
                                                         2Ex,max
                                                         2Infx
                                                       =                                                    (4)
                                                           cN
      Note that if Ex(N ) = Ex,max then RIN = 0, as well as Ex(N ) = 0 ⇒ RIN = 1.

3.3      Entropic relative information measure in factor model context
    We will present the link between IRN and factor models (static or dynamic) context, therefore
                                0
consider xit = (x1t , ..., xnt ) ; n ∈ N, t ∈ T stationary N-dimensional vector process with zero mean be
driven by k factors, as

                                                       N
                                                       X
                            xit = χit + ξit =                bij (L)ujt + ξit = BN Ft + t                  (5)
                                                       j=1


                                   xit ∈ RN , Ft ∼ Nk (0, Ik ), t ∼ Nk (0, Ψ11 )
   where χit is the common component, ξit is the idiosyncratic component, b − ij(L) = BN =
B0n+ B1n L + ... + Bsn Ls , represents the (dynamic) loadings of order s, uij ; j = 1, ..., q; t = 1, ..., T are
common shocks mutually orthogonal white noise processes with unit variance. The variance between
                                                      0
the first N elements of xit is equal to Γ(N ) = BN BN + Ψ11 as we can see Bai et al. [2008].
   When we add a variable xN +1,t , we have

                                                                         
                                       xit              BN              t
                                                   =           Ft +                                         (6)
                                     xN +1,t           bN +1          N +1,t

      with covariance
                                                                             
                                                                  Γ(N ) Γ12
                                         Γ(N + 1) =
                                                                   Γ21  Γ1
                        0                                                                        0   2
      where Γ12 = BN bN +1 +Ψ12 and Ψ12 = E(t N +1,t ), as xit is normalized we have bN +1 bN +1 +σN +1 =



                                                              8
         2         2
1, with σN +1 = E(N +1,t ). Using the rule of determinants for partitioned matrices we get


                                     det(Γ(N + 1)) = det(Γ(N ))(1 − aN +1 )
                              0                        0
   where aN +1 = (bN +1 BN + Ψ12 )Γ(N )−1 (BN bN +1 + Ψ12 ) and 0 ≤ (1 − aN +1 ) ≤ 1. as we have the
results

                                                   −logdet(Γ(N ))
                                           RI(N,t) =
                                                        cN
                                    −logdet(Γ(N + 1))   −logdet(Γ(N ) + (1 − aN +1 ))
                   RI(N +1,t)     =                   =
                                        c(N + 1)                  c(N + 1)
   In this way, we have the relation between RI(N +1,t) and RI(N,t) as

                                                                                          
                                                   1           log(1 − aN +1 )
                        RI(N +1,t)   = RI(N,t) −                               + RI(N,t)              (7)
                                                 N +1                c

    Therefore, there is only addition of relative information if RIN +1,t > RI(N,t) , or in the condition
                                              0             0
−log(1 − aN +1 ) > cRI(N,t) ⇒E(xN +1,t xN,t ) = (bN +1 BN + Ψ12 6= 0) this is the condition that will
be used to apply a formal statistical test. From Equation 7 we have RI(N +1,t) = RI(N,t) if aN +1 =
1 − exp (−cRI(N,t) ), Whenever RI(N,t) is close to zero, RI(N +1,t) increases for relative small values of
aN +1 whereas if RI(N,t) is close to one, aN +1 should be close to one to allow xN +1,t to add relative
                                                                              0
information. We can simplify the Equation 7 considering Γ(N ) = CΛC and the linear transformation
       0   1  0
x̃t = U Λ− 2 C xt and x̃N +1,t = υ −1 xN +1,t , being U orthogonal and υ 2 = 1 obtained by the singular
                                1  0                                        0
value decomposition with Λ− 2 C Γ = U Συ where Σ = (φ, 0, ..., 0) , from where do we also have
Γ12 = 0 ⇒ Σ = 0. Therefore, we have
                                                                     
                                        x̃N,t             0
                                                  = NN        , Γ̃(N + 1)
                                     x̃(N +1,t)           0
where                                                                    
                                                                I(N ) Σ
                                           Γ̃(N + 1) =
                                                                  Σ   1
                                                                      − log(1−φ2 )
    with det(Γ̃(N + 1)) = det(IN )(1 − φ21 ) ⇒ RI(N +1,t) = c(N +1) 1 , where φ1 ∈ [0, 1] is a coefficient
of canonical correlation. Because RI(N,t) = 0 by hypothesis is zero in Equation 7, so that there is
                                       ˜ (N +1,t) = −log(1−φ21 ) .
gain of relative information, we have RI             c(N +1)


3.4     Hyper-Dimensional entropic relative information test procedure
3.4.1   Formal entropic relative information test

    The first step is replace Γ̃(N + 1) by a consistent estimate Γ̃(N  ˆ    + 1) and applying the same
procedure yields RIˆ
                   ˜ (N +1,t) = − log(1− φ̂ 2)
                                            1
                                               under H0 : φ1 = 0, to this hypothesis we use Bartlett test
                                      2
statistic

                                                                
                               1                  2        1          ˜ˆ
               t(,N )   = − T − (N + 2) log(1 − φ̂1 ) = T − (N + 2) 2RI  N +1,t                       (8)
                               2                           2

    t(,N ) , where α, is the significante level, follows asymptotically a χ2 distribution with N degrees
of freedom, see e.g. Muirhead [1982]. Testing the hypothesis H0 : φ1 = 0 is similar to test whether


                                                           9
                            0             0
the transformed vector (x̃(N,t) x̃(N +1,t) ) has maximum entropy. If the null hypothesis is rejected, the
estimated relative information of the transformed variables equals

                                          ˆ˜            − log(1 − φ̂21 )
                                         RI  (N +1,t) =
                                                          c(N + 1)

3.4.2   Hyper-dimensional entropic relative information test procedure
    The series are transformed by taking logarithms and/or differencing when necessary to assure
approximate stationarity, the series should be adjusted for outliers by replacing the observations of
the transformed variables using some robust method. With previous treatments, the test procedure
follows the following steps:

   1. We estimated the canonical correlation coefficient φ̂∗1 in the context of mixed-frequency;
                                                       ˆ˜ ∗
   2. The relative information measure is calculated: RI
                                                                           − log(1−φ̂∗2
                                                                                     1 )
                                                          (N +1,t) =          c(N +1)
                                                                                         ;

   3. We order the data set according to the relative information measures with respect to target
      variable using the following procedure:

         • the initial variable of the ordered data set is the target variable;
         • the variable that maximizes the respective relative information from the remaining data
           is added to the ordered data set, and so on.
                  ˆ˜ ∗                                                                            ˜∗
                                                                          ∗                         ˆ
                                                                                   ∗ 1
   4. We test if RI  (N +1,t) is statistically different from zero with t (,N ) =  T − 2
                                                                                         (N + 2)  2RI N +1,t ∼
       2
      χN . The null hypothesis is that an additional variable is not correlated with the variables
      already included in the set;

   5. We can investigate the existence of relevant relative information in other lags (or leads), for
                              ˆ˜ ∗
      which it is calculated RI        and and apply the same steps.
                                 (N +1,t−k)


    We call attention to the fact that we estimate φ̂∗1 using frequency-mixed approach but in the
calculation of the test statistic we consider the different time sample sizes of each series. Although
this small difference did not alter the overall results, for a small set of series that are on the threshold
between having statistically nonzero relative information, the T version instead of T ∗ eventually
ended up with a larger number of series. For a descriptive model, the selection of variables can use
series present in different lags (considering only once present in several lags.), in order to increase the
descriptive capacity of the factorial model to be estimated. Alternatively we can implement some
backdating method for the mixed-frequency time series as Bańbura and Modugno [2014] presents
and apply the test procedureIn this thesis the two forms were tested, as the divergence of selected
series was small, we opted for first backdating the series (with the data already normalized) and later
applying the relative information test..

3.5     Generalised dynamic factor models
    Recently serious progress has been made in the theory of factor models through the Generalised
Dynamic Factor Model (GDFM) of Forni, Hallin, Lippi and Reichlin, hence-forth FHLR (Forni
et al. [2000]; Forni and Lippi [2001]; Forni et al. [2001, 2004, 2005]). The model differs from the
classic factor model in that it allows the idiosyncratic errors to be weakly serial and cross-sectional
correlated to some extent apart from being a non-parametric approach. It thereby combines the
so-called “approximate static factor model” of Rothschild and Chamberlain [1982], widely applied


                                                       10
in financial econometrics (e.g. Arbitrage Pricing Theory, APT) and the Dynamic Factor Model of
Geweke [1977], Sargent et al. [1977] for which respectively cross-sectional and serial correlation was
allowed. The model is dynamic since the common shocks can hit the series at different times as
opposed to the static model. The common shocks and components, which are a linear combination
of them, are inherently unobservable and are estimated by means of dynamic principal components.
While the familiar static principal components are based on an eigenvalue decomposition of the
contemporaneous covariance matrix, dynamic principal components are based on the spectral density
matrix (i.e. dynamic covariations) of the data and consequently are averages of the data weighted
and shifted through time.

3.6     Estimating GDFM
     As we presented in Section 2.4 we assume that the N time series included in our panel are, after
suitable transformations, a realization of a real-valued stationary N -dimensional vector process with
                                  0
zero mean xit = (x1t , ..., xN t ) Under the GDFM, satisfying the necessary conditions and assumptions,
it is shown that each time series can be decomposed into two components:

                                                     q
                                                     X
                                 xit = χit + ξit =         bij (L)ujt + ξit                          (9)
                                                     j=1


     χit is the common component and ξit the idiosyncratic component. bij (L) = Bn (L) = B0 + B1 L +
... + Bs Ls represents the (dynamic) loadings of order s which are allowed to differ in coefficient and
lags across the series. The q common shocks ujt ; j = 1, ..., q are assumed to be mutually orthogonal
white noise processes (at all leads and lags) with unit variance, this vector process has a non-singular
spectral density matrix, equal to the first q dynamic eigenvalues of the data. The idiosyncratic
component is driven by variable-specific shocks, for which the GDFM allows a certain amount of
correlation. The dynamic factor structure implies that the idiosyncratic component of any series is
orthogonal to all common shocks at any lead or lag. The common shocks ujt are latent and need
to be estimated. This is done through the estimation of dynamic principal components. These are
obtained by the dynamic eigenvalues and eigenvectors decomposition of the spectral density matrix
of xit which is a generalization of the orthogonalization process of the variance-covariance matrix of
xit in case of static principal components.

3.7     Proposed GDFM model
    Even the GDFM model considering (N, T ) tending to infinity, computational processing does not
exceed a certain number of iterations due to physical memory limitations. In the context of time
series of very high dimension they have no alternative but a step of selection of variables. In a context
of mixed frequency data, the use of the GDFM model is also compromised. To address all of the
issues we propose in this section, changes to the basic GDFM model. The first step is the use of the
entropic test of relative information for selection of sub-set of high-dimensional time series.

3.7.1   Mixed-frequency generalised dynamic factor model
    As previously mentioned Doz et al. [2012] show that maximum likelihood is consistent, robust
and computationally feasible also in the case of large cross-sections. To maximise the likelihood
over the high-dimensional parameter space they propose to use the Expectation-Maximisation (EM)
algorithm. The EM algorithm was first applied for a dynamic factor model by Watson and Engle
[1983] on a small cross-section. They cast the model in a state space form and derive the EM steps
in the case without missing data. Shumway and Stoffer [1982] show how to implement the EM

                                                   11
algorithm for a state space form with missing data, however only in the case in which the matrix
linking the states and the observable is known. Bańbura and Modugno [2014] proposed a general treat
data sets with arbitrary pattern of missing data allowing the idiosyncratic component be correlated,
the essential idea of the algorithm is to write the likelihood as if the data were complete (with
draws of N(0, 1)) and to iterate between two steps: in the expectation step we‘fill in’ the missing
data in the likelihood, while in the maximization step we re-optimize this expectation. Under some
regularity conditions, the EM algorithm converges towards a local maximum of the likelihood. A
direct maximisation of the likelihood (or state-space formulation) is computationally not feasible for
large N . However, as argued in Doz et al. [2012], the computational complexity can be circumvented
by means of the Expectation-Maximisation (EM) algorithm. Bańbura and Modugno [2014] offers
a solution to problems for which incomplete or latent data yield the likelihood intractable. The
essential idea is to write the likelihood as if the data was complete and to ’fabricate" the missing
data in the expectation step.

3.7.2        Algorithm for estimation of MF-GDFM
        The estimation of the MF-GDFM model follows the following steps:

    1. All treatments that precede the selection procedure are applied: the series available on a
       monthly basis were transformed to a quarterly basis by taking averages; deflation of monetary
       variables; de-seasonalization (when necessary); first-difference (when necessary to guarantee
       stationary) and finally normalization3 ;

    2. In order to obtain initial values for the parameters, θ(0) replace the missing observations in xit
       (observe that xit already normalized) by draws from N(0, 1) distribution;

    3. Obtain the back data estimate for the series using Bańbura and Modugno [2014] EM algorithm;

    4. The relative information test is applied to select, in different lags, the set of series to be used;

    5. GDFM is estimated4 .

   Some questions were left for future research, such as the possible bias using reconstructed data,
the power of relative information testing among others.


4         Data and treatments

    The challenges related to the database of young economies are always present in any study. The
studies with high time series increase these challenges whereas these data have problems of mixed
frequency, data in temporal frequency that requires a disaggregation procedure that will also demand
a wide set of covariables, seasonal adjustment procedures that should be applied on a large scale but
considering the particular issues of the country, the discontinuities of methodologies that generate
old and new series of the same phenomenon.
    3
        All the treatments applied and the description of the database used are detailed in the next section.
    4
        The number of factors to estimate the model was determined by the test proposed by Alessi et al. [2010].




                                                            12
           Figure 1: Temporal evolution of Brazilian series available for economic studies.

    The treatment for all these issues was presented in this chapter. In order to have a database
to cycles study, several steps were taken to make the models estimable. The series were made
compatible with the purpose of guaranteeing the maximum possible information; the annual series
were disaggregated in a high-dimensional context for quarterly frequency; the series that did not
have published their seasonally adjusted versions were submitted to a sequential seasonally adjusted
procedure, considering several individual issues of the series besides the Brazilian stylized facts; how
the study will focus on growth cycles, we focuses on the growth cycle concept of the business cycle
(unlike for instance the NBER method, which measures cycles in the level of the series, see Burns
and Mitchell [1947]), defined as the quarter-on-quarter variation of the underlying variables. Being
measured at a quarterly frequency, the series available on a monthly basis were transformed to a
quarterly basis by taking averages, leaving 152 observations between 1980Q1 and 2017Q4, and 95
observations between 1995Q1 to 2017Q4, for different research’s proposes. Furthermore, all activity
variables are expressed in real terms. These are obtained by deflating nominal variables by the CPI5
index. For all other variables (e.g. interest rates and exchange rates) both nominal and real concepts
were included in the data set.
    The models that will be estimated requires stationary time series. We opted to apply the same
stationary procedure to all series. We first-differenced the series’ levels by taking percentage changes
compared to the previous quarter and by a simple difference when the level possibly exhibits negative
values, for price variables (consumer prices, stock prices, ...) percentage changes with respect to the
previous quarter of the index were taken. We also applied this procedure to the variables which were
stationary from the outset. The reason for this is twofold i) having all variables defined in quarter-
on-quarter variations enables to capture the growth cycle concept of the business cycle and ii) taking
on variables in their level, even when stationary, would seriously disturb the mutual relations in the
frequency domain causing phase shifts and thus invalid deduced time lags as we can see in Cohen
[2001] deducing and comparing time lags from both concepts would be improper to do. Interest rate
spreads, which were taken on in levels, are the only exception to this rule. These levels are however
stationary and are the result of a cross-sectional difference instead of a difference in time. Given
their widely illustrated covariation with the growth cycle concept of the business cycle, Estrella
and Mishkin [1997], this is common practice. After, the series were normalised in order to have
a zero sample mean and unit variance by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard
deviation. This standardisation is necessary to avoid overweighting of the series with large variance
   5
    Each case was studied: IGP-DI used for series in general, IPCA used for consumer-related series, US CPI for the
case of variables of that country and so respectively


                                                        13
when estimating the spectral density matrix. Afterwards, the common component is denormalised,
so as to correspond to the actual series.
    The final step, after the normalized data, the series with different temporal mixed-frequencies
(dataset with an arbitrary pattern of missing data) were back dating using Bańbura and Modugno
[2014] procedure and with the database within all these specifications, the models were estimated.


5       Results


5.1      Variable selection and models for cycle estimation - Relative infor-
         mation test in high-dimensional for agricultural cycle.
    The first step of this section is the application of the test of relative information to identify, in
different lags, the most relevant variables for estimation of the agricultural cycle. The test as detailed
in chapter 1 establishes the greatest information gain in relation to the variable of interest, which
in this case is the agricultural GDP. The test was applied to the 2524 variables from the current
period up to the third lag (ie a full year of dynamic effects were considered). The results are shown
in Figure 2. Hence, low p-values indicate that an additional variable adds information.




        Figure 2: Relative information test - results for mixed-frequency agriculture cycle study.

    The results indicate that the number of variables in the short term (current period) is considerably
higher (192) than for the other lags. The number of variables selected for different lags was practically
the same (112,115 and 118 respectively).This result indicates that agriculture is a more complex
phenomenon in current events than in its temporal dynamics.
    Given the high-dimension characteristic of the database, it is necessary to categorize the variables
so that a more complete analysis of the agricultural cycle is possible. With twenty categories6 ,
this categorization for the agricultural cycle is the same one used by ESALQ-CEPEA7 to study
agribusiness GDP and is described in Table 2.
    6
   All time series used and their respective categories are available up request.
    7
   School of Agriculture "Luiz de Queiroz" (ESALQ) and Center for Advanced Studies in Applied Economics (CE-
PEA).




                                                    14
                                                                    Table 2: Categories for agriculture cycle study
 Categories - Mixed-Frequency - Agriculture cycle study                                Categories - Mixed-Frequency - Without National Accounts - Agriculture cycle study
                            Class                                   Series    %                                                      Class                                             Series      %
 Credit and Interest Rates                                            549    0,21      Credit and Interest Rates                                                                         549      0,22
 Global                                                               352    0,14      Global                                                                                            352      0,14
 Others Internal Markets                                              314    0,12      Others Internal Markets                                                                           301      0,12
 Industry                                                             226    0,09      Industry                                                                                          221      0,09
 Emploment and Salary                                                 205    0,08      Emploment and Salary                                                                              205      0,08
 External Sector                                                      163    0,06      External Sector                                                                                   145      0,06
 Governmental Finance                                                 124    0,05      Governmental Finance                                                                              124      0,05
 Agriculture Prices                                                    92    0,04      Agriculture Prices                                                                                 92      0,04
 Retail and Services                                                   88    0,03      Retail and Services                                                                                80      0,03
 Agroindustrial Production                                             79    0,03      Agroindustrial Production                                                                          78      0,03
 Prices and Inflation                                                  73    0,03      Prices and Inflation                                                                               73      0,03
 Agriculture Credit and Interest Rates                                 67    0,03      Agriculture Credit and Interest Rates                                                              67      0,03
 Agriculture Production                                                39    0,02      Agriculture Production                                                                             39      0,02
 Agriculture External Sector                                           39    0,02      Agriculture Employment and Salary                                                                  38      0,02
 Agriculture Employment and Salary                                     38    0,01      Agriculture External Sector                                                                        37      0,01
 Precipitation                                                         32    0,01      Maximum Temperature                                                                                32      0,01
 Maximum Temperature                                                   32    0,01      Minimum Temperature                                                                                32      0,01
 Minimum Temperature                                                   32    0,01      Precipitation                                                                                      32      0,01
 Monetary                                                              15    0,01      Monetary                                                                                           15      0,01
 Agricultural Inputs                                                   12    0,00      Agricultural Inputs                                                                                12      0,00
 Total                                                               2571 1,00         Total                                                                                            2524 1,00




Notes: For the variable selection procedure, the national accounts variables are not considered, even though they are
included in the estimated models.


   From this categorization we can have a more detailed analysis of the relative information test for
variable selection. These results are presented in Table 3.

Table 3: Variables selection - Relative information test for high-dimensional time series - Agriculture
GDP.
 Class                                   RIt    Selectedt   RIt−1    Selectedt−1    RIt−2   Selectedt−2   RIt−3   Selectedt−3   Final Selection   2o Component   Confirmatory      Total Sample
 Agricultural Inputs                       0           1        0              1        0            1        0            1                  2              0              0                       12
 Agriculture Credit and Interest Rates     0          20        0              4        1            3        1            3                 23              1              0                       67
 Agriculture Employment and Salary         0           7        1              4        1            4        2            3                 13              4              0                       38
 Agriculture External Sector               0           4        0              1        1            0        0            1                  6              1              0                       37
 Agriculture Prices                        2           5        0              5        1            1        0            2                 11              3              0                       92
 Agriculture Production                    0          10        2              4        0            6        2            7                 17              4             39                       39
 Agroindustrial Production                 0          13        2              6        2            4        1            4                 23              5              7                       78
 Credit and Interest Rates                 0          11        1             15        2            8        0            9                 34              3              0                      549
 Emploment and Salary                      4          15        3             11        3           12        3           12                 36             11              0                      205
 External Sector                           4           7        3              5        1            9        3            7                 20             11              0                      145
 Global                                    3          16        4             12        6           18        2           18                 46             14              0                      352
 Governmental Finance                      1           5        1              3        0            2        2            2                 10              4              0                      124
 Industry                                  4          13        3             16        2           15        5           14                 40             13              0                      221
 Maximum Temperature                       0           8        1              0        0            2        0            2                  9              1              0                       32
 Minimum Temperature                       0           8        0              0        0            0        0            0                  8              0              0                       32
 Monetary                                  0           1        2              0        0            2        1            1                  2              3              0                       15
 Others Internal Markets                   1          24        8             16        7           22        6           20                 58             20              0                      301
 Precipitation                             0          10        1              1        0            1        0            1                 11              1              0                       32
 Prices and Inflation                      2           2        0              2        0            3        1            3                  6              3              0                       73
 Retail and Services                       0          12        1              9        4            5        3            5                 22              6              0                       80
 Total                                    21         192       33            115       31          118       32          115               397             108             46                     2524

 Percentage
 Class                                   RIt    Selectedt   RIt−1    Selectedt−1    RIt−2   Selectedt−2   RIt−3   Selectedt−3   Final Selection   2o Component   Confirmatory Final Selection Sample
 Agricultural Inputs                     0,00        0,01    0,00            0,01    0,00          0,01    0,00          0,01             0,01            0,00           0,00                     0,17
 Agriculture Credit and Interest Rates   0,00        0,10    0,00            0,03    0,03          0,03    0,03          0,03             0,06            0,01           0,00                     0,34
 Agriculture Employment and Salary       0,00        0,04    0,03            0,03    0,03          0,03    0,06          0,03             0,03            0,04           0,00                     0,34
 Agriculture External Sector             0,00        0,02    0,00            0,01    0,03          0,00    0,00          0,01             0,02            0,01           0,00                     0,16
 Agriculture Prices                      0,10        0,03    0,00            0,04    0,03          0,01    0,00          0,02             0,03            0,03           0,00                     0,12
 Agriculture Production                  0,00        0,05    0,06            0,03    0,00          0,05    0,06          0,06             0,04            0,04           0,85                     0,44
 Agroindustrial Production               0,00        0,07    0,06            0,05    0,06          0,03    0,03          0,03             0,06            0,05           0,15                     0,29
 Credit and Interest Rates               0,00        0,06    0,03            0,13    0,06          0,07    0,00          0,08             0,09            0,03           0,00                     0,06
 Emploment and Salary                    0,19        0,08    0,09            0,10    0,10          0,10    0,09          0,10             0,09            0,10           0,00                     0,18
 External Sector                         0,19        0,04    0,09            0,04    0,03          0,08    0,09          0,06             0,05            0,10           0,00                     0,14
 Global                                  0,14        0,08    0,12            0,10    0,19          0,15    0,06          0,16             0,12            0,13           0,00                     0,13
 Governmental Finance                    0,05        0,03    0,03            0,03    0,00          0,02    0,06          0,02             0,03            0,04           0,00                     0,08
 Industry                                0,19        0,07    0,09            0,14    0,06          0,13    0,16          0,12             0,10            0,12           0,00                     0,18
 Maximum Temperature                     0,00        0,04    0,03            0,00    0,00          0,02    0,00          0,02             0,02            0,01           0,00                     0,28
 Minimum Temperature                     0,00        0,04    0,00            0,00    0,00          0,00    0,00          0,00             0,02            0,00           0,00                     0,25
 Monetary                                0,00        0,01    0,06            0,00    0,00          0,02    0,03          0,01             0,01            0,03           0,00                     0,13
 Others Internal Markets                 0,05        0,13    0,24            0,14    0,23          0,19    0,19          0,17             0,15            0,19           0,00                     0,19
 Precipitation                           0,00        0,05    0,03            0,01    0,00          0,01    0,00          0,01             0,03            0,01           0,00                     0,34
 Prices and Inflation                    0,10        0,01    0,00            0,02    0,00          0,03    0,03          0,03             0,02            0,03           0,00                     0,08
 Retail and Services                     0,00        0,06    0,03            0,08    0,13          0,04    0,09          0,04             0,06            0,06           0,00                     0,28
 Total                                   1,00        1,00    1,00            1,00    1,00          1,00    1,00          1,00             1,00            1,00           1,00                     0,16



Note: The Table presents the result of the relative information test applied to the total set of variables considered (2524). The results for each period
represent RIt−k + Selectedt−k all variables which presented non-zero relative information.

The Selectedt−k variables represent those that have a statistically non-zero value in each period. The series in Final Selection represent the series if they
were statistically significant in some periods (t − k), without repetitions, as well as the values presented in 2o Component, however with the series not being
selected in some periods. Confirmatory represent only series directly related with agriculture GDP. The values in Final Selection Sample represent the ratio
between Final Selection and Total Sample. The 47 series of the National Accounts category were not related to the process of selecting variables because they
belong to the same category in which the cycle to be studied was defined.



   Considering the Final Selection in the table 3, we observed the predominance of five categories:
Other Internal Markets (economic activity’s series of different sectors), global variables (Interna-

                                                                                                                           15
tional economic activity), industrial variables, employment and wages and credit and interest rates,
representing together more than sixty percent of all selected series.
    Dynamically the variables of the category of agricultural credit and interest rates are very repre-
sentative in the current period but with few series present in other lags, the opposite happens with
the series of the category of Other Internal Markets, in which the quantity of variables present in all
the lags is high.
    Monetary variables and agricultural inputs are the categories with the lowest number of series,
while the global and Other Internal Market variables are the categories with the highest number of
selected series.
    In terms of sample representativity, we can observe in the Final Selected Sample that eight
categories have great participation within their own category: Agricultural Production, Agricultural
Credit and Interest Rates, Agricultural Employment and Salary, State Precipitations, Agroindustrial
Production, Retail and Services, State Maximum Temperatures and State Minimum Temperatures.
    From the total of 2524 variables tested, 505 (20%) presented non-zero relative information, of
which 397 (16%) presented values statistically different from zero. Thus, each set of variables (397
of the Final Selection, 108 of the Second Component and 46 of the Confirmatory) will be used for a
specific type of model to estimate the agricultural cycle.
    Results presented in the Final Selected and Final Selection Sample already represent a first outline
of the agricultural cycle that will be estimated in the next steps. The number of selected series gives
us a relative idea of the importance of each category but its true importance will only be known with
the estimation of each model.

5.2    Mixed-frequency generalized dynamic factor model results for agri-
       culture cycle.
    Figure 3 illustrates the growth cycle of agriculture GDP and its common component. From this
figure it can be seen that the common component of agriculture GDP generally comoves with the
variation in agriculture GDP, although its variation is milder and flattens out the sharp growth
peaks and troughs of agriculture GDP. Later on, we will evaluate each variable with respect to this
reference cycle by analysing the mutual relation between the common component of the series and
the common component of agriculture GDP, representing the essential business cycle relation.




   Figure 3: Quarter-on-quarter agriculture GDP growth and MF-GDFM common component.

   We can observe that from 1995 the movements of the agricultural cycle become more adjusted

                                                  16
to the movements of agricultural GDP. We can observe that the sharpest crises of agricultural GDP
are more associated with extreme climatic events than with the economic crises dated by CODACE.
The co-movements of agricultural GDP and the cycle are more synchronized in the 2008 CODACE
crisis and in the long period of extreme climatic events from 2008 to 2012.

5.2.1    Dissecting the Brazilian agriculture cycle
    The results of Table 4 dissect the Brazilian agricultural cycle estimated according to the char-
acteristics of its phases and moments by each category used. We can know from the established
categories, the major degree of commonalities with the agricultural cycle, the portion of this com-
monality associated with the Cycle Phase Indicator (CPI): pro-cyclical or counter-cyclical, the degree
of commonality associated with each moment of the Cycle Moment Indicator (CMI): lagging, coin-
cident or leading.
    In Table 4 we have the average of the commonality ratio by category which allows us to ana-
lyze more generally. The relative importance of categories is also presented in the quantities and
percentages of series by categories.

5.2.2    Aggregate analysis by category
    In a general analysis, the degree of average communality was 17% among all categories8 , with the
maximum average communality of the state minimum temperatures of 82% and with lower average
commonality of the series that compose the agricultural production.
    The first highlight is the high average commonalities of climatic variables. There are 28 series (6%
of the total), but with commonalities above 50%. The minimum temperatures and precipitations
present the highest pro-cyclical and antecedent commonalities (82% and 64%), which means that
less severe winters and more rainy periods are associated to expansions of the agriculture cycle, and
these conditions occur before the cycle, or either periods with milder winters or wetter periods are
associated in the period following an expansion of the agriculture cycle. The effects of maximum
temperatures are divided between pro-cyclical and counter-cyclical movements in all cases in an an-
tecedent way. In this way, more severe or less severe summers can indicate expansions or contractions
in the agriculture cycle.
    In terms of importance, after the climatic variables, the variables of credit, agriculture and general
conditions are the most relevant in terms of average commonality. The agriculture credit conditions
have average commonality (18%) slightly higher than the general credit conditions (15%). In both
cases the degree of this commonality divides pro-cyclically and counter-cyclically, yet the highest
average commonality is counter-cyclical (19% with 19 series and 18% with 16 series for agriculture
credit and general credit respectively.) Occurring lagging behind agriculture cycle movements.
    Other seven categories (Governamental Finance, Others Internal Markets, Retail and Services,
Industry, Global, Agriculture Inputs and External Sector) have predominantly pro-cyclical and an-
tecedent average commonality. The other categories (Employment and Salary, Prices and Inflation,
Agriculture Prices, Agroindustrial Production, Agriculture External Sector, Agriculture Employment
and Salary, Monetary and Agriculture Production) have dispersed average commonality in a large
number of series, being this average commonality divided between pro-cyclical and counter-cyclical
phases and between lagged and antecedent effects.
    The conclusions we obtain from aggregated analysis by categories highlight the importance of
climate variables and credit conditions for the Brazilian agriculture cycle. Among the climatic
variables, all of them presented antecedent pattern to the agricultural cycle, which is natural and
happens in the process of planting and harvesting or herd’s pregnant and birthing periods. Better
   8
    Note that the total of variables included in the model refers to the total of the process of selection of the previous
section (397) plus the variables of the National Accounts (47) re-classified according to the categorization adopted,
resulting in a total of 444 variables used in the model.


                                                           17
climatic conditions (winters and milder summers with more rainy periods) precede expansions of
the Brazilian agriculture cycle . Regarding credit conditions, both agricultural and general credit
have diffuse effect in the agriculture cycle, part of this credit is counter-cyclical and antecedent may
indicate that producers in financial difficulty in the stage of planting or herd’s pregnant stage, on the
other hand, the counter-cyclical and lag commonality may indicate financial difficulty in the harvest
period or herd’s birth stage. The portion of credit conditions that has pro-cyclical and antecedent
characteristics may indicate an increase in the investment capacity at the stage of planting or herd’s
pregnancy stage, in the same way that the pro-cyclical and lagged portion may indicate an increase
in the capacity of investment in the harvesting phase or in the herd’s birth stage.

                                     Table 4: Average Degree of Commonality - Brazilian Agriculture Cycle
                Class                    Average Counter-Cyclical Pro-Cyclical Lagging Coincident Leading Series   Counter-Cyclical Pro-Cyclical Lagging Coincident Leading Series   Counter-Cyclical Pro-Cyclical Lagging Coincident Leading
 Minimum Temperature                      0,812       0,000         0,812      0,000     0,000     0,812    8            0             8          0          0        8      0,02         0,00           1,00      0,00      0,00      1,00
 Precipitation                            0,643       0,000         0,643      0,000     0,000     0,643    11           0             11         0          0        11     0,02         0,00           1,00      0,00      0,00      1,00
 Maximum Temperature                      0,506       0,253         0,707      0,000     0,000     0,506    9            4             5          0          0        9      0,02         0,44           0,56      0,00      0,00      1,00
 Agriculture Credit and Interest Rates    0,188       0,195         0,151      0,195     0,000     0,151    23           19            4          19         0        4      0,05         0,83           0,17      0,83      0,00      0,17
 Credit and Interest Rates                0,156       0,180         0,135      0,180     0,000     0,135    34           16            18         16         0        18     0,08         0,47           0,53      0,47      0,00      0,53
 Governmental Finance                     0,129       0,047         0,211      0,047     0,000     0,211    10           5             5          5          0        5      0,02         0,50           0,50      0,50      0,00      0,50
 Others Internal Markets                  0,122       0,064         0,165      0,062     0,121     0,167    71           30            41         30         1        40     0,16         0,42           0,58      0,42      0,01      0,56
 Retail and Services                      0,115       0,096         0,131      0,096     0,102     0,131    30           14            16         13         1        16     0,07         0,47           0,53      0,43      0,03      0,53
 Industry                                 0,109       0,024         0,143      0,024     0,000     0,143    45           13            32         13         0        32     0,10         0,29           0,71      0,29      0,00      0,71
 Global                                   0,102       0,085         0,119      0,085     0,000     0,119    46           23            23         23         0        23     0,10         0,50           0,50      0,50      0,00      0,50
 Agricultural Inputs                      0,095       0,088         0,103      0,088     0,000     0,103    2            1             1          1          0        1      0,00         0,50           0,50      0,50      0,00      0,50
 Emploment and Salary                     0,076       0,071         0,082      0,071     0,000     0,082    36           18            18         18         0        18     0,08         0,50           0,50      0,50      0,00      0,50
 External Sector                          0,070       0,042         0,080      0,042     0,000     0,080    38           10            28         10         0        28     0,09         0,26           0,74      0,26      0,00      0,74
 Prices and Inflation                     0,054       0,044         0,059      0,044     0,000     0,059    6            2             4          2          0        4      0,01         0,33           0,67      0,33      0,00      0,67
 Agriculture Prices                       0,052       0,037         0,060      0,037     0,000     0,060    11           4             7          4          0        7      0,02         0,36           0,64      0,36      0,00      0,64
 Agroindustrial Production                0,045       0,033         0,057      0,033     0,071     0,056    24           12            12         12         1        11     0,05         0,50           0,50      0,50      0,04      0,46
 Agriculture External Sector              0,041       0,028         0,063      0,028     0,000     0,063    8            5             3          5          0        3      0,02         0,63           0,38      0,63      0,00      0,38
 Agriculture Employment and Salary        0,040       0,020         0,058      0,020     0,000     0,058    13           6             7          6          0        7      0,03         0,46           0,54      0,46      0,00      0,54
 Monetary                                 0,032       0,060         0,003      0,060     0,000     0,003    2            1             1          1          0        1      0,00         0,50           0,50      0,50      0,00      0,50
 Agriculture Production                   0,013       0,008         0,018      0,006     0,013     0,020    17           8             9          7          3        7      0,04         0,47           0,53      0,41      0,18      0,41
 Mean/Total                               0,170       0,088         0,157      0,056     0,015     0,180    444         194            250        185        6        253    1,00         0,44           0,56      0,42      0,01      0,57


Note: Mixed frequency Generalized Dynamic Factor Model (MF-GDFM) - In-sample period: 1980Q1 to 2017Q4. The Table shows average degree of
commonality for each class by Cycle Phase Indicator (CPI): Counter-Cyclical and/or Pro-Cyclical; Cycle Moment Indicator (CMI): Lagging, Coincident
and/or Leading.

The number of series and their percentages are displayed respectively.




6             Conclusions
         This study was based on the use of techniques and models applied to the context of high-
dimensional and mixed frequencies databases, aiming at estimating the Brazilian agricultural business
cycle and dissecting it to understand which categories of variables have a high commonality with the
cycle. In the selection of variables for cycle estimation, eight categories stood out with a high level
of selection of variables within the category. As expected, the level of variable selection was high for
categories directly associated with the dynamics of agriculture itself, such as agricultural production
indicators, rural credit indicators, as well as employment and wages indicators in the sector. Given
the intrinsic dependence of agriculture on climate, the level of selection within the categories was
also high for those related to climatic variables (maximum temperatures, minimum temperatures
and rainfall in the Brazilian states).
    From the cycle estimation, we observed that the most intense crises of the agricultural cycle are
more associated to climatic events than to economic crises. Dissecting the cycle, we found an average
commonality of 17% for the categories of variables, and the maximum level of commonality found
was for the minimum state temperature category (82%). Following the minimum temperatures,
the greatest commonalities were verified for the categories of precipitation (65%) and maximum
temperatures (50%). This important result evidences the fundamental role of the climatic cycles for
the agricultural performance in the states and, therefore, in the Country.
    We found that the minimum temperatures and the precipitations presented pro-cyclical and
antecedent commonalities, which means that less severe winters and rainier periods are associated
to future expansions of the agricultural cycle. In addition to the important role of the climate,
another important result of the study was the high commonality of the agricultural cycle with the
variables related to credit, be it rural credit or general conditions. For these categories, the highest
commonality occurs in countercyclical and antecedent indicators.


                                                                                                                      18
References
Alessi, L., Barigozzi, M. and Capasso, M.: 2010, Improved penalization for determining the number
  of factors in approximate factor models, Statistics & Probability Letters 80(23-24), 1806–1813.

Anwar, M. R., Li Liu, D., Macadam, I. and Kelly, G.: 2013, Adapting agriculture to climate change:
 a review, Theoretical and applied climatology 113(1-2), 225–245.

Bacha, C. J. C.: 2004, Economia e política agrícola no Brasil, 1 ed. edn, Atlas, São Paulo.

Bai, J.: 2003, Inferential theory for factor models of large dimensions, Econometrica 71(1), 135–171.

Bai, J. and Ng, S.: 2002, Determining the number of factors in approximate factor models, Econo-
  metrica 70(1), 191–221.

Bai, J., Ng, S. et al.: 2008, Large dimensional factor analysis, Foundations and Trends R in Econo-
  metrics 3(2), 89–163.

Bańbura, M. and Modugno, M.: 2014, Maximum likelihood estimation of factor models on datasets
  with arbitrary pattern of missing data, Journal of Applied Econometrics 29(1), 133–160.

Barros, G. S. d. C.: 2014, Agricultura e Indústria no Desenvolvimento Econômico Brasileiro, in A. M.
  Buainain, E. Alves, J. M. da Silveira and Z. Navarro (eds), O Mundo Rural no Brasil do Século
  21, 1ed edn, Embrapa, Brasília, pp. 79–116.

Barros, G. S. d. C., Bacchi, M. R. P. and Burnquist, H. L.: 2002, Estimação de equações de oferta de
  exportação de produtos agropecuários para o Brasil (1992/2000), Technical report, IPEA, Brasília.

Barros, G. S. d. C. and Castro, N. R.: 2017, Produto Interno Bruto Do Agronegócio E a Crise
  Brasileira, Revista de Economia e Agronegócio 15(2), 156–162.

Belloni, A. and Chernozhukov, V.: 2011, High dimensional sparse econometric models: An introduc-
  tion, pp. 121–156.

Buainain, A. M., Alves, E., da Silveira, J. M. and Navarro, Z.: 2013, Sete teses sobre o mundo rural,
  Revista de Política Agrícola XXII(2), 105–121.

Burnham, K. and Anderson, D.: 2002, Model Selection and Multi-model Inference: A pratical
  Information-Theoretic Approach. 2nd edn.(Springer: New York.).

Burns, A. F. and Mitchell, W. C.: 1947, Measuring business cycles.

Cepea/Arroz: 2012, Agromensal Cepea/Esalq - Arroz, Technical report, Cepea, Piracicaba.

Cepea/Soja: 2013, Quebra da safra marca 2012 com preços recordes, Technical report, Cepea,
  Piracicaba.
  URL: https://www.cepea.esalq.usp.br/br/diarias-de-mercado/soja-cepea-quebra-da-safra-marca-
  2012-com-precos-recordes.aspx

Chauvet, M.: 1998, An econometric characterization of business cycle dynamics with factor structure
  and regime switching, International economic review pp. 969–996.

Cohen, D. S.: 2001, Linear data transformations used in economics, Technical Report 2001-59.

Conab: 2013, Acompanhamento de safra brasileira: grãos, décimo segundo levantamento, setembro
  2013, Technical report.

                                                 19
Conab: 2017, Acompanhamento de safra brasileira: grãos, décimo segundo levantamento, setembro
  2017, Technical report.

Doz, C., Giannone, D. and Reichlin, L.: 2012, A quasi–maximum likelihood approach for large,
 approximate dynamic factor models, Review of economics and statistics 94(4), 1014–1024.

Estatística, I. B. d. G. e.: 2006, Censo agropecuário - instituto brasileiro de geografia e estatística.

Estatística, I. B. d. G. e.: 2018a, Contas nacionais trimestrais - instituto brasileiro de geografia e
  estatística.

Estatística, I. B. d. G. e.: 2018b, Produção agrícola municipal - instituto brasileiro de geografia e
  estatística.

Estrella, A. and Mishkin, F. S.: 1997, The predictive power of the term structure of interest rates
  in europe and the united states: Implications for the european central bank, European economic
  review 41(7), 1375–1401.

Forni, M., Hallin, M., Lippi, M. and Reichlin, L.: 2000, The generalized dynamic-factor model:
  Identification and estimation, Review of Economics and statistics 82(4), 540–554.

Forni, M., Hallin, M., Lippi, M. and Reichlin, L.: 2001, Coincident and leading indicators for the
  euro area, The Economic Journal 111(471), C62–C85.

Forni, M., Hallin, M., Lippi, M. and Reichlin, L.: 2004, The generalized dynamic factor model
  consistency and rates, Journal of Econometrics 119(2), 231–255.

Forni, M., Hallin, M., Lippi, M. and Reichlin, L.: 2005, The generalized dynamic factor model: one-
  sided estimation and forecasting, Journal of the American Statistical Association 100(471), 830–
  840.

Forni, M. and Lippi, M.: 2001, The generalized dynamic factor model: representation theory, Econo-
  metric theory 17(6), 1113–1141.

Garcia, J. R.: 2014, Trabalho rural: tendências em face das transformações em curso, pp. 559–590.

Gasques, J., Bastos, E., Valdes, C. and Bacci, M. R. P.: 2014, Produtividade da agricultura: resul-
 tados para o Brasil e estados selecionados, Revista de Política Agrícola pp. 87–98.

Gasques, J. G., de Rezende, G. C., Verde, C. M. V., Salerno, M. S., da Conceição, J. C. P. R. and
 Carvalho, J. C. d. S.: 2004, Desempenho e crescimento do agronegocio no Brasil, Technical report,
 IPEA, Brasília.

Geweke, J.: 1977, The dynamic factor analysis of economic time series, Latent variables in socio-
 economic models .

Golan, A. and Maasoumi, E.: 2008, Information theoretic and entropy methods: An overview,
 Econometric Reviews 27(4-6), 317–328.

Gornall, J., Betts, R., Burke, E., Clark, R., Camp, J., Willett, K. and Wiltshire, A.: 2010, Implica-
 tions of climate change for agricultural productivity in the early twenty-first century, Philosophical
 Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 365(1554), 2973–2989.

Hamilton, J. D.: 1989, A new approach to the economic analysis of nonstationary time series and
  the business cycle, Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society pp. 357–384.


                                                   20
Harding, D. and Pagan, A.: 2002, Dissecting the cycle: a methodological investigation, Journal of
  monetary economics 49(2), 365–381.

Harding, D. and Pagan, A.: 2006, Synchronization of cycles, Journal of Econometrics 132(1), 59–79.

Jacobs, J. P. and Otter, P. W.: 2008, Determining the number of factors and lag order in dynamic
  factor models: A minimum entropy approach, Econometric Reviews 27(4-6), 385–397.

Kageyama, A. et al.: 1987, O novo padrão agrícola brasileiro: do complexo rural aos complexos
 agroindustriais, Campinas: Unicamp .

Kim, C.-J. and Nelson, C. R.: 1998, Business cycle turning points, a new coincident index, and
  tests of duration dependence based on a dynamic factor model with regime switching, Review of
  Economics and Statistics 80(2), 188–201.

Kim, M.-J. and Yoo, J.-S.: 1995, New index of coincident indicators: A multivariate markov switching
  factor model approach, Journal of Monetary Economics 36(3), 607–630.

Kydland, F. E. and Prescott, E. C.: 1982, Time to build and aggregate fluctuations, Econometrica:
 Journal of the Econometric Society pp. 1345–1370.

Kydland, F. E. and Prescott, E. C.: 1990, The econometrics of the general equilibrium approach to
 business cycles, Real Business Cycles pp. 219–236.

Lucas Jr, R. E.: 1972, Expectations and the neutrality of money, Journal of economic theory
  4(2), 103–124.

Lucas, R. E.: 1973, Some international evidence on output-inflation tradeoffs, The American Eco-
  nomic Review 63(3), 326–334.

Marquetti, A., Silveira, F. G. and da Silva, P. R. N.: 1991, Agricultura: Quebras de safra significam
 elevações de preço, importações e pacotes agrícolas, Indicadores Econômicos FEE 19(3).

Mendelsohn, R., Nordhaus, W. and Shaw, D.: 1996, Climate impacts on aggregate farm value:
 accounting for adaptation, Agricultural and Forest Meteorology 80(1), 55–66.

Millner, A. and Dietz, S.: 2015, Adaptation to climate change and economic growth in developing
 countries, Environment and Development Economics 20(3), 380–406.

Mohapatra, S. and Majhi, B.: 2015, An evolutionary approach for load balancing in cloud computing,
 Handbook of Research on Securing Cloud-Based Databases with Biometric Applications, IGI Global,
 pp. 433–463.

Morton, J. F.: 2007, The impact of climate change on smallholder and subsistence agriculture,
 Proceedings of the national academy of sciences 104(50), 19680–19685.

Muirhead, R. J.: 1982, Aspects of multivariate statistical analysis.

Nordhaus, W. D.: 1993, Reflections on the economics of climate change, Journal of economic Per-
  spectives 7(4), 11–25.

Rosenzweig, C., Elliott, J., Deryng, D., Ruane, A. C., Müller, C., Arneth, A., Boote, K. J., Folberth,
  C., Glotter, M., Khabarov, N. et al.: 2014, Assessing agricultural risks of climate change in the
  21st century in a global gridded crop model intercomparison, Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences 111(9), 3268–3273.


                                                  21
Rothschild, M. and Chamberlain, G.: 1982, Arbitrage, factor structure, and mean-variance analysis
  on large asset markets.

Sargent, T. J., Sims, C. A. et al.: 1977, Business cycle modeling without pretending to have too
  much a priori economic theory, New methods in business cycle research 1, 145–168.

Shumway, R. H. and Stoffer, D. S.: 1982, An approach to time series smoothing and forecasting
  using the em algorithm, Journal of time series analysis 3(4), 253–264.

Song, S. and Bickel, P. J.: 2011, Large vector auto regressions, arXiv preprint arXiv:1106.3915 .

Staduto, J. A. R., Shikida, P. F. A. and Bacha, C. J. C.: 2004, Alteração na composição da mão-de-
  obra assalariada na agropecuária brasileira, Revista de Economia Agrícola 51(2).

Stock, J. H. and Watson, M.: 2011, Dynamic factor models, Oxford University Press.

Stock, J. H. and Watson, M. W.: 2014, Estimating turning points using large data sets, Journal of
  Econometrics 178, 368–381.

Summer, L.: 1986, Some skeptical observations on real business cycles theory, Federal Reserve Bank
  of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 10, 23–27.

Watson, M. W. and Engle, R. F.: 1983, Alternative algorithms for the estimation of dynamic factor,
 mimic and varying coefficient regression models, Journal of Econometrics 23(3), 385–400.

Wheeler, T. and Von Braun, J.: 2013, Climate change impacts on global food security, Science
 341(6145), 508–513.

Young, T. Y. and Calvert, T. W.: 1974, Classification, estimation and pattern recognition, North-
  Holland.




                                                 22
