Physical and Human Capital and Brazilian Regional Growth: A Spatial
Econometric Approach for the Period 1970-2010
Ricardo Carvalho de Andrade Lima - PIMES (UFPE)
Raul da Mota Silveira Neto – PIMES (UFPE)

Resumo
O objetivo do trabalho é identificar os determinantes do crescimento econômico e analisar a
dinâmica de renda considerando um painel para o período de 1970-2010 com 522 microrregiões
brasileiras. Para tal, a pesquisa estima os parâmetros de um Spatial Durbin Model (SDM) com
efeitos-fixos derivado diretamente de uma expansão do modelo teórico de Mankiw-Romer-Weil
(MRW) que, além de considerar explicitamente o capital físico e humano, incorpora dependência
espacial com respeito à tecnologia. Para mensurar o impacto das variáveis sobre o crescimento
regional, são calculados os impactos diretos e indiretos (spillovers). Além de indicarem forte
dependência espacial entre as taxas de crescimento das microrregiões brasileiras, os resultados
também indicam que tanto o investimento em capital físico, quanto o investimento em capital
humano importam não só para o crescimento da própria economia, mas também para o
crescimento de economias vizinhas.

Palavras-Chave: Crescimento Econômico, Spillovers Espaciais, Painel Espacial, Convergência
de renda.

Abstract
The aim of this paper is to identify the determinants of economic growth and analyse the
dynamics of income using a panel of 522 Brazilian micro-regions for period 1970-2010. Based
on the spatial extension of the Mankiw-Romer-Weil (MRW) model and explicitly considering
both physical and human capital, the parameters of a Spatial Durbin Model (SDM) with fixed-
effects are estimated. The direct and indirect impacts (spillovers) of the determinants of regional
growth are then calculated. The results not only indicate strong spatial dependence among
Brazilian micro-regions, but also that investments in physical and human capital are important for
the growth of the economy and those of neighbouring economies.

Keywords: Economic growth, Spatial Spillovers, Spatial Panel, Income convergence.

Código JEL: R11, R15.

Área Anpec: 10 – Economia Regional e Urbana.
Physical and Human Capital and Brazilian Regional Growth: A Spatial Econometric
Approach for the Period 1970-2010

1. Introduction

        With its large continental area and diverse regional environment conditions, Brazil faces
significant and persistent regional income disparities (AZZONI, 2001; SHAKAR and SHAH,
2003; BAER, 2001; VELEZ et al., 2004). These circumstances are the result of its colonial
economic history, when export-based activities were based on local natural resources, poor
transportation networks among the country’s regions, and the concentration of industrialisation in
Brazil’s Southeast region during the twentieth century (CANO 1985; BAER 2001). The lack of
education investment and the high degree of closure of its economy during most of the twentieth
century, on one hand, and agglomeration forces, on the other, have contributed to maintain the
historical regional distribution of activities (SILVEIRA NETO and MENEZES, 2008; ÖZYURT
and DAUMAL, 2013).
        This characteristic is widely and clearly illustrated by the conditions in the Northeast (the
poorest) and Southeast (the wealthiest) macro regions of the country, the two most populous
regions of Brazil. The Northeast and Southeast regions represented 34,7% and 44,6% of the
Brazilian population and 17% and 63% of Brazilian GDP (Gross Domestic Product) in 1939,
respectively; this regional inequality persisted for the remainder of the twentieth century, while
28,1% and 46% of the Brazilian population was located in the Northeast and Southeast regions
and the shares of GDP in these regions were 12,4% and 58,3% in 2000, respectively (AZZONI,
2001). Throughout the period for which macro regional data are available (from 1939 on), the per
capita GDP of the Northeast was never greater than half that at the national level, and the
Northeast exhibited poverty levels more than twice those registered for the Southeast region
(ROCHA, 2003; SILVEIRA NETO, 2005).
        Understandably, this situation has motivated regional policies that, historically, have
primarily focused on increasing physical capital by attracting manufacturing activities to less-
developed regions (CANO, 1980; BAER, 2001). The results of these politics appear mixed,
resembling those of the European Structural Funds (MARTIN, 1999; HUSRT and VANHOUDT,
2000; PUGA, 2002). For example, FERREIRA (2004) suggests that these traditional regional
policies providing capital subsidies for Brazil’s Northeast did not reduce regional disparities.
CARVALHO et al. (2005), however, noted that these policies had positive effects in attracting
manufacturing to Brazil’s poorest regions, a result also obtained by MANOEL et al. (2009).
Moreover, the Brazilian experience in evaluating “place-based” regional policies provides an
example of the classical problem of the absence of a strong counterfactual; in other words, it is
impossible to know what the economic and social conditions in the poorest regions would have
been in the absence of the traditional policies intended to augment the stock of regional capital by
attracting manufacturing. As in the European experience (DURANTON and MONASTITIOTIS,
2002; OVERMAN and PUGA, 2002), these mixed results for Brazil have motivated a debate on
potentially more effective “spatially blind” policies specifically focused on improving the
Brazilian population’s education level, which would have a greater influence on the poorest
regions (SILVEIRA NETO and MENEZES, 2008).
        In the Brazilian case, the argument for improving the regional education level is based
both on evidence obtained from micro data regression analysis estimating the impact of schooling
on regional labour income (SILVEIRA NETO and MENEZES, 2008; DUARTE et al., 2004)
and growth regressions using aggregate variables to estimate the impact of schooling variables on
the regional level of GDP per capita or growth (AZZONI et al. 2000, FERREIRA 2000,
SILVEIRA NETO and AZZONI 2006, RESENDE 2011, CRAVO et al. 2014). The former
approach suffers from an inability to adequately distinguish supply and demand factors that
simultaneously affect a region’s level of labour income. Thus, apart from the potential problem of
reverse causality, when considering income levels, it is possible that the effect of education
captures some degree of the effect of the presence of capital. The growth regression evidence
features a similar problem; without exception, due to the failure to employ a regional physical
capital measure, the available evidence only considers the effect of schooling on regional per
capita GDP and clearly does not generate a robust measure of the importance of education to
regional growth.
         In addition, apart from the issue of adequately considering the influence of both human
and physical capital on Brazilian regional GDP growth, the evidence concerning the impact of
these factors obtained from growth regressions devotes little consideration to the presence of
spatial dependence in the variables that lead to positive bias in the estimates (ANSELIN, 1988).
As recently highlighted by ARBIA and PIRAS (2005), FINGLETON and LÓPEZ-BAZO (2006)
and ELHORST et al. (2010), in the case of European regions, and REY and MONTOURIO
(1999), for U.S. states, the dynamics of growth in geographic units are highly associated with the
dynamics of their spatial neighbours, and to correctly estimate the influence of the determinants
of growth, this spatial dependence must be explicitly considered in the econometric model.
         The works of MAGALHÃES et al. (2005), SILVEIRA NETO and AZZONI (2006),
RESENDE (2011) and ÖZYURT and DAUMAL (2013) are among the few exceptions that
address spatial dependence in regional growth regressions on the Brazilian case, and these works
confirm the importance of explicitly accounting for spatial dependence. None of these works on
the Brazilian regions, however, simultaneously employ spatial panel data and adequately interpret
the estimated effects of the variables on regional per capita GDP or income growth. Specifically,
RESENDE et al. (2012) and CRAVO et al. (2014) were the first to employ a spatial panel data
approach to measure the impact of schooling on regional income growth in Brazil, but the authors
fail to simultaneously consider the influence of physical capital, and because they do not consider
the role of regional spillovers, they also fail to correctly measure the effect of the human capital
variable on growth of regional per capita Income. ÖZYURT and DAUMAL (2013), however,
while correctly interpreting the influence of the variables (including human capital and the degree
of regional openness) on regional per capita GDP, only consider cross-sectional data and a very
brief period of analysis (2004-2007). These characteristics make their estimates of the importance
of human capital much less reliable.
         Given the above context, the contribution of this paper is twofold. By considering a new
and robust measure of regional physical capital, we first simultaneously estimate the influence of
physical and human capital to regional economic growth in Brazil using a panel data for the
period 1970-2010. This allows us to more precisely control for the influence of time-invariant
factors that are potentially associated with each type of capital. Previously, no information on the
relative importance of these types of capital was available for the Brazilian regions. Second, to
account for spatial dependence and based on the argument advanced by ERTUR and KOCH
(2007) regarding the spatial dependence of growth rates, we consider an empirical spatial panel
econometric model (Durbin Model) that allows us to measure the spatial spillovers potentially
arising from regional growth and the regional levels of both physical and human capital
utilisation. This methodology not only makes it possible to obtain unbiased estimates of the
model’s parameters in the presence of spatial dependence (ELHORST, 2003) but also, following
the methodology of LESAGE and PACE (2009), to correctly interpret the estimated coefficients
and the associated direct and indirect effects of the variables. In conjunction, these considerations
enable a much more precise understanding of the roles that physical and human capital play in
Brazilian regional income dynamics.
        The main results of the paper indicate that strong, positive spatial dependence was present
in the per capita income dynamics of Brazilian micro-regions between 1970 and 2010 and both
human and physical capital are important in understanding the dynamics of Brazilian regional per
capita income in this period. By calculating the direct and indirect effects of the two types of
capital, we also show that the spatial dependence implies that the estimated coefficients of the
spatial panel growth regression underestimate the influence of these factors on Brazilian regional
per capita income growth. Furthermore, at least for the measures of capital we employed, the two
types of capital have very similar effects on Brazilian regional growth.
        The remainder of this paper is organised into four additional sections. In the next section,
we present a review of the empirical literature on regional economic growth and human and
physical capital in Brazil. In the section three, we present the data and methodology employed in
the paper. The results and discussion are presented in section four, and the final remarks are
provided in section five.

2. Regional growth, physical and human capital and spatial dependence in Brazil

         The works of FERREIRA (2000) and AZZONI (2001) can be considered pioneering
contributions on the determinants of regional growth in Brazil based on regressions with
specifications derived from the traditional neo-classical growth model. Both investigations
indicated that the process of income convergence among Brazilian states is sensitive to the period
of analysis and the set of variables included in the regressions. However, in addition to
considering cross-sectional data, which do not allow the researcher to consider the influence of
the heterogeneity among the states’ economies on their growth trajectories, these two articles
present two further limitations: they did not consider the spatial dependence of the states’ growth
rate trajectories or use a measure of or proxy for the rate of savings or investment in physical
capital.
         Following the pioneering paper by REY and MOUNTOURI (1999), which estimated
spatial growth regressions and identified the presence of positive spatial dependence among the
economic growth rates of U.S. states, MAGALHÃES et al. (2005) and SILVEIRA NETO and
AZZONI (2005), considering a cross section of Brazilian states, incorporated spatial dependence
in the growth regressions and also identified positive spatial dependence among the growth rates.
In a similar vein, DE VREYER and SPIELVOGEL (2009), considering a cross section of
Brazilian municipalities, also showed that that the growth rates of neighbouring economies and
their initial levels of GDP per capita are important variables in explaining the income dynamics
of a particular economy. RESENDE (2011) analyses Brazilian regional growth at multiple
geographic scales for the period 1991-2000 and demonstrates that, regardless of the geographic
scale considered, a high-quality infrastructure and high levels of educational and health capital
are associated with higher rates of economic growth.
         More recently, ÖZYURT and DAUMAL (2013) investigated the influence of
international trade and human capital on the level of GDP per capita in Brazilian micro-regions.
The results reveal that while openness to the international market is beneficial for a given micro-
region, it ultimately has negative effects on neighbouring micro-regions, indicating that
international trade can generate negative spillovers. Moreover, ÖZYURT and DAUMAL (2013)
observed that human capital is important in explaining both the GDP per capita of a particular
economy and that of neighbouring economies. In other words, they found evidence of positive
human capital spillovers.
         These empirical results on Brazilian regional growth appear consistent with a recent
theoretical extension of the neoclassical model proposed by LÓPEZ-BAZO et al. (2004) and
ERTUR and KOCH (2007). In this context of economic dependence and based on the evidence
obtained by KELLER (2002) that technological diffusion decreases in the geographic distance
between regions, LÓPEZ-BAZO et al. (2004) and ERTUR and KOCH (2007) proposed an
extension to the Solow (1956) growth model and its extended human capital version (MANKIW
et al., 1992) that considers the technological interdependence among economies. One implication
of the model proposed by ERTUR and KOCH (2007) is that both the characteristics of a specific
economy (such as investments in physical and human capital) and those of neighbouring
economies are important in explaining regional economic growth. In other words, ERTUR and
KOCH (2007) highlight physical and human capital spillovers as important variables for
explaining the growth of a particular economy.
         However, by only considering cross-sectional data on Brazilian geographic units, neither
of these studies on the Brazilian regional experience accounted for the influence of the
heterogeneity among regional economies on their growth trajectory or GDP, nor did they include
any measure of the influence of physical capital on income growth or the income level. As noted
by ISLAM (1995), an appropriate means of accounting for heterogeneity in the production
function of each economy is to estimate the growth regressions using panel models, which
consider the fixed and specific characteristics of each region (regional effects). From a
methodological perspective, the estimation of panel models allows to the researcher to
distinguish the effects of the variables included in the model (such as investments in physical and
human capital) from the effects of unobservable characteristics (such as technology, geography
and institutional quality) and reduces omitted variable bias from temporally fixed variables,
which represent potential sources of endogeneity. In the case of Brazil’s regions, these specific
regional effects appear important; as shown by AZZONI et al. (2000), the geographical
characteristics (rainfall, temperature and latitude) of a Brazilian region are important in
explaining differences in income levels and growth rates among regions.
         NAKABASHI and SALVATO (2007) and CRAVO (2012) addressed the first of these
concerns by considering panel data on Brazilian regions. NAKABASHI and SALVATO (2007)
examined the role of human capital and CRAVO (2012) examined the role of entrepreneurship
on regional economic growth and, respectively, obtained evidence that human capital and
entrepreneurship are important for regional growth. However, despite their use of more
appropriate strategies to address economic heterogeneity (regional fixed effects), these studies
ignored the possibility of spatial dependence among the growth rates and their determinants and,
again, did not consider any measure of physical capital affecting Brazilian regional growth.
         Following the works of ARBIA and PIRAS (2005) and ELHORST et al. (2010), which
employ a spatial panel approach to study European regional growth, only RESENDE et al.
(2012) and CRAVO et al. (2014) applied this methodology to the Brazilian case. RESENDE et
al. (2012) demonstrated, for Brazilian municipalities, micro-regions and meso-regions, the
existence of positive spatial dependence among the income growth rates of regional spatial units
even after accounting for regional fixed effects. Utilizing a panel of 508 micro-regions for the
period 1980-2004, CRAVO et al. (2014) demonstrated that the activity of small and medium-
sized enterprises (SMEs) are important to explain economic growth and can generate spatial
spillovers. Additionally, for the micro-regions, both the studies found no evidence of a
relationship between human capital spillovers and regional economic growth.
        However, the work of RESENDE et al. (2012) and CRAVO et al. (2014) nevertheless
presents two important limitations. The first is that the role of physical capital is entirely
neglected. This limitation hampers the theoretical consistency of the paper’s empirical results, as
theory indicates that investments in both physical capital and its potential spillovers are important
in explaining regional economic growth (ERTUR and KOCH, 2007). Note that on one hand,
from an econometric perspective, this limitation can bias the parameters of growth equations; on
the other hand, from a regional policy perspective, this limitation prevents determining the
influence that physical capital has on regional growth. The second limitation is that the articles
presents an inaccurate interpretation of the parameters estimated using the spatial models. As
LESAGE and FISCHER (2008) demonstrated, when considering growth models that explicitly
incorporate the influence of the growth of neighbouring economies, it is necessary to calculate
the direct and indirect impacts to determine the true effect of a marginal change in the
independent variable and make inferences regarding the sign, magnitude and significance of the
explanatory variables. As FISCHER (2011) showed, (inaccurately) interpreting the parameters
estimated using spatial models as one would for models that fail to consider the spatial dimension
(typical regressions) can be very costly: the conclusions and implications of the empirical model
can be meaningfully affected.
        Thus, this paper aims to contribute to the debate on Brazilian regional economic growth
by directly addressing these limitations. Specifically, to study Brazilian regional growth from
1970 to 2010, we explicitly consider the roles of both human and physical capital in a spatial
panel model that allows us to control for both spatial dependence and unobservable, time-
invariant factors. This approach permits us to obtain more reliable parameter estimates from the
theoretical model. Additionally, the accurate interpretation of the spatial parameters in this work
allows us to generate more reliable evidence regarding the importance of both types of capital
(physical and human) and their potential spatial spillovers.
3. Theory, Methodology and Data

3.1 Theory and specification of the empirical model

        From a theoretical perspective, the empirical strategy is motivated by the recent extension
of the neoclassical growth model proposed by ERTUR and KOCH (2007), in which various
economies interact through technological interdependence. Thus, it relaxes the assumption of a
closed economy, imposed in the classical SOLOW (1956) model and its main extensions. Using
this spatially extended version of the traditional growth model proposed by these authors, it is
possible to explicitly express not only the effects of both physical and human capital on regional
economic growth but also to consider the spatial spillovers arising from the levels of these factors
in neighbouring economies.
        We begin with the Cobb-Douglas production function proposed by ERTUR and KOCH
(2007), which takes the traditional specification:



where      is the per capita output for the specific region “i” at time “t”,   is the aggregate level
of technology,       is the stock of physical capital per worker, and        is the stock of human
capital per worker. The spatial interactions among economies are introduced though the level of
technology as follows:
                                                                                            (2)

Where       is the total amount of technology created in the world, available for any region, and
grows at an exogenous rate, such that                   , where      is the initial level of exogenous
knowledge. Furthermore, it is assumed that the level of technology also depends on the
cumulative production factors, that is, economies with higher levels of physical and human
capital exhibit a higher level of technology, akin to a learning-by-doing process (ROMER, 1986;
LUCAS, 1988). The parameters and represent the magnitude of the externalities generated
by human capital and physical capital, respectively.
        The last term of the expression indicates the technological interdependence among
economies, and hence, the technical progress in a particular region depends positively on the
technology levels in other regions,         , for             . The parameter measures the overall
degree of interdependence, and         are the spatial weights and represent the connectivity between
region “i” and region “j”. These terms are assumed to be non-stochastic, non-negative and finite.
It is assumed that                   and, incorporating empirical evidence obtained by KELLER
(2002) that technological diffusion between two distinct regions decreases in geographic
distance; it is supposed that the closer region “i” is to region “j”, the greater the           . Thus,
economies more proximate to economy “i” will have a more substantial influence (in terms of
technological diffusion).
        To determine the level of steady state per capita output and, consequently, study the
dynamics of economic growth in the presence of technological interdependence, it is necessary to
consider the laws of motion for physical and human capital. These laws of motion follow
traditional specifications and indicate how physical and human capital accumulates for given
rates of investment in physical capital ( ), in human capital           ), and the depreciation rate of
capital (for simplicity, it is assumed that the depreciation rates for physical and human capital are
equal), and the rate of population growth, . From equation (1) and these laws of motion, it is
possible to express a region’s rate of growth as:




Where is the growth rate of physical and human capital in the steady state,           is the growth
rate of per capita output for economy “i” at time “t”,      is the growth rate of per capita output
for neighbouring regions, and      (s = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4), (s = 1, 2, 3, 4) and are combinations of
model parameters. It is interesting to note that if                 , technology in region "i" only
relies on the exogenous term, and hence equation (3) becomes the traditional convergence
equation in MANKIW et al. (1992).
        As can be observed from equation (3), the growth rate of the economy “i” depends
positively of the level of investment in human and physical capital and negatively of the rate of
population growth and the economy’s initial income level, as indicated in the model developed
by MANKIW et al. (1992). However, given the assumed interactions expressed in equation (2),
economic growth now also depends positively on the investments in physical and human capital
and the rate of output growth in neighbouring regions and negatively of the rate of population
growth and initial income levels of neighbouring regions.
         From an empirical perspective, there are two important issues concerning equation (3).
First, as argued by MANKIW et al. (1992), the term            can represent the degree of technology
and the endowments of resources, institutions and climate and hence may differ between
economies. As this variable is not observable, it is captured by the error term (                of the
empirical model. To proceed with the estimation of equation (3) using ordinary last squares
(OLS), the identification assumption that        is independent of the variables included in the model
is necessary, but this type of assumption appears overly strong. For example, it is unconvincing
to argue that the level of capital investment in an economy is not related to its institutional
quality. As argued by ISLAM (1995), an appropriate solution to this problem is to employ panel
models and consider the existence of a regional effect (         in the unobserved term (
    ) that is correlated with the variables included in the model.
         The second issue relates to the interpretation of the parameters           and , where
          of this spatial extended model. Note that due to spatial interactions that imply feedbacks
arising from changes in production factors and technology, we place the initial income, growth
rate, human capital and physical capital variables of neighbouring economies on the right side of
equation (3). Therefore, the marginal effects of the changes in variables representing regional
growth rates are no longer given by the estimated              but by a combination of parameters
involving ,           and . To clarify this point, we rewrite equation (3) in matrix form and
explicitly consider the panel structure of our data by incorporating a regional effect ( in the
unobserved term:

                                                                                                  (4)

Where is a vector             of observations of the per capita income growth rate of “n” regions
for “t” periods of time, is a matrix of explanatory variables (initial income level, investments
in human and physical capital and population growth) of length ,            ,   is a matrix        of
spatial weights, is the coefficient of spatial correlation, is an identity matrix,          , is an
identity matrix,          , is a vector           of ones,      is a vector of unobserved specific
characteristic of each region of dimension           and is a vector          of idiosyncratic errors
with               . We will suppose that the vector          is uncorrelated with the explanatory
variables and with vector . The symbol         represents the Kronecker product. This model, a non-
deterministic version of equation (3), includes explicit spatial dependence in both the dependent
and explanatory variables and is known in the spatial econometrics literature as the Spatial
Durbin Model (SDM).
        It is assumed that each element of vector is an unobserved individual characteristic of
a particular region “i”, which is constant over time and correlated with the explanatory variables
included in the model; the elements of are known as regional fixed effects. According to
ISLAM (1995), these assumptions are appropriate in the context of economic growth models. For
example, we can interpret as a measure of the institutions in a particular region. Institutions are
a classic example of a feature that is fairly independent of time, is not observed and is related to
the characteristics observed and included in the model. By considering the regional effects, we
will reduce omitted variable bias and, consequently, obtain more reliable estimators. Another
advantage of using panel models with fixed effects is that if there are distinct regions with the
same inputs, the rate of per capita GDP growth in these regions will differ due to the inclusion of
the parameter . Therefore, the use of panel models allows for the existence of heterogeneous
production functions. Moreover, BALTALGI (2005) argues that panel data exhibit greater
variability, a lower degree of collinearity among variables and provide more efficient estimators.
         Thus, spatial panel models enable us to simultaneously control for spatial dependence and
unobserved fixed effects, which are potential sources of endogeneity (ARBIA and PIRAS, 2005).
Therefore, by using this methodology, we can verify the existence of spatial spillovers arising
from physical and human capital and analyse income dynamics with non-biased and consistent
estimators. The traditional (and strong) assumptions of closed economies and homogenous
production functions imposed in cross-sectional studies of growth are relaxed.       With       the
objective of estimating equation (4), we follow ELHORST (2003) suggestion of transforming the
variables (achieved by subtracting the average time for each observation in cross-section) to
eliminate the fixed-effects. As suggested by LESAGE and PACE (2009) and ELHORST (2003),
the parameter can be obtained through a concentrated1 likelihood function and then substituted
into a likelihood function to obtain the values of     and .
         As argued above, due to the spatial dynamic incorporated into equation (3), a marginal
change in the explanatory variable for region “i” can affect both the income growth of region “i”
and that of all other regions,      , for            . To interpret the parameters obtained from an
SDM, consider the reduced form of equation (4):

                                                                                                              (5)

Taking the partial derivative of           with respect of the explanatory variable “r”, we obtain the
following expression:

                                                                                                              (6)

        The resulting expression is a matrix of dimension               . The elements of the main
diagonal of matrix (6) reflect the effects of a change in          in response to variations in the
explanatory variables for the same region, , these own-partial derivatives are known as the
direct impact2. The elements off of the diagonal of matrix (6) reflect the effects of a change in
in response to variations in the explanatory variables for different regions, ,       . These cross-
partial derivatives are known as indirect impacts or spillover effects. As the direct and indirect
impacts can vary according to regions/observations, LESAGE and PACE (2009) proposed a
measure of the direct and indirect effects that correspond to average of elements on and off of the
main diagonal of matrix (6), respectively.



1
    For details on the estimation, see ELHORST (2003) or MILLO and PIRAS (2012).
2
 These direct impacts include feedback effects: a change in    causes not only an effect on   but also an effect on
which in turn causes an additional change in the variable. .
3.2 Data and spatial matrices
        To estimate the parameters of the model specification in equation (4), it is necessary to
determine adequate measures of GDP per capita, investments in physical and human capital and
the population growth rate. To do so, we employed official data from Brazilian Demographic
Census for the years 1970, 1980, 1991, 2000 and 2010 produced by the IBGE (Brazilian Institute
of Geography and Statistics) and processed by IPEADATA (Institute of Applied Economic
Research), a Brazilian government institute. Brazilian micro-regions serve as the spatial scale3 of
the analysis. The micro-regions are formed by a group of adjacent municipalities and were
defined according to similar characteristics regarding the agricultural, mining and industrial
production structures of the municipalities, and social factors are also taken into consideration
(MAGNAGO, 1995). An alternative would be to select larger geographical units (states or meso-
regions); however, in addition to reducing the number of available observations, states and meso-
regions include localities that differ substantially in economic characteristics, rendering the
regional growth analysis less accurate.
        When analysing Brazil, we face the problem of the creation of new municipalities4, and as
the micro-regions are sets of adjacent municipalities, these are also subject to change with respect
to their geographical extent. To solve this issue, we adopted the approach proposed by
RESENDE et al. (2012); specifically, the micro-regions analysed were constructed by
aggregating data obtained from minimum comparable areas 5 (MCAs), which generated a sample
of 522 micro-regions with constant borders over time.
        Regarding the variables, we used total income, which corresponds to the sum of gross
income from all sources, as a proxy for the GDP (gross domestic product) of the micro-regions.
Ideally, we would consider GDP, but this variable was not calculated in 1991. Nevertheless, as
shown by MENEZES et al. (2012), the regional dynamics of the variation in these aggregates are
quite similar. To calculate the annual growth rate of per capita income (the dependent variable),
we assume exponential income growth. Total income was deflated by the INPC (national
consumer price index from IBGE) into real (R$) in year 2000 equivalents. As a proxy for human
capital, we adopted the average years of schooling of the population over 25 years of age who
reside in a given micro-region. To proxy for physical capital, we use the stock of residential
capital, which corresponds to this constant perpetual flow of rents discounted at 0.75% per
month, deflated by IGP (general price index) to thousands of reals in 2000.
        To verify the accuracy of this last variable as a measure of physical capital, BARROS et
al. (2013) calculated its correlation with other measures of physical capital, which are only
available for more aggregated geographic units: gross fixed capital (available at the national
level) and industrial electricity consumption (available at the state level). Table 1 reports the
correlation coefficients between the stock of residential capital and each of other measures of
physical capital. As can be observed from table 1, residential capital is highly correlated with all
other measures of physical capital. As argued by BARROS et al. (2013), as the marginal product

3
 Brazil can be divided into political-administrative regions: 27 states and 5.570 municipalities or functional regions:
5 macro-regions, 137 meso-regions and 558 micro-regions.
4
    For example, the number of municipalities increased from 3.920 in 1970 to 5.570 in 2013
5
 The minimum comparable areas (MCAs) are municipalities that have a consistent boundary over the period 1970-
2010 (Reis et al. 2005)
of capital tends to be the same in different segments, the expectation is that regions with a larger
stock of residential physical capital are identical, in this respect, to those with a larger stock of
non-residential fixed capital.

Table 1 – Correlation between the stock of residential capital and common proxies for
physical capital
                                    Variables                  Correlation Coefficient
                Gross fixed capital – Non-residential building         0.9649
                Gross fixed capital – Machinery and equipment           0.847
                           Gross fixed capital – total                 0.9424
                Industrial electric power consumption – 1970           0.9372
                Industrial electric power consumption – 1980           0.9433
                Industrial electric power consumption – 1991            0.937
                Industrial electric power consumption – 2000           0.9445
Source: Ipeadata and BARROS et al. (2013). Note: for gross fixed capital (Non-residential building, Machinery and
equipment and total), the coefficient was calculated using national information from 1970 to 2000; for industrial
electricity consumption, the coefficient was calculated using state-level information.

        Population data are readily available and were obtained from IPEADATA. Following
MANKIW et al. (1992), ISLAM (1995) and FISCHER (2011), among others, we assume that the
sum of the rate of technological growth and the depreciation rate is equal to 0.05 for all micro-
regions considered in the analysis.
        Regarding the spatial weight matrices used to capture the spatial relationships between
neighbouring economies, we initially employed the more traditional normalised Queen matrix
(W1), where              if the regions share a common border and otherwise            . LESAGE
and PACE (2010) argue that the estimates and inferences obtained from spatial regressions are
not affected by the choice of a particular structure for the matrix. These authors demonstrate that
when the model is interpreted appropriately (considering the direct and indirect impacts), the
results relevant to estimation and inference do not vary significantly. We adopt a more flexible
approach and, as robustness checks, also consider the 4th nearest neighbours matrix (W2) and 8th
nearest neighbours matrix (W3). These matrices account for the fact that regions with greater
geographical proximity will receive a higher weight, which is consistent with the hypothesis of
KELLER (2002) that the greater the geographical proximity between two regions, the greater the
interdependence (in technology) between them.
4. Results

4.1 Descriptive Statistics and Model Estimation

        In this section, we present evidence concerning the influence of both physical and human
capital in Brazilian regional growth using an empirical spatial panel model that explicitly
accounts for the characteristics of neighbouring regions (ERTUR and KOCH, 2007). From the
Brazilian Demographic Census for the years 1970, 1980, 1991, 2000, and 2010, it is possible to
construct four time periods with respect to variations in per capita income. The time periods and
average values of the variables considered in the regressions are displayed in table 2 below.
Table 2 – Descriptive Statistics of the variables
                                  1970-1980               1980-1991                1991-2000               2000-2010
                                Mean      SD            Mean      SD             Mean      SD            Mean      SD
Income growth                   0.091       0.019       -0.015      0.014        0.065       0.016       0.070       0.021
Human capital                   0.256       0.618        0.711      0.553        1.160       0.433       1.451       0.329
Physical capital                0.542       0.700        0.804      0.725        0.825       0.712       1.281       0.635
Income                          0.050       0.029        0.127      0.070        0.108       0.061       0.195       0.106
Popul. Growth                   0.018       0.025        0.016      0.019        0.012       0.012       0.010       0.009
Source: Brazilian Demographic Census for the years 1970, 1980, 1991, 2000, and 2010. SD corresponds to the
standard deviation. Income growth refers to annualised per capita income variation and Income refers to initial level
of the log per capita income values of the micro-regions; Human capital and Physical capital correspond to the
logarithm of the initial values of the respective variable; Popul. growth refers to annualised relative variation in the
population of the micro-region.


        From the figures in table 2, we note higher growth in per capita income during the periods
1970-1980 and 2000-2010 than during the other two periods. The weaker income growth during
the periods 1980-1991 and 1991-2000 coincided with periods of very high inflation and
macroeconomic instability (BAER, 2001). We also note that the mean of both the human capital
variable (average years of schooling of the population over 25 years old) and the physical capital
proxy (stock of residential capital) exhibited positive growth between the periods. Regarding
population growth, we note that it exhibited a monotonic decrease.
        Table 3 presents the parameter estimates from equation (4), the spatial Durbin model with
fixed effects. The explanatory variables are in logarithms and, to eliminate endogeneity resulting
from simultaneity, we use the explanatory variables at their initial values (t), while the growth in
per capita income (dependent variable) is given between time (t) and (t +1). Table 3 also reports
the t-values associated with each parameter. To obtain consistent estimators for the variance
parameters of the spatial models, we apply the bias correction proposed by LEE and YU (2010).
Column 1 presents the results when estimating the empirical model without considering space or
the role of physical capital, i.e., equation (3), by imposing the restriction that
  . Column (2) presents the classical model of MANKIW et al. (1992), which disregards any
interaction between economies, such that                     . Column (3) presents a panel version
of the ERTUR and KOCH (2007) model without physical capital,                          and Column 4
reports the results of the complete version of the model (without any restrictions).
        Regarding the non-spatial models (columns (1) and (2)), we note that the variables
considered take the signs predicted by the theoretical model. Moreover, the inclusion of physical
capital as an explanatory variable improves the fit of the model (as indicated by the adjusted R²),
a result that reinforces that our measure of physical capital (residential capital) is an appropriate
proxy. Additionally, the inclusion of investment in physical capital also reduces the importance
of human capital (as indicated by the reduction of the human capital coefficient), increases the
speed of convergence of the economy and provides a better control to investigate the role of
population growth in regional growth. These results indicate that omitting physical variable
reduces not only the theoretical consistency of the empirical model but also generates substantial
bias in the estimators6.

Table 3 – Determinants of Brazilian regional growth - Panel estimate - Dependent variable
is the growth in per capita income.
                                      Non-Spatial Panel      Non-Spatial Panel       SDM Panel       SDM Panel
                                            (1)                    (2)                    (3)              (4)
                                             -                      -                  0.828**         0.808**
                                                                                       (71.55)         (65.93)
          Per capita income                -0.109**               -0.151**            -0.024**        -0.030**
                                            (-40.57)               (-48.72)            (-13.95)        (-14.14)
            Human capital                   0.096**                0.079**             0.022**         0.021**
                                            (33.22)                (29.31)             (12.77)         (12.67)
           Physical capital                     -                  0.103**                 -           0.010**
                                                                   (21.10)                               (4.54)
            Popul. Growth                   -0.110                -0.250**             -0.050*        -0.070**
                                            (-1.62)                 (-4.10)            (-2.01)          (-2.57)
          W Per capita Inc.                    -                       -               0.005*            0.004
                                                                                        (2.51)           (1.58)
          W Human capital                      -                       -               -0.004*         -0.005*
                                                                                       (-1.96)          (-2.21)
          W Physical capital                   -                       -                   -             0.002
                                                                                                         (1.03)
          W Popul. Growth                      -                       -                0.025            0.019
                                                                                        (0.56)           (0.44)
       Region fixed effects                  Yes                    Yes                  Yes              Yes
        Time fixed effects                   Yes                    Yes                  Yes              Yes
                R²                           0.51                   0.62                   -                -
           Adjusted R²                       0.36                   0.46                   -                -
             LogLik                            -                      -                735.27           744.34
      Akaike Criterion (AIC)                   -                      -                -1456.5         -1470.7
      Scharz Criterion (BIC)                   -                      -                -1447.3         -1458.8
     Number of observations                  2088                   2088                 2088             2088
Source: Author’s estimates. The variables W Per capita Inc., W Human capital, W Physical capital and W Popul.
growth correspond to lagged spatial variables for initial per capita income, human capital, physical capital and
population growth, respectively. “**” and “*” indicate statistical significance at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively.
The non-spatial models were estimated using a within estimator, and the spatial models were estimated by maximum
likelihood.

        Columns (3) and (4) report the results of the SDM with fixed effects; the estimations were
obtained using the Queen matrix, which, according with the measures of goodness of fit (log-
likelihood and the Akaike Criterion and Scharz Criterion), provides the best fit of the spatial
6
    These conclusions are also valid when we consider the spatial models (columns (3) and (4)).
matrices considered (4th and 8th nearest neighbours). As can be observed, the spatial model that
includes physical capital investment (column (4)) exhibits better fit to the data. Thus, all
subsequent analyses will be based on this model, the full version of the model proposed by
ERTUR and KOCH (2007), equation (4), using the Queen matrix.
        First, we observe that the spatial dependence parameter           is large and statistically
significant, indicating that the higher (lower) the growth rate(s) of neighbouring micro-regions,
the higher (lower) the growth rate of a particular micro-region. These findings demonstrate that
Brazilian micro-regions cannot be treated as independent economies and the location of an
economy is important in defining its growth trajectory. From an econometric perspective,
ignoring this type of spatial dependence would generate omitted variable bias and lead to
inconsistent estimators.
        As emphasised in the previous section, the presence of spatial dependence throughout the
dependent variable, which implies spatial feedback effects arising from variation in the
determinants of micro-region growth, the estimated of coefficients do not represent the marginal
effects of the explanatory variables on the dependent variables. Thus, to obtain measures of the
impacts of the variables on the growth of Brazilian micro-regions, we follow the suggestion of
LESAGE and PACE (2009) and use the estimated coefficients in table 3 for calculating the
equation (6). The estimated impacts are presented7 in Table 4.

           Table 4 – Direct and Indirect impacts of the variables on regional growth
                                                  Direct             Indirect                Total
                 Per capita income             -0.037**             -0.101**              -0.138**
                                               (-15.108)             (-7.223)              (-9.02)
                   Human capital                0.024**              0.055**              0.079**
                                                (11.858)             (3.900)               (5.144)
                  Physical capital              0.013**              0.053**              0.067**
                                                 (4.809)             (3.638)               (4.236)
                   Popul. Growth                 -0.083*              -0.187                -0.271
                                                (-2.260)             (-0.778)             (-1.001)
Source: Author’s estimates. The figures in the table are obtained using matrix W1 (Queen). The standard deviations
and z values are obtained by simulation, assuming a normal distribution; “**” and “*” indicate statistical significance
at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively.


       From Table 4, we can observe that the coefficients of all variables take the signs predicted
by the theoretical model developed by ERTUR and KOCH (2007). It is noteworthy that the
indirect impacts are statistically significant, indicating that the characteristics of neighbouring
economies (per capita income and investments in human and physical capital) are important in
explaining the process of economic growth in a particular economy. These spatial spillovers
represent further evidence of the importance of correctly interpreting the estimated regression




7
  Impacts were estimated with the W2 and W3 matrix. The results were robust to any type of matrix used, a result in
line with the study by LESAGE and PACE (2010).
coefficients8. Notably, the indirect impacts are greater in magnitude than the direct impacts,
which is feasible, as argued by LESAGE and FISCHER (2008). As the average indirect impact is
calculated as a change in the explanatory variables for all neighbours on the dependent variable
for region "i", it is entirely plausible that this would be greater than the direct impact, provided
that the spatial interaction parameter (ρ) is high. Moreover, the difference between the estimates
of the direct impact and the respective coefficients of the SDM (Table 3, column 4) is due to
feedback effects.
       Regarding the initial level of per capita income, Table 4 indicates that wealthier economies
with wealthier neighbours tend to have lower future growth rates, an indication that the
hypothesis of conditional convergence holds. Specifically, a 1% increase in an economy’s per
capita income in the initial period leads to a 0.037 percentage point reduction in its growth rate,
while a 1% increase in the initial incomes of all neighbouring regions leads to a reduction of
0.101 percentage points. While such negative spillovers may appear contradictory, they are a
natural consequence of the process of convergence: economies with high income levels tend to
have low rates of economic growth, and due to positive spatial dependence, these economies
generate negative effects on the growth of surrounding regions.
         Table 4 reports that human and physical capital generate positive spillover effects (as the
indirect impacts are positive and statistically significant). Thus, micro-regions having neighbours
with high rates of investment in physical and human capital ultimately benefit. In the light of the
theoretical model developed in section 3, higher levels of physical and human capital investment
generate a larger stock of technology (learning-by-doing) for a given economy. Due to the
technological interdependence described by ERTUR and KOCH (2007), see equation (2), these
additional technology stocks in a given region flow into neighbouring regions, causing higher
rates of economic growth for the latter regions. With respect to the magnitudes of the direct and
indirect impacts, one standard deviation increases in human and physical capital investment in an
economy generate similar variations in growth, while the latter exhibits a slightly larger impact9.
Regarding investments in neighbouring economies, physical capital is relatively more beneficial
for the surrounding economies10. A possible explanation for this is that physical capital is related
to infrastructure that, unlike human capital, is often non-excludable and non-rivalrous and hence
benefits neighbouring economies to a greater extent. Thus, these results indicate that investments
in physical capital contribute more significantly to economic growth in a given micro-region and
in neighbouring micro-regions.
         Finally, Table 4 also indicates that the direct impact of population growth is negative and
statistically significant, a result consistent with theoretical growth models. However, the indirect
8
  If we interpret the coefficients based on the estimation of the SDM (column 4 of Table 2), we could conclude that
there are negative spillovers from human capital and an absence of spillovers from physical capital, which are widely
divergent conclusions.
9
  The one-unit increase in the standard deviation of the logarithm of physical capital (0.63 in 2000) increases the
growth rate of the economy by 0.0082 percentage points, while a one-unit increase in the standard deviation of the
logarithm of human capital (0.32 in 2000) increases the growth rate by 0.0079 percentage points.
10
   A one-unit increase in the standard deviation of the logarithm of physical capital of neighbouring economies
  (0.55 in 2000) increases the growth rate of the economy by 0.029 percentage points, while a one-unit increase in the
standard deviation of the logarithm of human capital of neighbouring economies (0.27 in 2000) increases the growth
rate of the economy by 0.014 percentage points.
impact of population growth is not significant, indicating that increased rates of population
growth in neighbouring economies does not affect an economy’s rate of economic growth, i.e.,
there are no spatial spillovers.

4.2 Region fixed effects

        Using the estimated model parameters, it is possible to derive the micro-regions’ fixed
effects. These effects represent time-invariant characteristics of the localities that affect their
economic growth during the period 1970-2010. Although it is not possible here to precisely
determine what these effects capture (the factors range from geographic to persistent institutional
characteristics), this evidence can reveal the consistency of known, time-invariant favourable and
unfavourable characteristics of Brazilian localities as determinants of economic performance or
suggest unknown spatial regularities that affect the growth of the localities. To obtain each
Brazilian micro region’s fixed effect, we use the parameters estimated in the econometric model
(vector β, and the spatial coefficient ρ) and the data in following equation:




where      is the fixed effect of region i,  is the rate of growth of region i in period t,    is the
rate of growth of the neighbouring region j,       is the explanatory variable k for region i and
is its coefficient,      is the explanatory variable k for the neighbouring region j and        is its
coefficient.
        The results are depicted in figure 1 below. There are at least two pieces of evidence that
should be highlighted. First, the fixed effects estimates indicate more favourable conditions for
the micro regions located in North and, primarily, Mid-West regions of Brazil. More specifically,
confirming the visual inspection, we find that 69.0% of the micro regions located in Mid-West
and 61.0% of the micro regions located in Brazil’s North macro region exhibit fixed effects in the
two most favourable categories of the figure. However, there is also a clearly negative finding:
only approximately 27% of micro regions located in Brazil’s Northeast macro region exhibit
fixed effects in these two most favourable categories. Second, we also note that the magnitude of
these fixed effects is far from negligible. According to the estimative, the effects on economic
growth range between -3,34% and 3,66%, and the latter value is approximately equivalent to a
effect of one standard deviation increase in the human capital variable.
                         Figure 1 –Fixed effects of Brazilian micro-regions




Source: Author’s estimates. The estimates are obtained using the parameter estimates obtained from model (4) and
reported in table 3.

        Clearly, we cannot be certain regarding the explanation of these results, but we note that
they are consistent with one of most notable economic facts concerning Brazilian regional growth
between 1970 and 2010: the above-average performance of most micro-regions in the Brazilian
Mid-West (its micro region grew more rapidly than the national average). As these micro regions
exhibit greater dependence on the products of agricultural export sector that require land as a
production input, the quality of which is not explicitly considered in our estimates, than this
characteristic of Brazilian regional growth appears to be captured by micro-regional fixed effects.
Furthermore, in relation to northeast macro-region, these effects could also reflect the worst
geographic conditions associated with the semi-arid climate of most micro-regions there.

5. Conclusions

        The high and persistent levels of regional income inequality in Brazil have motivated
various types of policies to attenuate this regional disequilibrium. Traditionally, these policies
have been based on improving the physical capital stock of poorer regions by directing public
investment to such regions and granting manufacturing capital subsides. More recently, federal
policies rely on different types of spatially blind policies such as social programmes in the form
of cash transfers and, primarily, expanded schooling. Although these two types of policies have
focused on different targets, both are intended to increase the per capita income of Brazil’s
poorest regions. This work is the first to provide evidence of the effects of both physical and
human capital on Brazilian regional per capita income growth during the period 1970-2010 using
a panel data approach that explicitly allows for the possibility of spatial spillovers arising from
the levels of physical capital and human capital.
        In addition to controlling for the influence of (unobserved) regional fixed effects on
regional economic growth, the empirical approach adopted allows us to assess the influence of
variables associated with neighbouring regions on the per capita income growth of a given region
and provides precise measures of the influence of human capital and physical capital on
economic growth that account for the potential spatial interdependence among Brazilian micro-
regions. Furthermore, these measures allow us to identify spatial spillovers arising from specific
regional variables. The results indicate that both physical and human capital are important in
explaining micro-regional economic growth during the period 1970-2010 and, at least for the
variables we used to capture the influence of these factors, the magnitudes of the effects of these
two factors are similar. However, the evidence also shows very strong spatial dependence among
the economic growth of Brazilian micro-regions, and hence, the effects of human and physical
capital derive not only from a unit’s own levels of investment in these two types of capital but
also, and importantly, the influence of neighbouring micro-regions’ investments. In other words,
there were significant spatial spillovers associated with investments in both physical and human
capital that substantially and positively affect the economic growth of Brazilian micro-regions.
Thus, in Brazilian regional growth, the micro-regions tend to benefit from their neighbours’
greater investments in human and physical capital and not only from their own investment.
        The approach employed was able to provide a measure of the impacts of these types of
capital that not only considered the micro-regions’ own investments but also the effects of the
investments of neighbouring micro-regions. We also note that the estimated micro-regional fixed
effects are quantitatively important in explaining the economic growth of Brazilian micro-
regions, meaning that time-invariant characteristics are also important in understanding the
economic performance of these micro-regions. Furthermore, the identified values of these fixed
effects are consistent with the omitted fixed factors represented by the quality of land and
expanded agricultural production of the micro-regions located in the Brazilian Mid-West, on the
one hand, and by the less favourable geographic conditions of most Brazilian micro-regions
located in the Northeast, on the other.
References

ANSELIN, L. (1988) Spatial Econometrics: Methods and Models. Kluwer Academic Publisher,
Dordrecht.
ARBIA, G., PIRAS, G. (2005) Convergence in per-capita GDP across eu-nut2 regions using
panel data models extended to spatial autocorrelation effects. Working Paper REAL, 05-T-3,
Urbana Champaign.
AZZONI, C. (2001) Economic growth and regional economic inequality in Brazil. The Annals of
Regional Science 35, 133–152.
AZZONI, C., MENEZES, N., MENEZES, T., SILVEIRA NETO, R. (2000) Geography and
income convergence among Brazilian states. Inter-American Development Bank, Research
Network Working Papers, R–395.
BALTAGI, B. (2005) Econometric Analysis of Panel Data. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
BAER, W. (2001) The Brazilian Economy, 5th Edition, Praeger.
BARROS, G., NAKABASHI, L., SAMPAIO, A. (2013) Determinantes do Capital Físico: o
papel do Capital Humano e da Qualidade Institucional. In: Encontro Nacional de Economia –
ANPEC, Foz do Iguaçu.
CANO, W. (1985) A Questão Regional no Brasil. Pensamiento Iberoamericano 7.
CARVALHO, A., LALL, S., TIMMINS, C. (2005) Regional Subsidies and Industrial Prospects
of Lagging Regions, Working Paper No. 3843. World Bank Policy Research.
CRAVO, T. (2010) SMEs and economic growth in the Brazilian micro-regions. Papers in
Regional Science 89, 711–734.
CRAVO, T., BECKER, B., GOURLAY, A. (2014) Regional Growth and SMEs in Brazil: A
Spatial Panel Approach. Regional Studies 48. 1–22.
DE VREYER, P., SPIELVOGEL, G. (2009) Spatial externalities between Brazilian municipios
and their neighbours. In: Klasens, Nowak-Lehmann F (eds) Poverty, inequality, and policy in
Latin America. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
DUARTE, J., FERREIRA, P., SALVATO, M. (2003). Regional or Education Disparities? A
Counterfactual Exercise. Ensaios Econômicos 532. 1-29.
DURANTON, G., MONASTIRIOTIS, V. (2002). “Mind the Gaps: The Evolution of Regional
Inequalities in the U.K. 1982–1997,” Journal of Regional Science 42, 219–256.
ELHORST, P. (2003) Specification and Estimation of Spatial Panel Data Models. International
Regional Sciences Review 26, 244-268.
ELHORST, P. PIRAS G., ARBIA G. (2010) Growth and convergence in a multi-regional model
with space-time dynamics. Geographical Analysis 42, 338–355.
ERTUR, C., KOCH, W. (2007) Growth, Technological interdependence and spatial externalities:
theory and evidence. Journal of Applied Econometrics 22, 1033–1062.
FERREIRA, A. (2000) Convergence in Brazil: Recent trends and long-run prospects. Applied
Economics 32, 479-489.
FERREIRA, P. (2004). Regional Policy in Brazil: A Review. World Bank commissioned paper.
Available at www.fgv.br/professor/ferreira/RegionalPolicyFerreira.pdf. Last accessed: march 24,
2014.
FINGLETON, B., LÓPEZ-BAZO, E. (2006) Empirical growth models with spatial effects.
Papers in Regional Science 85, 177-198.
FISCHER, M. (2011) A spatial Mankiw–Romer–Weil model: theory and evidence. Annals of
Regional Science 47, 419-436.
HURST, C., THISSE, J., VANHOUDT, P. (2000). What Diagnosis for Europe’s Ailing Regions?
EIB Papers 5, 9–30.
IPEADATA. Dados Regionais (Available at : http://www. ipeadata.gov.br).
ISLAM, N. (1995). Growth empirics: A Panel data approach. Quarterly Journal of Economics
110, 1127-1170.
KELLER, W. (2002) Geographic localization of international technology diffusion. American
Economic Review 92,120–142.
LEE, L., YU, J. (2010) Some recent developments in spatial panel data models. Regional Science
and Urban Economics 40. 255–271.
LESAGE, J., FISCHER, M. (2008) Spatial growth regressions: Model specification, estimation
and interpretation. Spatial Economic Analysis 3. 275-304.
LESAGE, J., PACE, R. (2009) Introduction to spatial econometrics. Taylor and Francis, Boca
Raton, FL.
LESAGE, J. P., PACE, R. (2010) The Biggest Myth in Spatial Econometrics. Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1725503.
LÓPEZ-BAZO, E., ARTÍS, M., VAYÁ, E. (2004) Regional externalities and growth: evidence
from European regions. Journal of Regional Science 44, 43–73.
LUCAS, R. (1988) On the mechanics of economic development. Journal of Monetary Economics
22, 3-42.
MAGALHÃES, A., HEWINGS, G., AZZONI, C. (2005). Spatial dependence and regional
convergence in Brazil. Investigaciones Regionales 6, 5–20.
MAGNAGO, A. (1995) A divisão regional brasileira – uma revisão bibliográfica. Revista
Brasileira de Geografia 4, 65-92.
MANKIW, G., ROMER, D., WEIL, N. (1992) A Contribution to the empirics of economic
growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 407-37.
MANOEL, A., RESENDE, SILVEIRA-NETO, R. (2009) Eficácia do Gasto Público: Uma
Avaliação do FNE, FNO e FCO. Estudos Econômicos 39, 89–125.
MENEZES, T., SILVEIRA-NETO, R., AZZONI, C. (2012) Demography and evolution of
regional inequality. The Annals of Regional Science 49,643-655.
MARTIN, P. (1999). Are European Regional Policies Delivering? EIB Papers 4, 10–23.
MILLO, G., PIRAS, G. (2012) splm: Spatial Panel Data Models in R. Journal of Statistical
Software 47, 1–38.
NAKABASHI, L., SALVATO, MA. (2007) Human capital quality in the Brazilian states. Revista
Economia 8, 211–222.
OVERMAN, H., PUGA. (2002) Unemployment Clusters Across Europe’s Regions and
Countries, Economic Policy 17, 115–147.
ÖZYURT, S., DAUMAL, M. (2013) Trade openness and regional income spillovers in Brazil: A
spatial econometric approach. Papers in Regional Science 92, 198-215.
PUGA, D. (2002) European Regional Policy in Light of Recent Location Theories, Journal of
Economic Geography 2, 373–406.
REIS J., TAFNER P., PIMENTEL M., MEDINA M., MAGALHAES K., REIFF O., SERRA R.
(2005) O PIB dos municípios brasileiros: metodologia e estimativas, 1970-96. IPEA Discussion
Paper, n. 1064, Brasília.
REY, S., MONTOURI, B. (1999) U.S. regional income convergence: A spatial econometric
perspective. Regional Studies 33, 143-156.
RESENDE, G. (2011) Multiple dimensions of regional economic growth: The Brazilian case,
1991-2000. Papers in Regional Science 90, 629-662.
RESENDE, G., CARVALHO, A., SAKOWSKI, P. (2012) Evaluating Multiple Spatial
Dimensions of Economic Growth in Brazil using Spatial Panel Data Models, 1970-2000. In:
Encontro Nacional de Economia, Porto de Galinhas.
ROCHA, S. (2003) Pobreza no Nordeste: a década de 1990 vista de perto, Revista Econômica do
Nordeste, 34 , 7-41.
ROMER, P. (1986) Increasing returns and long run growth. Journal of Political Economy 94.
1002–1037.
SILVEIRA NETO, R. (2005) Quão Pró-Pobre tem sido o Crescimento Econômico no Nordeste?
Evidências para o Período 1991-2000. Revista Econômica do Nordeste 36, 483-507.
SILVEIRA NETO, R., AZZONI, C. (2006) Location and regional income disparity dynamics:
the Brazilian case. Papers in Regional Science 85, 600-613.
SILVEIRA NETO, R., MENEZES, T. (2008) Preferência Revelada e Arbitragem Espacial:
Determinando um Ranking de Qualidade de Vida para as Regiões Metropolitanas Brasileiras.
Revista Brasileira de Economia 62, 361-380.
SOLOW, R. (1956) A contribution to the theory of economic growth. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 70, 65-94.
SHANKAR, R., SHAH, A. (2003) Bridging the economic divide within nations: a scorecard on
the performance of regional development policies in reducing regional income disparities, World
Development 31, 1421–1441.
