 Short-term allocation of gas networks and
      gas-electricity input foreclosure

                    Miguel Vazqueza,∗, Michelle Hallackb
        a
            Economics Institute (IE), Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ)
               b
                 Economics Department, Fluminense Federal University (UFF)



Strategic interaction between gas and electricity sectors is a major issue in the
implementation of competitive energy markets. One relevant aspect of the problem
is the potential for input foreclosure between gas and power industries. In this
paper, we are concerned with situations where input foreclosure opportunities are
associated with the choice of market design. In particular, we study input foreclosure
in the case that the short-term capacity allocation mechanism of gas networks raises
barriers to cross-border trade. In that situation, one may find gas markets that are
isolated only in the short term. We explain players’ ability to influence the electricity
price using their gas decisions in those isolated markets. Therefore, input foreclosure
opportunities are additional costs to be taken into account when weighing benefits
and drawbacks of different gas market designs.
Keywords: Market design; Input foreclosure; Gas-power interaction; Network eco-
nomics.




                                  1.   Introduction

The interaction between electricity and gas industries encompasses a variety
of effects and it is difficult to find a unified framework to analyze the problem.
One of the relevant aspects is the strategic interaction between them. In
particular, as the gas industry may be viewed as an intermediate product
in the supply chain of electricity, gas-electricity convergence may be viewed
as a playing field for the theory of vertical integration.
As shown by Joskow (2005), there is not one unified theory of vertical inte-
gration —as an instance of the difficulty to define a unified academic posi-
tion on the issue with application to gas-power interaction, see Barquı́n et al.
(2006) and Padilla et al. (2006). Vertical integration encompasses different
   ∗
       Corresponding author: Miguel.Vazquez.Martinez@gmail.com.


                                             1
aspects of the same problem, including a number of efficiency increasing ef-
fects. In fact, a large stream of the literature is devoted to show that vertical
integration has in many cases beneficial effects, see for instance Williamson
(1975). From this standpoint, as gas and electricity assets are typically spe-
cific, contracts are incomplete and uncertainty is relevant, one will likely
find cases where vertical integration between gas and electricity companies
responds to industry needs. Nonetheless, vertical integration may also allow
the existence of opportunities to raise prices anti-competitively. In partic-
ular, vertical integration may be used to harm competition in the case of
input foreclosure, Ordover et al. (1990) or Hart and Tirole (1990). It de-
scribes a situation where the vertical firm can increase his rivals’ costs by
manipulating the prices in the upstream market and therefore can benefit
from higher prices in the downstream market. When applied to gas-elec-
tricity integration, this would in theory allow a vertically-integrated firm to
exercise increased market power in electricity if it controls somehow the gas
market. A first effect is shown by Hunger (2003), who analyzed the problem
in the context of gas-power mergers in the US. In the study, gas producers
may raise rivals’ costs in the power market by raising long-term gas prices.
In practice, when trade can happen both at the long-term markets and at
the short-term markets, the rules of exchange may have an important im-
pact on market results. In particular, we show that analyzing only long-term
transactions does not give a complete description of the problem1 . Short-
term network allocation may be an additional source of opportunities for
strategic behavior. The idea behind this is that the design of gas markets
implies the definition of a mechanism to allocate network capacity, and such
mechanism needs to deal with the trade-off efficiency/liquidity, Hallack and
Vazquez (2013). This trade-off comes from the fact that market arrange-
ments in gas industries have to deal with the strong specificity of gas net-
works, which in turn is the source of significant transaction costs, Williamson
(1975), Williamson (1983) and Williamson (1985). In that view, market de-
signs have faced the trade-off between maintaining gas network specificity
(and hence obtaining efficient network allocation) and reducing specificity
by defining simplified common standards for products (at the cost reducing
efficiency). These simplified standards would be less specific and hence eas-
ier to trade in markets —see Riordan and Williamson (1985) for a general
treatment of this problem. From this standpoint, we identify additional costs
of reducing transaction costs. These additional costs are associated with in-
creased opportunities for input foreclosure in the short run. We show in this
   1
    A first effect of this is studied in Vazquez and Barquı́n (2007), which describes a
situation where large players may benefit from avoiding to sell or buy at the short term,
thus draining liquidity from the spot market. Under this strategy, any small deviation
or imbalance can be managed internally by the large players. But these imbalances are
highly penalized for the smaller ones, as they cannot find counter-part for trading in the
short-term market.


                                            2
paper that, even if long-term gas markets are relatively competitive, mar-
ket designers should be concerned with market power opportunities in the
short run. Put it differently, even if the market for producers and suppliers
(a long-term market) is competitive enough, inefficient network allocation
may result in isolated short-term markets where gas suppliers may be highly
concentrated, and hence in strong cases for input foreclosure.
Nevertheless, assessing generally the potential for those isolated markets to
appear is significantly complex in gas markets, as there is no unified design
for network allocation mechanisms. The US market is based on long-term
pipeline contracting, complemented with considerably liquid secondary ca-
pacity trading. In the Victoria gas market, that secondary trading was im-
plemented through implicit auctions based on gas prices. The EU relies as
well on secondary network capacity trading. In that view, the rules governing
such secondary trading are central in the analysis of potential opportunities
to foreclose the market. Both the US and the Australia mechanisms are
based on highly efficient mechanisms to allocate capacity. In the EU, ca-
pacity allocation mechanisms prefer to reduce efficiency in order to increase
liquidity. This in turn creates barriers to cross-border trading in the short
run, so national short-term markets may be isolated from the rest of Euro-
pean markets, and thus the potential for input foreclosure may be relevant.
In that view, the opportunities to foreclose the market are motivated by
the capacity allocation mechanism, and hence will be softened if it were
substituted for a more efficient mechanism.
We will adopt a model-based approach to explain the impact of the ver-
tical effects. Our model will be aimed at explaining the effects of vertical
integration when there are opportunities to foreclose the short-term market.
With that formalization, we will then discuss whether regulation facilitates
the existence of such effects. This in turn allows us to identify additional
costs of European network regulation. If one sees vertical integration as a
compromise between efficiency-increasing effects and increased opportunities
to behave strategically, network regulations that allocate network capacity
more efficiently would reduce the costs of strategic interaction.
We begin in section 2 by describing the interaction between gas and elec-
tricity markets that we consider in this paper. In section 2.1, we develop a
model to study the vertical effects between the downstream gas market and
the power market. Section 4 analyzes the model and obtains general factors
to characterize input foreclosure situations. Section 5 provides policy im-
plications of the previous results. Finally, section 6 collects our conclusion.
Formalization details are developed in the Appendix.




                                      3
2.   The interaction between gas and electricity markets

In the setting we will be considering in this paper, there is a long-term
gas international market —with time frames of about 10 or 20— where all
players in a certain market can attend to buy their gas supplies. There is
also a short-term gas market —with horizons from several hours to several
months— where market participants buy and sell gas to manage deviations
from their expected plans. Both markets require purchasing the associated
transmission rights. Such market for transmission rights is critical to analyze
the opportunities for input foreclosure.
Actually, one needs to differentiate between long-term markets for transmis-
sion and secondary trading of transmission rights. The logic for this is that
the liquidity of each market might be quite different, and lack of liquidity
in markets for transmission rights may create barriers to trade the gas com-
modity. If there are barriers to trade transmission rights, it is sensible to
expect the existence of regional markets. In those regional markets, the gas
market structure would tend to be horizontally concentrated and thus the
opportunities for input foreclosure would increase.
The strategy we pursue in this paper is to characterize first a game where
those barriers to trade transmission in the short run exist. With the game
characterization, we will be able to study formally the opportunities for in-
put-foreclosure strategies. Furthermore, we will identify the key parameters
that determine the potential for input foreclosure. By the analysis of that
game, thus, we will study whether or not one finds those barriers to trade,
which will be the aim of section 4.
We consider thus the market as made up of three consecutive stages. First, all
agents go to the long-term gas market to purchase their basic gas contracts.
We assume that they are all small compared with the size of the market,
so they act as pure price-takers, even if there are other players in that
market that are acting strategically —relaxing this assumption adds the
effects studied in Hunger (2003). Therefore, from the strategic interaction
point of view, this stage will be irrelevant for us; we will just reflect it through
an long-term gas price that we will take as constant for the following stages.
Second, the short-term gas market takes place. All gas end-consumers buy
their energy in this market, and there is a price-elasticity associated with
them. Typically, the price in this market results to be higher than the long-
term price. Besides, gas-fired power plants buy their opportunity gas in
this market. We will assume that this opportunity gas is sold at the same
price that resulted from the national gas market. The price will never be
lower than that, since otherwise arbitrageurs could sell all their long-term-
contracted gas in the end-user gas market and buy extra gas afterwards


                                         4
with a profit. This would tend to level both prices and will surely erode
the ability of the oligopolists to withhold gas quantity. Therefore the extra
gas will be sold at least at the short-term gas price. It could be more ex-
pensive than that, since the constraint on the opportunity gas purchases to
be positive limits the possibility of arbitrage here. In practice, it is likely
that it will be approximately the retail gas price plus some mark-up, de-
pending on the willingness to pay of the buyers and other characteristics of
this market. Although we have not modeled explicitly this effect, including
it would result in additional opportunities to behave strategically. Suppliers
in this short-term market have to decide how much they would sell at this
stage, considering that they may want to reserve some gas for electricity
production at the following stage. The needs of gas contracted in advance
for electricity production are uncertain. In addition, we assume that sup-
pliers in the short-term market are concentrated enough to manipulate the
price. This assumption is made in order to formalize the idea that regional
markets may exist only in the short run. We will model this by assuming
that suppliers play Cournot strategies in this market.
Third, the electricity market takes place. Each gas-fired generator may use
the remaining part of his contracted gas with no additional cost. However,
since gas purchases are made many years in advance from the actual elec-
tricity market, uncertainty is high and additional amounts of gas may be
required. The short-term gas market is not liquid enough, so electricity pro-
ducers have to buy this extra gas to the few firms that do trade in the short
run.


                   2.1.   Formalization of the game

Most of the models concerned with strategic behavior in gas markets focus
on the relationship between the upstream and downstream of gas markets,
assuming that some of their players are oligopolists. To our knowledge, the
first work modeling market power in gas markets is Mathisien et al. (1987).
In Mulder and Zwart (2005) the gas market is represented by means of a
small number of strategic gas producers, and price-taking gas traders in
the downstream market. Boots et al. (2004) model the gas market as a
sequence of oligopolistic markets in gas production (upstream) and trading
(downstream). Holtz et al. (2008) model the same structure of the market,
but relax some assumptions of Boots et al. (2004), such as the approach of
modeling the domestic production as an exogenous variable.
The aim of our study, on the other hand, is to analyze the interaction be-
tween the gas and the electricity market in the short run. In that view, a
relevant part of that interaction takes place between the downstream gas
market and the electricity market. So in our model, we represent a sequence


                                      5
of an oligopolistic gas market (the short-term market) and an oligopolistic
power market. We thus implicitly assume a competitive upstream gas mar-
ket. In doing so, our modeling strategy will be close to Barquı́n (2006) and
Crampes and Hernandez-Alva (2007).
Summing up, we will describe the interaction between electricity and gas
markets as a two-stage game, where the electricity market players decide
their output in the electricity market once the gas market has cleared. We
model the two markets as non-cooperative games in quantities.
To set up the game, we first define the profit-maximization problem of each
firm. The problem we will describe in this section builds on a market made
up of N firms with positions both in the gas and in the electricity markets.
The time-uncertainty setting is defined by two periods (date 0 and date 1),
and S states of nature at date 1. It represents a situation where the gas
market takes place at date 0 subject to an uncertain power market at date
1. The possible states at date 1 will be denoted by s = 1, , S.
In addition, player i ∈ N has a preference ordering on the revenues set
Ri = R0i , , RSi , and we will assume that the ordering can be expressed by a
utility function:
                                  U i : <S+1 → <
This utility function, thus, defines the producers’ preferences for each state
of nature, and it is assumed transitive, convex and complete.
Gas market decisions are defined by the maximization of the income in the
short-term market, π g V i , where π g is the price of the gas market and V i
is the firm i’s sales in the gas market. In addition, all firms must purchase
their gas sales from a certain gas producer. This step is not represented in
the model, and we assume all the trades have been made before short-term
decisions take place. It is summarized by the variable Ai , which represents
the gas purchases of firm i ∈ N . Hence, firm i buys the amount Ai in advance
both for selling in the gas market and for producing electricity. The price of
the gas supplies bought in advance through long-term contracts is denoted
by pg .
In the power market stage, πsp is the price of the electricity market at state
s and cis is the firm i’s variable cost of her non-gas-fired power plants. qsN,i is
the firm i’s output of her non-gas-fired power plants. qsG,i is the firm i’s gas
purchases in the gas markets to produce with of her gas-fired power plants.
qsC,i is the firm i’s part of her gas purchases dedicated to production with of
her gas-fired power plants.
The revenue stream in the power market at state s is thus defined by

              Rsi = (πsp − cis )qsN,i + (πsp − π g )qsG,i + (πsp − pg )qsC,i


                                            6
and the share of the total purchases that will be used in each market is
decided on in the optimization of the firm’s profits fulfilling

                                         V i ≤ Ai − qsC,i

The profit-maximization problem of market players can be represented by
the following program:
             g
    max      (π − pg )V i + U (Rsi )
R,V,q N ,q G ,q C

        s.t. Rsi = (πsp − cis )qsN,i + (πsp − π g )qsG,i + (πsp − pg )qsC,i   : µis
                             N,i
                    qsN,i ≤ qmax                                              : µN,i
                                                                                 s       (1)
                    V i ≤ Ai − qsC,i                                          : µgas,i
                                                                                 s
                    0 ≤ qsG,i                                                 : µmin,i
                                                                                 s

In addition, we consider the inverse demand curves both the short-term gas
market and the power market:

                    πsp = π0p − αsp
                                    X
                                      (qsN,i + qsG,i + qsC,i )         (2)
                                              i

for the power market and

                                       π g = π0g − αg
                                                        X
                                                            Vi                           (3)
                                                        i

for the gas market.


     3.      Incentives for cross-industry input foreclosure

Gas-fired generators often purchase much of their gas supplies in the long-
term gas market. We assume that this market is liquid enough, so no firm
in the demand side has the ability to manipulate it. In that view, none of
the companies operating in the short-term gas market, selling gas to the
end customers, would have any influence on the price that the electricity
producers pay for their long-term gas, and both segments of the demand
(end users and power producers) would become in practice two completely
separated markets. Considering the market for long-term supplies alone,
vertical integration provides no additional opportunity to exercise market
power, since the electricity price is independent from the price in the short-
gas market that gas oligopolists control.
In that situation, we find that:



                                                  7
Result 1 (No cross-industry input foreclosure). Given that player’s behavior
is described by problem (1), if no firm is producing with opportunity gas,
there are no opportunities of input foreclosure.
The equilibrium gas price is given by the Cournot pricing condition for the
short-term gas market:

                               π g = pg + α g V i                          (4)

This result is derived in the Appendix.
However, gas-fired power plants usually need to buy some extra gas in the
short-term gas market in order to compensate for deviations from their ex-
pected plans. And this opportunity gas (short-term gas) needs to be bought
in the market that oligopolists control. This is a potential case for input
foreclosure. In that view, the simplest situation of input foreclosure would
describe a gas monopolist that also owns a power company. A raise in the
price of gas automatically implies a raise in the cost of fuel for the combined
cycle generators and, depending on the load curve, a raise in the electricity
price of some hours. The monopolist benefits from three factors: a higher
price for the gas it sells directly to customers —in balance with a loss of
income derived from a reduction in consumption; a higher price for the gas
it sells for power generation —in balance with a reduction in the production
of the gas-fired units as they become more expensive; and a higher price
for the rest of the electricity it is producing. The first two terms are the
same ones that any equivalent monopolist faces when competing against
demand elasticity, but the third one is a direct consequence of vertical in-
tegration, and it is providing extra benefits when the gas price is raised.
This means that there is an additional incentive for the firm to raise gas
prices. In other words, the quantity that is affected by an increase in gas
prices is not just the amount of gas sales —as it happens in the problem
of the gas monopolist. It is related to his electricity sales, especially those
coming from non-gas-fired generators. This represents a worsening effect on
the market abuse conditions that arises when the gas monopolist integrates
with an electricity firm.
However, short-term gas markets do not correspond to the relatively simple
setting above. In our setting, the previous example is a particular case of it,
so it reflects the factors that explain the interdependence between the gas
price and the electricity price. In particular, we can derive from the model
the following result:
Result 2 (Cross-industry input foreclosure). Given that player’s behavior is
described by problem (1), if K firms including firm i are buying opportunity
gas in the short-term market, firm i has two additional incentives: a) the loss
of profits associated with the higher gas price for her own gas-fired power

                                       8
plants and b) the increase of profits associated with the increase in infra-
marginal rents.
The equilibrium contains the following pricing condition for the short-term
gas market:

             π g − pg =αg (V i − E i,∗ [q G,i ])+
                                                          
                        g i,∗        K          N,i G,i C,i
                       α E                  (q + q + q ) −                   (5)
                                   N +1
                       X
                            µgas,i
                             s
                         s


This result is also derived in the Appendix.
As shown in the Appendix, E i,∗ represents the risk-neutral expectation of
player i for the power market. In addition, the Lagrange multiplier µgas,i s
represents the trade-off between increasing marginally V i (supplying one
megawatt more to the short-term gas market) and using the contracted gas
to produce electricity. Hence, when firms are deciding on short-term sales in
the gas market, they take account of the opportunity costs of selling in the
future power market. That opportunity cost is given by (see the Appendix
for the details of the derivation):
               X
                   µgas,i
                    s     = E i,∗ [π p − αp (q N,i + q G,i + q C,i )] − pg
               s

which is the risk neutral expectation of marginal profits in the power market
associated with using contracted gas to produceP electricity. Note that if there
                                                   gas,i
is spare long-term gas in all states of nature, s µs     = 0 and the expression
reduces to the (risk-affected) Cournot pricing equation of the power market,
using the long-term gas price as the cost for firing the power plant.
By analogy with the first result, we observe two additional terms, which
represents the effects of vertical integration. In particular:
   • The term αg E i,∗ [q G,i ] describes player i’s valuation of the possibility
     of using opportunity gas in the future power market. And this player’s
     valuation is the risk-neutral expectation of future consumption of op-
     portunity gas.
                        h                          i
   • The term αg E i,∗ NK+1 (q N,i + q G,i + q C,i ) describes how changes in
     the oligopolistic behavior in the electricity market affect the agent’s
     profit. It represents the increase in profits due to the increase in power
     prices associated with raising rivals’ fuel costs. As shown in the Ap-
     pendix, NK+1 s
                    αg describes the increase in power prices in state s when
     gas sales decreases marginally, i.e. the ability of firm i to raise the


                                       9
        power price through decisions in the gas market. Firm i’s electricity
        production q N,i + q G,i + q C,i represents the incentives of the power
        price.
This last term is the increased market power due to the fact that raising the
price of the gas market affects the electricity market. The value of this latter
term depends on the value of K, i.e. the number of firms producing with
opportunity gas, which is uncertain when deciding in the gas market. If all
the generating firms are using this gas K and input foreclosure is maximized.
The more opportunity gas consumers, the more additional market power for
the firm i.
Consequently, the oligopolistic effects described by (Result 2) is threefold.
On the one hand it represents the usual horizontal effect of the market
power, that is, withholding gas output forces the gas price to raise. On the
other hand, it shows one of the effects of vertical integration: when the firm
raise the gas price, the marginal cost of its electricity production is risen
as well. This would tend to lower gas prices. And finally, the ability of gas
suppliers to affect the behavior of other players in the electricity market and
to benefit from it.


   4.     Network allocation mechanisms and transmission
                       services flexibility

The key parameter to define input-foreclosure effects is the amount of firms
buying opportunity gas in the short-term market, defined by K. These power
producers have to choose between limiting themselves severely to the gas
the have bought in the long term, or buying to some of the firms controlling
the short-term gas market (and thus creating the incentives for input fore-
closure). Hence, the additional potential for input foreclosure that we had
identified is based on the idea that a part of the gas for these combined cycles
has to be bought in a small market controlled by incumbents. This creates
a local oligopoly for these sales that results in the conflictive incentives.
We will next analyze the different schemes to implement mechanisms to allo-
cate network resources, in order to identify the determinants of the creation
of such local oligopolies. In that view, gas market liberalization has been im-
plemented in significantly different ways, and most of those differences can
be traced to the different mechanisms designed to allocate network services.
Gas networks operation is characterized by tight technical constraints, and
hence the contracting architecture required to implement the commodity de-
livery at different points of the network must be complex. This is the source
of significant transaction costs. In particular, dealing with spatial specificity
has motivated a wide range of design solutions, Vazquez et al. (2012).


                                       10
In that view, it is possible to reduce the specificity of each feasible trade by
simplifying its spatial characteristics. By doing so, the difficulties to trade
are reduced and the number of market players trading the same product in-
creases. That simplification strategy, on the other hand, implies that several
network services will be allocated equally among all network users regard-
less their preferences. This in turn creates inefficiencies that may result in
barriers to cross-border trade.


          4.1.    Spatial flexibility and capacity allocation

The less simplified mechanism to allocate network resources is a point-to-
point gas transmission arrangement. In it, a large part of the spatial char-
acteristics of the trade is defined in the agreement. Hence, point-to-point
transmission is relatively difficult to trade. This is the typical scheme fol-
lowed in the US and Australian gas markets. Both systems are supposed to
allocate most of the spatial characteristics of the network using market-based
mechanisms, although both systems differ in several fundamental features.
The US system is based on long-term bilateral agreements between pipeline
operators and network users, complemented with liquid short-term trading
of capacity, Makholm (2012). The Australian system, on the other hand,
uses an implicit mechanism to allocate capacity in the short run. The mech-
anisms can be viewed as a combinatorial auction where network capacity is
allocated implicitly according to gas prices, Ruff (2012). Under sufficiently
liquid secondary trading, both schemes are equivalent in terms of short-term
efficiency2 .
The EU design may be viewed as a third way that aims to combine the char-
acteristics of the two schemes. It is characterized by a combination of explicit
and implicit allocation of gas transmission services, Vazquez et al. (2012).
Such combination is built on the explicit allocation of only some of transmis-
sion services. The allocation mechanism is called entry/exit allocation. The
idea behind it is to simplify the network topology to a simpler set of entry
and exit points (a commercial network that represent partially the physical
network). All explicit allocation is reduced to buying separately entry and
exit rights. After that, shippers do not need to buy additional transmission
rights (such as flexibility rights) but they are allocated implicitly according
to a set of rules defined by the regulator. Such allocation mechanism is called
virtual hub. With it, one avoids the explicit allocation and renegotiation of
complex spatial characteristics of the network, but it comes at the cost of
severe difficulties in the calculation of the capacity to be sold.
   2
     See Hallack and Vazquez (2012) for discussion on additional effects of those two dif-
ferent schemes.




                                           11
 4.2.   Identifying barriers to cross-border trade in European
                                systems

Entry/exit schemes market players only reveal preferences on the right to
enter and exit the gas systems. Within the system, all injections and with-
drawals are considered to have the same price. From the point of view of
this paper, the main characteristic is that it gives network users free spatial
flexibility within the system, which in turn creates barriers to cross-border
trade.


                         4.2.1.      Capacity allocation

Entry-exit regimes may be thought of as a system where transmission con-
straints are moved to the borders. That is, entry-exit capacity allocation
calculates the network capacity that allows shippers to trade within the
zone without transmission constraints. In practice, the transmission capac-
ity offered to market participants has to be lower than the physical limits
of the transmission system. This under-use of transmission capacity is part
of the design, which bears that cost in order to promote zonal market liq-
uidity (by giving spatial flexibility). But the entry/exit system also implies
an increase of the transmission constraints in the cross-border. The capacity
made commercially available at the borders has to be lower than the phys-
ical capacity of interconnection. Hence, the within-zone network flexibility
entails a barrier for cross-border trade.
Consider for instance an injection at a certain entry point A. Giving the right
to the shipper of trading everywhere within the zone containing A implies
that the capacity sold at A is lower than the physical capacity. Consider the
same situation in a different zone with an entry point B. If a trader were
willing to enter through point A, but to sell in the zone of point B, the
trader would be facing a reduction of capacity twice. That is, the problem
of underused capacity is faced twice with cross-border trade between two
entry/exit zones: a first one when injecting at A and a second one when
injecting at B. This represents a barrier to cross-border trade.


                            4.2.2.     Network tariffs

In entry/exit systems, the costs of the network cannot be allocated accord-
ing to the actual use of the network, because the prices for entry and exit
points on the commercial network do not represent the costs generated by
the physical gas flows that they generate. Consequently, one always finds
cross-subsidies among shippers, which are caused by the spatial flexibility
given inside the trading zone. In that view, tariffs are not cost-reflective, but

                                         12
that may be a bearable cost when compared to the increase of within-zone
liquidity.
However entry/exit systems create tariff distortions that are especially rele-
vant when crossing zones. This often results in higher costs for a cross-zone
trade. Actually, network users are charged several entry and exit charges
in multiple zones, which may result in ’pancaking’, meaning that multiple
tariffs are added on a single transaction. Put it differently, spatial flexibil-
ity is given to shippers at the entry to all zones. And the network tariffs
paid at each entry cannot be cost-reflective, often resulting in cross-subsi-
dies. Therefore, a shipper crossing two zones would face the difficulty twice.
Thus, those non-cost-reflective tariffs increase the costs of cross-zone trade
as compared to the costs of gas trade within the zone. The effects of tar-
iff distortion increase when crossing zones, creating additional barriers to
trade.


 5.   Implications: Effects of different carriage systems

Summing up, we have identified additional potential for short-term input
foreclosure with local oligopolies that exist only in the short run. Besides,
we have showed that markets designs providing spatial flexibility to shippers
facilitate the existence of those local oligopolies. In that view, the US and
Australia markets rely on point-to-point transmission allocation. This in
turn implies that the spatial flexibility provided by the network rules is
minimal. So if the network is meshed enough, it is difficult to find situations
where a certain consumption point is subject to input foreclosure. But if that
consumption point is connected to the network through, for instance, a single
pipeline, it is possible to find situations where a large gas supplier purchase
gas in the hub and exercise market power at the isolated consumption point.
On the other hand, in the EU gas systems, market designs do provide ample
spatial flexibility. Moreover, the zone where free spatial flexibility is given
is limited to national borders. That is, within a certain national system,
market participants can trade gas without network constraints. This in turn
implies that network constraints are moved to national borders, creating bar-
riers to cross-border trade. Those barriers to cross-border trade represents
additional potential for the existence of isolated national systems.
In that view, assume that we could implement a more efficient (in the sense
of giving less free spatial flexibility) management of the gas network, so in-
ternational traders (players outside the initially isolated national market)
could make opportunity deals with the national companies without commit-
ting to very long-term agreements of network capacity. If the international
traders had easy access to the national gas grid, then there would be plenty


                                      13
of potential sellers willing to participate in the opportunity gas market.
As the supply side of the short-term market is more competitive, most of
the gas of the electricity producers would be priced at values that could
not be influenced by gas suppliers, thus eliminating the potential for input
foreclosure. Therefore, as entry/exit capacity allocation creates barriers to
cross-border trade, it facilitates the existence of local oligopolies, and local
oligopolies was the source of the case for input foreclosure that we identified
in the previous section. Hence, entry/exit capacity allocation increases the
potential for input foreclosure.
In general, determining the relevant market in the short run is critical to
assess the potential for input foreclosure. Even when long-term markets are
competitive enough, lack of liquidity in short-term trading of network ca-
pacity may create opportunities for input foreclosure. Put it differently, if
transmission capacity may not be available in the short run, one may find
isolated oligopolies where potential for input foreclosure exists, regardless
the competitiveness of the long-term markets. But, if transmission alloca-
tion mechanisms provide free spatial flexibility, these isolated zones may be
motivated by the rules of network use defined in the regulation. Hence, this
is an additional cost that should be taken into account when deciding on
the rules of network use.


                              6.   Conclusion

The analysis above shows that the key factor in the existence of a case for
input foreclosure is the ability of a gas agent to manipulate the gas price
faced by her competitors in the power market. There are essentially two cases
for input foreclosure. The first one is related to a certain firm with position
both in the upstream gas market and in the power market. This is the case
described in Hunger (2003). The second one, described in this paper, has to
do with a market structure where several firms need to purchase short-term
gas supplies in a local oligopoly. In that situation, power producers have
to choose between limiting themselves severely to the gas they have bought
in the long run, or buying from some of the firms operating in the local
short-term market.
By identifying the second type of input-foreclosure situations, we have shown
that the particular design of the gas market has a critical influence on the
existence of cases for input foreclosure. In particular, giving free spatial
flexibility moves congestion to national borders, creating in turn barriers
to trade in the short run. Thus, EU market designs, which builds on ample
provision of free spatial flexibility, creates barriers to cross-border trade, and
hence potential for the existence of isolated national markets where there


                                       14
are opportunities to foreclose the market. This is not the case of systems
based on point-to-point transmission.
Therefore, if cross-border barriers are weaken (by reducing free spatial flex-
ibility), so that international traders have easy access to the national gas
grid, then there will be more potential sellers willing to participate in the
short-term gas market. Competition among them would limit the ability of
national firms to manipulate the short-term price. Hence, electricity produc-
ers would be priced at values that could not be influenced by the national
companies, eliminating the potential for input foreclosure. This is an addi-
tional cost that must be taken into account when deciding on the design of
the capacity allocation mechanism.


                               References

Barquı́n, J. (2006): “Gas-electricity mergers and input foreclosure: A
 quantitative study,” in EEM, The European Electricity Market, Warsaw,
 Poland.
Barquı́n, J., L. Bergman, C. Crampes, J.-M. Glachant, R. Green,
 C. von Hirschhausen, F. Lévêque, and S. Stoft (2006): “The ac-
 quisition of Endesa by Gas Natural: Why the antitrust authorities are
 right to be cautious,” The Electricity Journal, 19, 62–68.
Boots, M. G., F. A. M. Rijkers, and B. F. Hobbs (2004): “Trading in
 the downstream European gas market: A successive oligopoly approach,”
 Energy Journal, 25, 73–102.
Crampes, C. and C. Hernandez-Alva (2007): “Strategic incentives
 to merge in the energy industry,” in IAEE International Conference,
 Wellington.
Hallack, M. and M. Vazquez (2012): “The impact of who decides the
 rules for network use: A common-pool analysis of the investment dynam-
 ics in different gas network regulatory frames,” European University In-
 stitute, no. RSCAS 2012/52 in Loyola de Palacio Working Papers.
——— (2013): “European Union regulation of gas transmission services:
 Challenges in the allocation of network resources through entry/exit
 schemes,” Utilities Policy, Forthcoming.
Hart, O. and J. Tirole (1990): “Vertical integration and market foreclo-
 sure,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Holtz, F., C. von Hirschhausen, and C. Kemfert (2008): “A strategic
 model of European gas supply (GASMOD),” Energy Economics, 30, 766–
 788.

                                     15
Hunger, D. (2003): “Analyzing gas and electricity convergence markets:
 A supply curve is worth a thousand words,” Journal of Regulatory Eco-
 nomics, 24.
Joskow, P. (2005): “Vertical integration,” in Handbook of New Institutional
  Economics, ed. by C. Menard and M. Shirley, Springer.
Magill, M. and M. Quinzi (2002): Theory of incomplete markets, MIT
 Press.
Makholm, J. (2012): The Political Economy of Pipelines: A Century of
 Comparative Institutional Development, University of Chicago Press.
Mathisien, L., K. Roland, and K. Thonstad (1987): “The European
 natural gas market: Degrees of market power on the selling side,” in Natu-
 ral gas markets and contracts, ed. by R. Golembek, M. Hoel, and J. Vislie,
 North-Holland.
Mulder, M. and G. Zwart (2005): “Modelling long run strategic behavior
 on the liberalised European gas market,” in IAEE European Conference,
 Bergen, Norway.
Ordover, J., G. Saloner, and S. Salop (1990): “Vertical integration
 and market foreclosure,” American Economic Review.
Padilla, J., M. Polo, M. Schnitzer, D. Spector, R. Schmalensee,
  and X. Vives (2006): “The proposed acquisition of Endesa by Gas Nat-
  ural: Is there an academic consensus against electricity and gas mergers?”
  Tech. rep.
Riordan, M. H. and O. E. Williamson (1985): “Asset specificity and
  economic organization,” International Journal of Industrial Organization,
  3, 365–378.
Ruff, L. (2012): “Rethinking gas markets–and capacity,” Economics of
 Energy and Environmental Policy, 1.
Vazquez, M. and J. Barquı́n (2007): “Gas logistics costs: Simulation of
 the proposed Endesa/Gas Natural merger,” in IAEE European Confer-
 ence, Florence, Italy.
Vazquez, M., M. Hallack, and J. Glachant (2012): “Designing the
 European Gas Market: More Liquid and Less Natural?” Economics of
 Energy and Environmental Policy, 1, 25–38.
Williamson, O. E. (1975): Markets and hierarchies: Analysis and antitrust
 implications, New York: Free Press.
——— (1983): “Credible commitments: Using hostages to support ex-
 change,” American Economic Review.


                                    16
——— (1985): The economics of institutions of capitalism, New York: Free
 Press.


                                          Appendix

           A.     Representation of players’ behavior

In this section we characterize the opportunities of players to behave strate-
gically. To do so, we analyze the optimality conditions of problem (1). The
Lagrangean function of problem (1) is given by:

        L =(π g − pg )V i + U (Rsi )+
            µis {Rsi − (πsp − cis )qsN,i − (πsp − π g )qsG,i − (πsp − pg )qsC,i }+
            µN,i N,i  N,i
             s {qs − qmax }+
            µgas,i
             s     {V i − Ai + qsC,i }+
            µmin,i
             s     {0 − qsG,i }

In addition, using the inverse demand equation (2) and (3), we have the
following price derivatives:

                         ∂πsp                         ∂π g
                                  = −αg        and         = −αg
                        ∂qsx,i                        ∂V i

where qsx,i is power production with any kind of fuel.


                    A.1.     Risk-neutral expectations

The optimality of problem 1 with respect to revenues Rsi gives the definition
of the Lagrange multipliers µis :

                                          ∂U (Rsi )
                                                    = µis                            (6)
                                           ∂Rsi
As Lagrange multipliers are marginal utilities at date 0 of an additional
unit of spot profits, they can be thought of as discount factors for each state
of nature. No-arbitrage conditions impose that each µis are positive values.
That is equivalent to the condition that the problem has a solution, see for
instance Magill and Quinzi (2002).
The relationship between the previous discount factors P and risk-neutral
probabilities is straightforward. Consider the values λ = Ss=1 µis and de-
                                                       i
                                 µis
fine the parameters φis =        λi
                                     .   As each φis are positive values and they sum

                                                17
up to one, they P                                        P a certain value
                   can be thought of as probabilities. Thus,
defined by X = s µis xs can be rewritten as X = λi s φis xs = λi E N [x],
where E N denotes the expectation with respect to the previously defined
probabilities, and λi can be interpreted as the discount on the riskless asset.
That is, the forward price is its discounted expected payoff in the sense of
artificially constructed probabilities. We will use E ∗ to denote discounted
expectations, E i,∗ = λi E N .


 A.2.       Optimality with respect to gas sales in the short-term
                               gas market (V i )

                                                     ∂πsp N,i
                      X                X                                                  
  g     g     g   i
 π −p −α V +              µgas,i
                           s       =       µis           (q + qsG,i + qsC,i ) − αg qsG,i       (7)
                      s                s
                                                     ∂V i s
From the above equation, it is possible to identify a first expression of the
effects of pvertical integration between gas and electricity. That is, a problem
        ∂πs
where ∂V    i = 0 would yield

                                           X                     X
                  π g − pg − αg (V i −           µis qsG,i ) +       µgas,i
                                                                      s     =0
                                             s                   s

The Lagrange multiplier µgas,i
                            s    represents the trade-off between increasing
              i
marginally V (supplying one megawatt more to the short-term gas market)
and using the contracted gas to produce electricity. Hence, this equation
states that the costs taken in to account when deciding on short-term sales
in the gas market are made up of the price in the long-termP  market pg and
the opportunity costs of selling in the future power market s µgas,i
                                                                 s   .
The incentive to raise the gas price is defined, on the one hand, by the ben-
efits for the firm’s gas sales V i , and on the other by the additional costs
of buying opportunity gas at a higher price, qsG,i . As    P the power market is
subject to uncertainty, that incentive is defined by s µis qsG,i , which is the
player’s valuation of the possibility of using opportunity gas in the future
power market. This player’s valuation is the risk-neutral expectation of fu-
ture consumption of opportunity gas, so that
                                                        X
                 π g − pg − αg (V i − E i,∗ [q G,i ]) +   µgas,i
                                                           s     =0
                                                                 s
                      p
                   ∂πs
Therefore, when ∂V    i = 0, market participants play Cournot strategies, tak-
ing into account the extra cost associated with the fuel used to produce
electricity. In that view, the main effects of vertical integration that we are
                                                          ∂πsp
considering in this paper are represented by the term ∂V     i .




                                                 18
 A.3.     Optimality with respect to the electricity production
                  from gas contracted in advance (qsC,i )

                µis {πsp − pg − αsp (qsN,i + qsG,i + qsC,i )} = µgas,i
                                                                 s         (8)

As µgas,i
      s     represents the opportunity costs of selling in the future power
market, this condition states that an optimal amount of gas is allocated to
the short-term gas market when the marginal value of gas in this market
µgas,i
 s     is equal to the marginal value of gas in the electricity market. Summing
over all states of nature, the previous condition can be rewritten as
                                                                 X
                E i,∗ [π p − αp (q N,i + q G,i + q C,i )] − pg =   µgas,i
                                                                    s       (9)
                                                                s

That is, the expected marginal value in the power market is equal to the
opportunity cost with respect to the gas market.


A.4.    Optimality with respect to power production with from
                         opportunity gas (qsG,i )

               µis {πsp − π g − αsp (qsN,i + qsG,i + qsC,i )} = −µmin,i
                                                                  s       (10)

µmin,i
 s     measures the extra costs associated with producing using opportunity
gas. Hence, this condition states that the marginal value of producing with
opportunity gas in the power market equals the cost associated with it.


   A.5.    Optimality with respect to power production with
                    non-gas-fired power plants (qsN,i )

                 µis {πsp − cis − αsp (qsN,i + qsG,i + qsC,i )} = µN,i
                                                                   s      (11)

For the sake of simplicity, we assume in the paper that some production
with gas-fired power plants is always required, so that µN,i          N,i
                                                          s 6= 0. If µs = 0,
the marginal cost of the power system would be cs , so that and µmin,i
                                                      i
                                                                       s     =
  i  g    i
µs (πs − cs ). However, to have a coherent representation of such situation, it
would be necessary to add a constraint on the minimum value of production
from contracted gas. The assumption has no effect on the results developed
in the paper, but it is convenient for the sake of simplicity.




                                          19
  B.    Power price sensitivity with respect to gas sales

We may identify the effects associated with vertical integration as
               X  ∂πsp                                    
                     i         N,i    G,i   C,i      g G,i
                   µs        (q + qs + qs ) − α qs
                 s
                         ∂V i s

That expression will be next analyzed in detail.
The price equation in the power market is given by

                    πsp = π0p − αsp
                                    X
                                      (qsN,i + qsG,i + qsC,i )
                                          i

and the optimality condition (10) can be rewritten as
                                          1 p              1
                qsN,i + qsG,i + qsC,i =             g          min,i
                                           p (πs − πs ) + i p µs         (12)
                                          αs             µs αs

Putting together the equations (8) and (10), it is possible to obtain

                          µis (π g − pg ) = µgas,i
                                             s     + µmin,i
                                                      s

We can identify two basic cases:
   • A certain state of nature s has spare long-term gas. In this case,
     µmin,i
      s     > 0 as the minimum production constraint of opportunity gas
     will be active. Besides, µgas,i
                               s     = 0 because the firm is using less gas
     than contracted, so the corresponding constraint will not be active.
     From above we have that

                                  µmin,i
                                   s     = µis (π g − pg )

   • A certain state of nature s has spare long-term gas. This is the com-
     plementary case of the previous one. As firms are producing with op-
     portunity gas, µmin,i
                       s    = 0. On the other hand, as all contracted gas is
     used, µgas,i
            s     > 0.  In particular,

                                   µgas,i
                                    s     = µis (π g − pg )


 B.1.    Price sensitivity when no firm is using opportunity gas

If the firm is not using opportunity gas, because the gas contracted in the
long-term is enough to serve the gas and electricity markets, then µmin,i
                                                                    s     > 0.



                                              20
In those scenarios, V i < Ai − qsC,i because there will be spare gas, and thus
µgas,i
 s     = 0. Using the optimality conditions
                                        1 p             1       1
              qsN,i + qsG,i + qsC,i =      (π − πsg ) + p πsg = p πsp    (13)
                                        αsp s          αs      αs
As the power price equation does not depend on the gas price,

                                        ∂πsp
                                             =0
                                        ∂V i

B.2.     Price sensitivity when firms need to use opportunity gas

If firm i is actually consuming opportunity gas at that state s, µmin,i
                                                                  s     = 0.
Thus                                     X 1
                         πsp = π0p − αsp     (π p − πsg )
                                          αsp s
                                            i

In that view, the price sensitivity will depend on the number of firms that
are consuming opportunity gas. Let us use the parameter Ks to denote the
number of firms purchasing gas in the short run, at state s. Thus,

                            πsp = π0p − (N πsp − Ks πsg )

Hence,
                                     1      Ks g
                           πsp =       πp +    π                         (14)
                                   N +1 0 N +1 s
From the previous expression,

                         ∂πsp    Ks ∂πsg      Ks g
                              =            =     α                       (15)
                         ∂V i   N + 1 ∂V i   N +1 s
That is, the power price reacts proportionally to the amount of firms us-
ing opportunity gas, divided by the number of firms plus one, because it
takes into account also the demand reaction.  Note that if no firm is using
                                   ∂πsp
opportunity gas, Ks = 0 and hence ∂V  i = 0.


 C.      Representation of input foreclosure opportunities

Combining both results we can derive (Result 1) and (Result 2). In particu-
lar, optimality condition (7) can be written as:
                  X            X  Ks                                     
  g    g   g i         gas,i       i          g N,i  G,i    C,i     g G,i
π −p −α V +          µs      =    µs        α (qs + qs + qs ) − α qs
                   s           s
                                      N +1



                                           21
Reordering the term and using the expression for risk-neutral expectations,
we obtain (Result 2):

             π g − pg =αg (V i − E i,∗ [q G,i ])+
                                                                  
                                     K
                       αg E i,∗             (q N,i + q G,i + q C,i ) −
                                   N +1
                       X
                            µgas,i
                              s
                          s

When no firm is attending to the short-term gas market, both E i,∗ [q G,i ] = 0
and Ks = 0. Moreover, asP not buying opportunity gas means that the firm
has spare contracted gas, s µgas,i
                              s    = 0. Thus, we obtain (Result 1):

                                π g = pg + α g V i




                                        22
