Spillover effects of blacklisting policy in the Brazilian Amazon
                              Luiza Andrade∗1 and André Luis Squarize Chagas2
                                              1 MSc candidate, IPE-USP
                             2 Department      of Economics, University of São Paulo



                                    Área 11 - Economia Agrícola e do Meio Ambiente

Abstract: We analyse the effects of the Priority Municipalities List, that indicates the primary targets of
environmental police monitoring, on deforestation of municipalities in the neighbourhood of the listed. We argue
that being a neighbour to a priority municipality causes an exogenous variation in environmental authorities’
presence, and use a difference-in-differences estimator to determine the impact of such presence on deforestation.
As an innovative feature, we introduce a spatial version of this estimator to correct spatial dependence. Our
estimations show that the net effect of treatment is a decrease in deforestation of 15% to 36%. This result
is robust to changes in the measure of deforestation as well as in the neighbourhood criteria. Estimates also
indicate that effects get weaker the greater the distance to the priority municipality.

Key-words: Deforestation, spillovers, Amazon, environmental policy
JEL codes: Q23, Q28, C21

Resumo: Este trabalho avalia os efeitos da Lista de Municípios Prioritários, que indica os principais alvos
de fiscalização da autoridade ambiental, sobre o desmatamento dos municípios na vizinhança dos listados.
Argumenta-se que ter um vizinho listado causa uma variação exógena na presença das autoridades ambientais,
e um estimador de diferença-em-diferenças é usado para determinar o impacto dessa presença sobre o des-
matamento. Uma contribuição deste trabalho é acrescentar uma versão espacial do estimador para corrigir a
dependência espacial na variável dependente. Nossos resultados mostram que o efeito líquido do tratamento é
reduzir o desmatamento entre 15% e 36%. Esse resultado é robusto a mudanças na medida de desmatamento,
assim como na definição de vizinhança.

Palavras-chaves: Desmatamento, spillovers, Amazônia, política ambiental



1     Introduction
From 2005 to 2012, deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon decreased by 75%. This slowdown followed major
changes in environmental policy. A growing literature investigating the new measures adopted since 2004
suggests that stricter command and control policies are the main cause for this reduction (Assunção et al.,
    ∗ Thanks   São Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP) for funding through grant 2014/19332-6.


                                                                1
2012, 2013; Maia et al., 2011; Hargrave and Kis-Katos, 2013). Our goal is to evaluate the impact of a targeted
monitoring policy, the Priority Municipalities Lists, implemented from 2008 to 2013. Unlike most of the
literature, however, we are interested in spillover effects this policy might have had on non-listed subjects.
     Land cover in the Amazon region has been monitored via satellite since 2004, and deforestation alerts are
produced in real time, indicating to the environmental authorities the location of new clearings. Due to dispersed
urban centers and lack of infrastructure in the Amazon, access to some regions and inspection of hot spots are
costly. Therefore, a targeting strategy had to be developed to enhance inspection proceedings.
     In 2008, a list of Priority Municipalities was released, comprising major deforesters. Although all municipali-
ties in the Amazon are monitored via satellite, the main change introduced consists of the inspection teams being
allocated primarily to those in this blacklist. These municipalities are also subject to land property regularization
proceedings, georeferencing of rural properties and credit constraints.
     Some effort has already been made to evaluate the effectiveness of the blacklist. Arima et al. (2014),
Assunção and Rocha (2014) and Cisneros et al. (2015) find significant reductions in deforestation on listed
municipalities. While Assunção and Rocha (2014) identify command and control instruments as the main cause
for the slowdown, Cisneros et al. (2015) argue that other institutional and reputation pressures were the decisive
features.
     Our focus, however, is to investigate if blacklisting has spillover effects, that is, if the Priority Municipality
List, by focusing in one municipality, affects its non-targeted neighbours. Spillovers of environmental monitoring
are documented by Shimshack and Ward (2005), and spatial spillovers in deforestation are observed by Robalino
(2007) and Pfaff et al. (2015).
     We argue that blacklisting caused a shock in police presence on both listed municipalities and their non-listed
neighbours. Once environmental police teams are located close to blacklisted municipalities, the probability
of a priority municipality’s neighbour being inspected is greater than that of a municipality that is far from
environmental police’s units, given the high transportation costs in the region. Therefore, following a well-
established literature modelling criminal activity (Becker, 1968; Stigler, 1974) and environmental monitoring
(Polinsky and Shavell, 1999; Russell et al., 2013; Gray and Shimshack, 2011), we expect command and control
policies to affect deforestation by changing the expected value of engaging in criminal activities.
     Nevertheless, if deforestation gains are sufficiently high, it may be profitable for a closely monitored
producer to relocate her activities to a less monitored municipality. In this case, unmonitored neighbours
would experience an increase in deforestation. Thus, even though we expect producers in listed municipalities
to reduce deforestation, the effect on their neighbours is uncertain. If the overall effect of blacklisting on
untreated neighbours is to reduce deforestation, the policy’s effectiveness might be underestimated. However, if
blacklisting dislocates deforestation to the neighbours, not taking spillover effects into account overestimates the
effects and misleads the policy’s accountability.
     Pfaff (1999), Chomitz and Thomas (2003), Hargrave and Kis-Katos (2013) and Robalino and Pfaff (2012)
document the presence of spatial dependence on Amazon deforestation. They show that not only is accumulated
deforestation very concentrated in a region known as Deforestation Arch, the decision to clear new plots is also
affected by neighbouring conditions. As an innovative feature, we use a spatial econometrics methods to correct
possible inefficiencies or biases caused by spatial autocorrelation.
     We adopt difference-in-differences estimators to measure the List’s effect on non-listed neighbour’s share
of remaining forest cleared. Our results suggest the net effect of blacklisting on non-listed neighbours is
an average decrease of 15% to 36% in the remaining forest area cleared yearly. This finding is robust to
changes on the deforestation measure and on the neighbourhood definition. We also find that deforestation
is a spatially dependent process, where both spatial lags of independent variables and unobserved, spatially
correlated variables affect the outcome.
     This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the deforestation policies implemented in the
Brazilian Amazon along the 2000s and discusses the mechanisms through with the Priority Municipalities List

                                                          2
may affect deforestation. Section 3 develops a theoretical model to describe deforestation decision. Section 4
describes our empirical approach. Section 5 presents estimation results. Section 6 discusses some robustness
checks. Section 7 makes the final remarks.


2      The Priority Municipalities List
The Amazon forest is the biggest tropical forest in the world, spreading for around 5.5 million squared kilometers,
60% of which are in Brazilian territory. It provides environmental services such as biodiversity sheltering,
carbon storage and rainfall regulation, apart from having water reservoirs that represent 20% of the world potable
water. In the last decades, the world has paid particular attention to forests and to land use change in the context
of climate change. According to the Brazilian Science Ministry, in 2005, land use change was the source of
57% of greenhouse emissions in Brazil.1 From 2012 to 2010, there was a 76% drop in Brazil’s land use change
carbon emissions, most of it due to deforestation slowdown in the Amazon following a series of environmental
policy changes.

2.1     PPCDAm
Since the mid-2000’s, the Brazilian federal government has adopted a series of actions to inhibit deforestation in
the Amazon, most of which are organized within the Plan for Prevention and Control of Deforestation in the
Amazon Forest (PPCDAm). PPCDAm is the result of a large effort involving different levels of government and
lays down the guidelines to coordinated action towards curbing deforestation. The Plan has three basic lines: (i)
land property ordination, (ii) command and control policies and (iii) promotion of sustainable activities.2 While
the third focus was largely ignored, the first two encompassed a number of initiatives, and are pointed as reasons
for the decrease in deforestation observed in the the last ten years (Hargrave and Kis-Katos, 2013; Arima et al.,
2014; Cisneros et al., 2015; INPE, 2013; Assunção et al., 2012; Assunção and Rocha, 2014; Maia et al., 2011).
     According to Maia et al. (2011), during the first phase of PPCDAm’s implementation (2004-2006), the
first basic line, land property ordination, was the most effective. These actions focused mainly on the creation
of conservation units and Indian reserves. From 2004 to 2008, 25 million hectares of land were declared
conservation units, and 10 million became Indian reserves.3 Land regularization was also sought after, since it
was identified that most of deforestation occurred in plots occupied by producers with no land title.
     The second basic line, consisting on command and control policies, is indicated by the same authors as
the most effective during the second phase of the Plan (2007-2010). Until 2004, the Brazilian Institute for
the Environment and Renewable Natural Resources (IBAMA), which acts as environmental police, based its
inspection efforts on anonymous complaints. In that year, a system of satellite monitoring, DETER (Real-Time
Deforestation Detection), was developed by the National Institute for Space Research (INPE). The INPE
has been measuring yearly deforestation in Brazil via satellite since 1988, as part of the PRODES (Satellite
Monitoring of Deforestation in the Legal Amazon) project. DETER, on the other hand, produces images of the
Amazon in a more timely manner, issuing deforestation alerts every two weeks. Through the coordinated action
of IBAMA and INPE, it is now possible to quickly identify new deforestation spots and monitor the region more
efficiently, as reflected by the number of fines issued by IBAMA.4
     Apart from the new monitoring system, IBAMA also hired new personnel and invested on training and on
spreading new units of the agency across the Amazon. Despite these actions, it is still a challenge to visit all of
    1 Ministério  da Ciência Tecnologia e Informação (2013).
    2 Casa  Civil (2004)
    3 Assunção et al. (2012), p. 9.
    4 prices, p. 8.




                                                               3
the sites indicated by DETER as deforestation hot spots.5 For this reason, the development of the second phase
of the Plan aimed at better focusing IBAMA’s activities, which, according to Maia et al. (2011), accounts for the
success in reducing deforestation in the period. This strategy for targeting command and control policies, the
Priority Municipalities List, is the focus of this project.

2.2    Priority municipalities list
In January 2008, through the Decree no 6.321/07, the Ministry of Environment (MMA) became responsible
for creating a list of priority municipalities, which are subject to more strict environmental regulation. These
municipalities, that must be a part of the Amazon biome, should be selected according to three criteria: (1) total
cleared area in the municipality; (2) area cleared in the last three years; (3) increase in deforestation rate in at
least three of the last five years.
     Once in this list, municipalities should be monitored and supported by the federal government in the
implementation of measures to reduce deforestation rates and promote sustainable activities. Rural properties in
the priority municipalities are subject to registration in the National Institute for Colonization and Land Reform
(INCRA), which might require georeferencing and land titles verification. The issuance of authorizations for
land clearing in properties of medium to large size in these municipalities is also subject to georeferencing
through the Rural-Agricultural Register (CAR), and agricultural credit granting is subject to the observance of
environmental regulations in the properties. What is reportedly the most important feature of the policy, however,
is that IBAMA’s teams are primarily focused on listed municipalities, which means that DETER alerts located
within these municipalities receive more attention.6 Therefore, once a municipality is blacklisted, it is subject to
more rigorous environmental inspection.
     Every year, MMA must publish the list of Priority Municipalities, and announce the criteria to be unlisted,
including, (i) having eighty percent of the municipality’s private rural land monitored and in accordance with
INCRA’s technical criteria and (ii) maintaining deforestation under a limit established by IBAMA and announced
yearly. Once a municipality is no longer in the list, it is classified as a municipality with deforestation under
control and monitored.
     In spite of reinforced monitoring efforts, environmental fines are seldom enforced. According to Souza-
Rodrigues (2011), although the value of fines are extremely high when compared to average gross revenue,7
between 2005 and 2009, only 0.6% of the total value of issued fines was actually paid. Assunção et al. (2013)
argue, however, that these are not the only sanctions applied. Apart from being fined, producers caught illegally
clearing forest are also subject to having their production seized and destroyed, their land embargoed and their
machinery apprehended and auctioned.
     Even though no official position as to the List’s status has been taken since then, the last time a Decree
listing criteria and municipalities was in 2013. That year, only the criteria to exit the list were published, and
five municipalities were unlisted. Nonetheless, neither new additions nor new listing criteria were published,
and interviews with local actors revealed that this is not the only instance of diminished federal attention to
deforestation.
     We analyse the criteria to enter the list using a logistic regression to estimate, for the years when the list was
active, the probability of being listed as a function of that year’s published criteria. In 2010, no municipalities
were added to the list, so we did not include this year in our estimations. Results are indicate that the binding
criteria vary from one year to the other. For 2009, none of the criteria were significant. An analysis of the
criteria distribution still leaves doubts on how some of the cutoff values were selected. As reported by Cisneros
et al. (2015) and Arima et al. (2014), we were unable to recreate the List using the announced criteria. Some
   5 Sousa  (2016)
   6 Assunção  and Rocha (2014).
   7 Fines range from US$ 2,300 to US$ 23,000 per hectare, compared to an average revenue of US$ 120/ha in 2006.



                                                              4
municipalities that satisfy the criteria to be listed are consistently left out of the list (the most prominent case
is Itaituba), and municipalities with very low values for the variables supposed to constitute the criteria are
listed (take, for example, Tapurah and Grajaú in 2011). This indicates that other criteria are also used, possibly
political, which means blacklisting could be endogenous.

2.3    Mechanism discussion
Works evaluating the effect of increased inspection efforts on deforestation usually take the number of fines
as a proxy for environmental police presence (Assunção et al., 2013; Hargrave and Kis-Katos, 2013). We
believe, however, that this may not be a good measure. As previously discussed, environmental law enforcement
in the Brazilian Amazon works as follows: all municipalities are monitored via satellite, alerts are sent to
environmental authorities every two weeks, police inspects some of the alerts, and inspections may or may
not result in fines. Though we have data on deforestation alerts and number of fines issued, inspections are
endogenous and depend on environmental police efforts, non-observable in the data. Consequently, the number
of fines is also endogenous. We propose to use entrance in the Priority Municipality List as an exogenous source
of variation in police presence on non-listed neighbours of listed municipalities.
    We argue that the blacklisting policy caused a shock in environmental law enforcement on both listed
municipalities and their non-listed neighbours. Every municipality in the Legal Amazon is subject to satellite
monitoring, but inspection efforts by environmental police varies across the region. Transportation costs in the
Amazon are high, due to the lack of infrastructure in the region and to high rainfall levels. Some locations can
only be accessed by boat, and travel may take more than a week. Since the Priority Municipalities List created a
new system for the allocation of police inspections, targeting primarily the listed municipalities, it also affected
the cost of monitoring municipalities close to them. Once IBAMA’s teams come to a listed municipality, the
cost of inspecting its non-listed neighbours is lower than that of monitoring more distant municipalities. This
causes a decrease in the expected value of deforestation, since the probability of being fined becomes higher.
    This explanation depends on the assumption that the Priority Municipalities List causes a shift in environ-
mental police presence. We consider this a plausible assumption because it is one of the announced measures.
Nevertheless, it cannot be directly tested, since there is no available record of IBAMA inspections or of the
value of total penalties imposed on violators. The number of fines, however flawed a measure of police presence,
can give us some insight on that.

                                                   PPCDAm                          Blacklist                                                                      PPCDAm                       Blacklist




                                     60                                                                                                             15
              Mean number of fines




                                                                                                                             Mean number of fines
                                                                                                                               per km² cleared




                                                                                                                                                    10
                                     40




                                                                                                                                                     5

                                     20




                                                                                                                                                     0

                                          2003   2004      2005   2006   2007   2008      2009   2010      2011   2012                                   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008     2009   2010     2011   2012
                                                                            Year                                                                                                        Year
                                                        Non−listed with no listed neighbours            Listed                                                     Non−listed with no listed neighbours            Listed
                                                        Non−listed with listed neighbours                                                                          Non−listed with listed neighbours

                                                                   Source: IBAMA                                                                                              Source: IBAMA

                                                        (a) Number of fines                                                          (b) Number of fines per km2 cleared
                                                                  Figure 1: Mean number of environmental fines by group


                                                                                                                         5
     Figure 1a shows the evolution of the absolute number of fines in the region. In 2008, the first year the List
was active, all groups faced an increase in the number of fines as compared to 2007, but this effect is stronger in
listed municipalities and their neighbours than in the other municipalities in the biome. The downward trend in
the number of fines after 2008 is probably related to deforestation slowdown, and absolute numbers are hard to
compare due to the size of municipalities, as previously pointed. Therefore, we consider the number of fines to
deforestation increment ratio as a proxy for monitoring stringency. This indicator is shown in figure 1b, which
tells us a similar, but more interesting story: both listed municipalities and their non-listed neighbours present
higher values for our stringency proxy after the List was created. Even though non-neighbours also show an
initial raise in 2009, the average value for the whole period in these municipalities is actually lower than before
2008. Again, though we cannot affirm that we have causal evidence, these observations also seems to support
our monitoring mechanism assumption. In fact, non-listed neighbours present a very similar stringency trend to
non-neighbours, but they face a permanent shock after 2008, one that is even higher than that faced by listed
municipalities.
     As an alternative mechanism, municipalities could respond to the possibility of entering the list and facing
economic slowdown as consequence. If there is a response to the listing, such response would have to come
from the municipality, an not individual farmers, through some sort of institutional change.8 That may be easier
to observe. For such institutional effort to affect deforestation, a very well designed policy is necessary to induce
individual farmers to cooperate and prevent free riding.
     This economic threat mechanism assumes that the economy of listed municipalities suffers a slowdown as a
consequence of their inclusion to the list. An economic slowdown could be a consequence of the greater scrutiny
producers in listed municipalities are subject to regarding agricultural credit. Given the similar trends among
listed and non-listed, we conducted a simple difference-in-differences test to check for impacts of blacklisting
on credit availability. Results indicate that, controlling for GDP and state and year fixed effects, agricultural
credit did decrease on blacklisted municipalities, but credit for cattle raising experienced a raise and the effect
on the sum of both, though negative, is not statistically significant.
     Assunção and Rocha (2014) highlight that the blacklist didn’t affect listed municipalities’ economies. Still,
we propose another way to test the validity of the proposed mechanism: we use matching techniques to create
control and treatment groups with equal chances of being listed. Once we match municipalities on the probability
of being listed, the policy’s observed effect should be attributed to other causes, more specifically, following our
model, to increased monitoring.


3      Theoretical framework
The decision to clear a forested area can be modeled as part of the land use decision, which is typically
characterized by a model of porftfolio composition Young (1997). We assume there are two alternative and
concurrent land use possibilities: agricultural production and forest conservation. The model described below is
based on pfaff1999.
   Let i be a producer that disposes of a capital Q to invest in a plot of land, which will be spent in sunk costs
such as buying/renting the land and machinery. In any given period t, producer i in municipality j chooses land
    8 Thatis the case, for instance, of Programa Municípios Verdes, which was first implemented in 2013. This program is an initiative
of Pará’s state government and consists in creating a pact with local actors to reduce deforestation so that municipalities can either get
out of the List faster or avoid being listed at all.




                                                                    6
use l, either preserving the standing forest or clearing it, by solving the following problem:

                                         Max           πil jt = Piljt Ytl (xi jt ) −CTtl (zi jt )
                                  l ∈ {cleared, f orest}
                                                                 (
                                                                     xi jt = xi jt (l)
                                                       s.t.                               ,                           (1)
                                                                     zi jt = zi jt (l)

where Pjt is the price of agricultural production; Ytl is the output as function of a input vector xi jt ; and CTtl is the
total cost of production as a function of a vector zi jt that includes the price of inputs and transportation, taxes
and licensing costs.
    Land use decision can be described by

                                              Max                Viljt =          Max           πil jt
                                       l ∈ {cleared, f orest}              l ∈ {cleared, f orest}

Therefore, the producer will decide to clear the plot if the profit with agricultural activity is greater than the
profit from exploring the standing forest:
                                                                                                    f
                                         li jt = cleared if and only if, Vicjt > Vi jt                                (2)

    Law enforcement literature, on the other hand, models the decision to break the law as a function of the
following variables (Polinsky and Shavell, 1999): g, the gain from illegal activity; π e , the expected probability
of being caught; and L, the loss caused by the punishment. A risk-neutral agent decides to break the law if and
only if his gain is greater than the expected loss from punishment, i.e., if

                                                                  g ≥ π eL

   Assume, for simplicity, that forested land is not used, that is, no revenue is gained from selling forest products
and the land owner does not incur in any sort of maintenance cost, so that
                                                             f
                                                           Vi jt = 0, ∀i, j,t.

Consider, in addition, that different plot owners have different perceptions and/or face different probabilities
of being caught. Finally, suppose all deforestation is prohibited. When a firm is caught clearing land, her
production will be seized and the land, embargoed, which means there will be no revenue. Apart from that, the
instruments and machinery will be seized and fines may be applied, so the firm will suffer an additional loss of
Li jt . In this case, the gain with deforestation, that is, with buying a plot of forest land, clearing it, and then using
it for production purposes, Vidjt , is different from the gain from a previously cleared plot Vicjt , and is given by

                                               Vidjt = (1 − πiejt )Vicjt − πiejt Li jt .

    With these changes, we can model producer i’s decision to deforest a land plot in municipality j in time t as

                                          di jt = 1[(1 − πiejt )Vicjt − πiejt Li jt > 0].                             (3)

    Total deforested area in municipality j is then given by

                                     D jt = ∑ 1[(1 − πit )Vicjt − πit Li jt > 0]areai j .
                                              ∈i

    We will now extend this framework to allow for the possibility that the agent may move from municipality j
to a municipality k, located at a distance dk, j from j. The producer is faced now with the decision to choose (i) if

                                                                      7
she will stay in municipality j or move to k; (ii) if she will clear the plot or not. We will assume that moving
the production means incurring in dislocation costs φ (dk, j ) > 0, since sunk costs are not entirely mobile (rents
are non-refundable, transporting equipment is costly, etc.). Once forest land does not generate any revenue and
dislocation costs are positive, the agent will never choose to move if not to clear the land. On the other hand,
moving will only be profitable if
                                     e      c     e
                               (1 − πikt )Vikt − πikt Lk jt − φ (dk, j ) > (1 − πiejt )Vicjt − πiejt Li jt                       (4)

    Adding a few assumptions will make the analysis easier, though they are not strictly necessary. First, suppose
that the value of fines is irrelevant as compared to Q, so that the loss with sanctions is due to instruments and
machinery apprehension9 . Additionally, assume that, given the investment Q, the maximum profit from land
clearing is the same in any municipality. This might happen if prices and land productivity are equal in both
municipalities. Although both assumptions can be easily relaxed, they make the interpretation of our results
more straight forward.
    These assumptions give us

                                                   Li jt = Likt = Lt (Qi ) = Lit                                                 (5)
                                               Vicjt= Viktc
                                                            = Vtc (Qi , Z) = Vitc                                                (6)

    Then equation (4) can be written as
                                                          e
                                                (πiejt − πikt )(Vitc + Lit ) > φ (dk, j )                                        (7)

    When the expected probability of being punished increases, the expected gains decrease and the expected
losses increase. Therefore, the higher the difference in the expected probability of being punished between the
two municipalities, the more an agent will be willing to pay to move from one municipality to another.
    Thus, combining conditions (2) and (7), we have that the decision to clear the plot in municipality j is
described as
                                                                              e
                     di jt = 1[(1 − πiejt )Vitc > πiejt Li jt ] × 1[(πiejt − πikt )(Vitc + Lit ) ≥ φ (dk, j )], (8)
while the decision to move and clear a plot in municipality k is described as
                                    e
                     dikt = 1[(1 − πikt )Vitc > πikt
                                                 e                              e
                                                     Li jt ] × {1 − 1[(πiejt − πikt )(Vitc + Lit ) ≥ φ (dk, j )]}.               (9)

    Thus, the difference between the expected probabilities of being caught in municipalities j and k, pπiejt − πikte ,

affects the location of deforestation. Now, lets say municipality j was treated in period 1, so that the expected
probability of being punished in this period is greater than that of the previous period, that is, πiej1 > πiej0 , and
municipality k was not. The spillover effect on deforestation in k caused by treating j depends on how πikt       e is
               e decreases, because agents expect monitoring to focus exclusively on treated municipalities,
affected. If πikt
deforestation will likely increase in municipality k, both because production will became profitable for agents
on k who did not produce previously and because moving the production to k may became more profitable for
                                                     e is left unchanged (or increases very little), then it may still
producers previously located in municipality j. If πikt
be profitable for some producers in j, namely those with high Vit , to move to k, which induces an increase in
                                                            e increases enough, because agents expect monitoring
deforestation in the untreated municipality k. Finally, if πikt
efforts to cross municipalities’ borders, then not only deforestation will not migrate from municipality j to
municipality k, it will also decrease in municipality k, since it will no longer be profitable for agents previously
located in k to clear the land.
   9 Thisassumption is not as unrealistic as it might seem. Indeed, evidence shows that fines are rarely paid and other sanctions are
responsible for the costs of being caught (Souza-Rodrigues, 2011; Assunção et al., 2013).


                                                                   8
4     Empirical approach
As discussed in section 2, we are not able to affirm that blacklisting is exogenous. However, a municipality does
not choose its own location, and the agents (federal government, majors, farmers) cannot choose the neighbours
of listed municipalities. Therefore, though there is potentially endogeneity in the Priority Municipality list,
being a neighbour to a priority municipality is random. With this idea in mind, we build our control and
treatment groups: we consider non-listed municipalities with listed neighbours as being treated, and non-listed
municipalities with no listed neighbours as control group. Because the literature suggests that deforestation is a
spatially dependent process (Pfaff, 1999; Chomitz and Thomas, 2003; Hargrave and Kis-Katos, 2013; Robalino
and Pfaff, 2012), which is intuitive considering the spatial distribution of treated and control municipalities
shown in figure 2, we test for spatial correlation and use a spatial version of our main estimator to confirm our
results.




                            Source: PRODES/INPE                                        Source: PRODES/INPE

                   (a) Non-spatial specification                                  (b) Spatial specification
                                           Figure 2: Control and treatment groups



4.1    Difference-in-differences estimator
We begin by evaluating the effect of blacklisting in non-listed neighbours through a simple difference-in-
differences estimator. One advantage of using this estimator is that it controls for unobserved time invariant
variables. These is particularly useful, since local characteristics that influence agricultural potential may not be
easily measured.
    Let yit be the deforestation in municipality i and year t; xit a vector of observable characteristics; tratit a a
treatment dummy (tratit = 1 if municipality i was treated in year t and tratit = 0 otherwise); and trati a dummy
indicating if municipality i is in the treatment group, i.e., if it was ever treated. The equation to be estimated
through ordinary least squares is

                                             yit = α + xit0 β + γtrati + δtratit + uit                          (10)

    Before the treatment,

                                                  ybit,1 = α + γ + xit0 β + uit                                 (11)
                                                  ybit,0 =   α + xit0 β + uit ,                                 (12)

                                                                 9
where ybit,1 is the deforestation in treated municipalities before the treatment, and ybit,0 , the deforestation in
non-treated municipalities before treatment. Note that the values for both groups do not need to be equal,
because of parameter γ.
   After the treatment, we have

                                          yait,1 = α + γ + δ + xit0 β + uit                                     (13)
                                          yait,0 =    α + xit0 β + uit .                                        (14)

    The control group represents the counter factual trajectory, the one treated municipalities would follow were
they not subject to the intervention. Since the trajectories were not identical to begin with, we need to correct for
this difference, and then we have our treatment effect:

                                 ATT = E[yait,1 ] − E[ybit,1 ] − E[yait,0 ] − E[ybit,0 ] = δ                    (15)

   The estimated equation is

                                 yit = α + γtrati + δtratit + φ1t + φ2 u fi xit0 β + uit ,                      (16)

where yit is a deforestation measure, trati is a dummy variable indicating if municipality i ever had a listed
neighbour, tratit is a dummy variable indicating if municipality i had listed neighbours in year t, t is a year
dummy capturing time fixed effects, u fi is a state dummy, and xit0 is a set of controls including agricultural
characteristics, other policies implemented and economic structure of municipalities. We also include state and
year fixed effects.
    We use the ratio between the cleared area in a given year and the remaining forest area in the previous year
as dependent variable. The remaining forest area was calculated from INPE data as the difference between total
municipality area and the sum of accumulated deforestation, non-forest and water covered area. We chose not to
use INPE’s forest area due to the large number of missing observations.
    The use of a relative measure of deforestation is necessary to ensure comparability between groups. Since the
criteria to enter the list depend exclusively on absolute values of deforestation, listed municipalities are among
the largest in the region. When using data on municipality level, we must take into account the considerable
variance presented by municipalities’ areas. As robustness checks, we also considered the cleared to observed
forest area ratio, the cleared to total municipality area ratio and the absolute deforestation increment as dependent
variables. Compared to these options, the share of remaining forest cleared has the advantage of compensating
for previous deforestation, therefore taking into account the fact that as forest area gets smaller, clearing it
becomes harder.
    Figure 3 shows the trajectories for all three measures of deforestation. It indicates that both absolute
and relative deforestation present similar trends for all groups, with the same turning points for the whole
analysed period (2005-2012), in spite of different slopes. Therefore, this condition for identification of the
difference-in-differences estimator is satisfied.
    The neighbourhood criterion used to separate treatment and control groups is inverse distance. Because of
large variance in the size of municipalities in the Amazon region, adjacency and nearest neighbours criteria are
not adequate. The maximum distance cutoff is chosen according to the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC).
    Following Bertrand et al. (2002), we use cluster-robust standard errors to control for shocks that affect
municipalities in the same micro-region. Even though we control for regional shocks, there’s evidence in
the literature that deforestation is a spatially correlated process. For this reason, we also test an alternative
specification, using spatial econometrics methods.



                                                             10
                      300            PPCDAm                          Blacklist                                                                                   PPCDAm                       Blacklist                                                                       PPCDAm                       blacklist


                                                                                                                                                0.020
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.06




                                                                                                              Mean deforested to municipality




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mean deforested to forest
Deforestation (km²)




                      200                                                                                                                       0.015




                                                                                                                        area ratio




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         area ratio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.04




                                                                                                                                                0.010



                      100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.02

                                                                                                                                                0.005




                       0                                                                                                                        0.000                                                                                                         0.00
                            2003   2004      2005   2006   2007   2008      2009   2010     2011   2012                                                 2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008     2009   2010    2011    2012                                      2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008     2009   2010    2011    2012
                                                              Year                                                                                                                     Year                                                                                                         Year
                                          Non−listed with no listed neighbours            Listed                                                                 Non−listed with no listed neighbours             Listed                                                      Non−listed with no listed neighbours             Listed
                                          Non−listed with listed neighbours                                                                                      Non−listed with listed neighbours                                                                            Non−listed with listed neighbours

                                               Source: PRODES/INPE                                                                                                    Source: PRODES/INPE                                                                                          Source: PRODES/INPE

    (a) Mean deforested area by group                                                                              (b) % of municipality area cleared                                                                                       (c) % of remaining forest cleared
                                                                                                          Figure 3: Deforestation and area by group

4.2                                Spatial econometrics
Our usual ordinary least squares estimates assume that variables are randomly distributed with regard to location.
However, there are situations where the values observed in one location depend on the values of neighbouring
observations. In the presence of spatial dependence, non-spatial estimators may be inefficient, when only the
error terms are spatially correlated, or even biased, if the dependent variable is spatially autocorrelated.
    Spatial econometric methods deal with this problem by modelling spatial dependence and taking it into
account during estimations. There are three main spatial models. The first, and simplest, describes exogenous
interaction effects, when the dependent variable in one unit depends on the independent variables of neighbouring
units. The Spatial Lag of X Model (SLX) is described in equation 17. This is the case, for example, when the
treatment of one municipality affects its neighbours as well.
                                                                                                                                                          Y = Xβ +W Xθ + ε                                                                                                                                                         (17)
    The second model, called Spatially Autoregressive Model (SAR), accounts for endogenous interaction
effects, when the dependent variable depends on the neighbouring dependent variables. This situation typically
arises when decisions are made simultaneously, and only the spatially dependent equilibrium is observed. The
SAR model can be described as
                                            Y = ρWY + Xβ + ε                                              (18)
    Finally, correlated effects, when the error terms are spatially correlated, are described by the Spatial Error
Model (SEM) in equation 19, and are consistent with situations where unobserved variables follow a spatial
pattern.
                                           Y = Xβ + u, u = λWu + ε,                                           (19)
where Y is a vector of dependent variables, X is a matrix of covariates, u is the error term and W is a matrix
describing the neighbourhood relations among units.
    These three models can be combined to build new models, up to a general spatial model that encompasses all
three types of dependence. We, however, are only interested in two of them, the Spatial Durbin Model (SDM),
that combines SAR and SLX models, and the Spatial Durbin Error Model (SDEM), that combines SLX and
SEM models:
                                                                                                       SDM:   Y = ρWY + Xβ +W Xθ + ε                                                                                                                                                                                               (20)
                                                                                                      SDEM: Y = Xβ +W Xθ + u, u = λWu + ε                                                                                                                                                                                          (21)

                                                                                                                                                                                    11
    The choice among spatial models is made in two steps 10 : first, we conduct a Langrange Multiplier test on the
non-spatial specification. This test estimates the SEM and the SAR version of the original non-spatial regression
model and test for statistical significance of the spatial coefficients. The LM test allows us to determine if there
is spatial correlation and to choose between an autoregressive and a spatial error model. Then, we estimate the
chosen model with and without lags of the exogenous variables and use AIC to chose the best specification.

4.3     Spatial difference-in-differences estimator11
Let us now combine the difference-in-differences estimator described in section 4.1 and the spatial models
described in section 4.2. For what follows, let wi be a N × 1 vector assigning weights to other municipalities,
according to a neighbourhood criterion and dt an N × 1 vector of treatment dummies (dt j = 1 if municipality j
was treated in year t and dt j = 0 otherwise).
    If we suppose that deforestation follows a spatially dependent process, µ(xit ), that can take any of the forms
in section 4.2, our before-treatment equations in 11 become

                                                    ybit,1 = α + γ + µ(xit ) + uit                             (22)
                                                        ybit,0 = α + µ(xit ) + uit                             (23)

    Once the treatment is implemented, assuming that it may affect the neighbours of the treated, we have
                                                                          0
                                         yait,1 = α + γ + δ0 + wi dt δ1 + µ(xit ) + uit                        (24)
                                                                0
                                         yait,0 =            wi dit δ1 + µ(xit ) + uit                         (25)

   Notice that α captures the direct effect of blacklisting on the listed, while β captures the indirect effects
on both listed and non-listed neighbours of the listed. Therefore, three different effects of the policy can be
identified:

                                    ATE = E[yait,1 − ybit,1 ] − E[yait,0 − ybit,0 ] = δ0                       (26)
                                                                                                   0
                                    ATT =                 E[yait,1 − ybit,1 ]            = δ0 + wi dit δ1      (27)
                                                                                             0
                                  ATNT =                  E[yait,0 − ybit,0 ]            = wi dit δ1           (28)

    In matrix notation, we have

                                          Y = αι + µ(X) + [δ1 + (IT ⊗W )δ2 ]D +U                               (29)

where Y is a NT × 1 vector, ι is a NT × 1 vector of ones, X is a NT × K matrix of covariates, D is a NT × 1
vector of dummy variables indicating the presence of treatment, IT is a square identity matrix of dimension
T × T , ⊗ is the Kroenecker product operator, W is a N × N neighbourhood weight matrix and U is a NT × 1
vector of errors. µ,α and β are the parameters to be estimated.
    The term (IT ⊗W )Dβ in equation 29 is the average indirect effect of treatment (on both treated and non-
treated municipalities). However, this effect may vary among this two categories of municipalities, so that the
average effect expressed by β might be misleading. The different effects on treated and untreated neighbours
could be captured through a decomposition of the W matrix:

                                             IT ⊗W = Wt,t +Wt,nt +Wnt,t +Wnt,nt ,                              (30)
  10 See   Florax et al. (2003) and Anselin and Florax (1995)
  11 This   section follows Chagas et al. (2016).


                                                                     12
where

                                       Wt,t       =     diag(D) × (IT ⊗W ) × diag(D)                            (31)
                                      Wt,nt       =   diag(D) × (IT ⊗W ) × diag(ι − D)                          (32)
                                      Wnt,t       =   diag(ι − D) × (IT ⊗W ) × diag(D)                          (33)
                                      Wnt,nt      = diag(ι − D) × (IT ⊗W ) × diag(ι − D)                        (34)

and diag(D) is a NT × NT matrix with D in the main diagonal and zeros elsewhere, ι is a vector of ones and
Wi, j represents the neighbourhood relations of municipality j on municipality i (i, j=t, for treated, or nt, for
untreated).
     Then, substituting (30) in (29) gives us

                                        Y = αι + µ(X) + [δ0 +Wt,t δ1 +Wnt,t δ2 ]D +U 12                         (35)

    Equation (35) is a Spatial Difference-in-Differences model that incorporates spill-over effects of the treatment
on non-treated municipalities. The µ(X) term’s form depends on the spatial model chosen. Note that we cannot
remove listed municipalities from the sample, because that would compromise the estimation of the correct
spatial dependence process. However, we know that coefficients δ0 and δ1 area probably biased, so we’re
only interested in δ2 , the ATNT estimator, that gives us the effects of blacklisting on non-listed neighbours of
blacklisted municipalities.

4.4     Data description
Our database consists in a panel covering the municipalities within the Amazon biome from 2005 to 2012.
The PPCDAm was launch in March 2004, so 2005 is the first year for which it was active for the whole INPE
period. Since the criteria to enter the List were not published for 2013, we suspect other measures might not
have been implemented, so we end our time series in 2012. During the analysed period, the Brazilian Legal
Amazon covered 771 municipalities in 9 different states. Our spatial references are IBGE’s maps on municipality
frontiers of 2007. Figure 4 shows the political division and the different biomes present in the Amazon region.
Our final sample comprises the 503 municipalities that have more than 40% of their area within the Amazon
biome.




                                    Source:IBGE                                                Source:IBGE

                              (a) Political limits                                       (b) Biome limits
                                      Figure 4: Amazon region political and biome limits
  12 Note   that Wnt,nt D and Wt,nt D are both null vectors, which is why they do not appear in the equation.




                                                                    13
    Data on yearly deforestation comes from INPE’s PRODES. Since deforestation occurs during the dry season,
most images are taken between July and September, and yearly deforestation rates are calculated having August
1st as reference-date.13 The land-use is identified from the satellite image with better visibility (minimum cloud
coverage) and classified as forest, non-forest, cleared, water and cloud according to the image-fraction of soil,
shadow and vegetation, and PRODES can identify cleared areas larger then 6,25 ha. PRODES also calculates
total accumulated deforestation, which could be an important control, since municipalities with little remaining
forest areas should present smaller deforestation rates. Other variables from this same database are the area
unobserved and the area covered by cloud in final satellite images. As discussed by Butler and Moser (2007),
these are relevant as measurement errors controls.
    The value of rural credit provided to each municipality in a given year is available in the Statistical Yearbook
of Rural Credit of the Brazilian Central Bank (BACEN) for the 2000-2012 period. Pfaff (1999) argues that
credit supply is endogenous, once deforestation attracts new bank agencies and increases the demand for credit.
As a solution, we use the value of credit in the previous year in estimations, which is also consistent with the
dynamics of deforestation. Since BACEN only makes public annualized data, information on credit could not be
transformed into the PRODES yearly period. We used the IPCA index to express values in 1999 reais.
    Data on environmental fines were made available by IBAMA upon request. The database has information
on all fines issued by IBAMA from 2000 to 2014, including name of the violator, type of infraction, process
status and fine value. Georeferenced data containing type of conservation unit, responsible authority and year
of creation are provided by MMA. Georeferenced data on indigenous land, including date of creation, area
and ethnicity, are available on the National Indian Foundation (FUNAI) website. Information on Bolsa Verde
recipients is available on MMA’s website. Population and PIB data come from IBGE’s regional account system.
Cultivated area comes from IBGE’s survey on municipalities’s agricultural production (PAM), and include both
temporary and permanent cultures.


5       Results
Results from regression model 16 are shown in table 1. They indicate that, on average, having a listed neighbour
reduces the share of remaining forest cleared in 0.8 percentage points every year. Pre-treatment deforestation
mean was 2.2%, so this represents a 36% reduction in deforestation. This negative effect is present in all
specifications, although there’s a slight reduction in the coefficient as more controls are added.
     This result is consistent with literature evidence concerning spillover effects of environmental monitoring.
It contradicts, however, to results found in Cisneros et al. (2015), that indicate there are no spillovers. Since
non-listed municipalities are not the focus of this study, their identification suffers from some shortcomings we
try to overcome. First of all, they use absolute deforestation as dependent variable, which (i) causes confusion
with the criteria to enter the list and (ii) confuses identification, since this variables has different trajectories
among groups. Second, their analysis include municipalities from other biomes, where measuring the area
cleared is a challenge.
     As previously discussed, our results may be biased because of spatial dependence. To test for spatial
autocorrelation, we perform a Moran’s I test on the residuals of regression 16. This test indicates if the spatial
pattern expressed by residuals is clustered, dispersed or random. The results are presented in table 2, and show
that residuals are positively correlated through space. The null hypothesis of no spatial clustering is rejected for
all tests. These results indicate that the spatial distribution of deforestation is far from random, and that higher
deforestation rates in its neighbourhood are positively correlated to a municipalities’ own deforestation.
    13 Since
          PRODES defines year t as going from August t − 1 to July t, we use this period to define the year for control variables
whenever it is possible.



                                                               14
                                            Table 1: Results from main specification

                                                                                            Dependent variable:
                                                                                  Deforestation to remaining forest ratio
                                                                       (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)
                       Non-listed with listed neighbours           −0.012∗∗∗      −0.008∗∗∗      −0.008∗∗∗      −0.008∗∗∗      −0.007∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)

                       Accumulated deforestationt−1                                                 0.031∗∗∗      0.028∗∗        0.028∗∗
                                                                                                     (0.011)      (0.013)        (0.014)

                       Squared accumulated deforestationt−1                                         −0.008        −0.007         −0.006
                                                                                                    (0.013)       (0.014)        (0.014)

                       Cultivated area                                                              0.00003      0.00003        −0.00000
                                                                                                    (0.0001)     (0.0001)       (0.0001)

                       Protected areas                                                                            −0.004         −0.004
                                                                                                                  (0.005)        (0.005)

                       Indigenous land                                                                            −0.001        −0.0003
                                                                                                                  (0.003)       (0.004)

                       Bolsa verde (log)                                                                         0.0005∗∗        0.001∗∗
                                                                                                                 (0.0002)       (0.0002)

                       Agricultural creditt−1 (log)                                                                              0.0004
                                                                                                                                (0.0004)

                       PIB per capitat−1 (log)                                                                                   −0.001
                                                                                                                                 (0.002)

                       Agricultural share of PIBt−1                                                                               0.003
                                                                                                                                 (0.004)

                       Population densityt−1                                                                                     0.00000
                                                                                                                                (0.00001)

                       State and year fixed effects                   No             Yes              Yes           Yes            Yes
                       Observations                                  3,488          3,488            3,299         3,299          3,035
                       Adjusted R2                                   0.100          0.171            0.210         0.211          0.205

                          Notes: All specifications include measurement error controls and group intercepts. Monetary values are in 1999 BRL.
                          Standard errors are clustered by micro region. ∗ p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01.


                                         Table 2: Moran’s I test for main specification
                                                             Observed Expected         Std. Error     P-value
                                                      2005    0.654    -0.003            0.018         0.000
                                                      2006    0.659    -0.003            0.019         0.000
                                                      2007    0.663    -0.003            0.018         0.000
                                                      2008    0.663    -0.003            0.018         0.000
                                                      2009    0.674    -0.003            0.018         0.000
                                                      2010    0.678    -0.003            0.018         0.000
                                                      2011    0.686    -0.003            0.018         0.000
                                                      2012    0.430    -0.003            0.018         0.000



    In order to correct possible biases or inefficiencies in our estimates due to spatial dependence, we use a
spatial difference-in-differences estimator, described in section 4.3. LM test results for our non-spatial model,
shown in table 3, indicate that a Spatial Error Model is prefered to an autoregressive one. Results for the Spatial
Lag of X version of that model, shown in table 4, point in the same direction. To choose between the SEM and
the SDEM Models, we estimate them both and than compare their AIC values.
    To estimate the spatial regression, we need a fully balanced panel, so economic controls had to be excluded
due to missing observations. Results are presented in table 5. The first column of this table shows the coefficients
from our main specification, excluding listed municipalities from the sample, the same as column 4 in table 1. In
column 2, we present the coefficients from a non-spatial model including listed municipalities. The SEM model


                                                                               15
                                          Table 3: LM test for spatial specification
                                                      Model     Statistic   DF   P-value
                                                      SEM       1706.8       1   0.0000
                                                      SAR       428.95       1   0.0000
                                                   SEM (robust) 1276.9       1   0.0000
                                                   SAR (robust) 1.0930       1   0.2958
                                                     SARAR      1707.9       2   0.0000


                                 Table 4: LM test for spatial specification in SLX model
                                                       Model     Statistic DF P-value
                                                       SDEM       1616.7    1 0.0000
                                                        SDM       1000.0    1 0.0000
                                                   SDEM (robust) 644.04     1 0.0000
                                                    SDM (robust)  27.374    1 1.7e-07
                                                      SARAR      1644.1 8 2   0.0000



then includes lagged errors; the SLX, lagged values for some of the independent variables; and the SDEM, lags
of errors and independents variables.
    Using AIC values to chose the model that best describes spatial dependence leaves us with an SDEM
specification. This means (i) that independent variables from other municipalities affect the land clearing
decision and (ii) that we have spatially correlated unobserved variables affecting deforestation.14
    We observe negative and significant coefficients for having listed neighbours in all spatial models. The
inclusion of listed municipalities in the sample reduces the coefficient for having a listed neighbours, as does
that of spatially dependent errors. Our benchmark model indicates a reduction of 0.32 percentage points in the
share of remaining forest cleared. This represents a 15% reduction in deforestation.
    Coefficient estimates for other independent variables are consistent with our non-spatial specification, except
for the significance of protected areas and non-significance of bolsa verde. This is explained by the different
standard errors used in the non-spatial and the spatial models. For our non-spatial specification, we clustered
standard errors by micro-region, while the spatial model considers a spatially dependent error structure as
described in equation 21.15


6     Robustness checks
To check our results, we conducted some robustness exercises. First, we test other measures of deforestation as
dependent variables. Cleared to observed remaining forest area, absolute deforestation and deforestation as share
of municipality area are used in non-spatial difference-in-differences estimations. For the spatial regression,
we only used the latter.16 Estimates show that the negative and significant effects are robust to changes in the
definition of deforestation.
    To test our proposed enforcement mechanism as opposed to possible economic threats, we use matching
techniques to create control and treatment groups with equal chances of being listed. Once we match municipali-
ties on the probability of being listed, the policy’s observed effect should be attributed to other causes, more
   14 Similarly, to determine the most appropriate neighbourhood matrix, we estimate the SDEM model with different neighbourhood

criteria and choose the one with the highest AIC value (Stakhovych and Bijmolt, 2009). We tested a queen contiguity matrix as well as
inverse distance matrices with cutoffs ranging from 2 to 5. Results indicate the best choice as the inverse distance matrix with a 2.6
cutoff. This was the matrix used for estimations presented in both tables 1 and 5.
   15 The spatial modelling of the error should be preferred to cluster-robust standard errors, since the latter is only efficiency for

block-diagonal spatial processes (Anselin and Arribas-Bel, 2013).
   16 INPE’s observed forest has missing observations in some years, so it could not be used, and maximum likelihood processes did

not converge when using absolute deforestation.


                                                                   16
                                                Table 5: Spatial model specification test

                                                                                           Dependent variable:
                                                                               Deforestation to remaining forest ratio
                                                               (Main)      (Non-spatial)        (SEM)             (SLX)      (SDEM)
                 Non-listed with listed neighbours           −0.008∗∗∗      −0.007∗∗∗          −0.003∗       −0.007∗∗∗       −0.003∗
                                                              (0.003)        (0.002)           (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)

                 Listed                                                      −0.005∗           −0.002            −0.005∗      −0.002
                                                                             (0.003)           (0.003)           (0.003)      (0.003)

                 Accumulated deforestationt−1                 0.028∗∗∗       0.034∗∗∗          0.030∗∗∗          0.033∗∗∗    0.026∗∗∗
                                                              (0.013)        (0.013)           (0.007)           (0.007)     (0.007)

                 Squared accumulated deforestationt−1          −0.007         −0.011           −0.008            −0.011       −0.006
                                                               (0.014)        (0.014)          (0.006)           (0.007)      (0.006)

                 Cultivated area                                0.000         −0.000            0.000             0.000        0.000
                                                               (0.000)        (0.000)          (0.000)           (0.000)      (0.000)

                 Protected area                                −0.004         −0.004           −0.003∗           −0.003∗     −0.004∗∗
                                                               (0.005)        (0.006)          (0.002)           (0.002)      (0.002)

                 Indigenous reserves                           −0.001         −0.002           −0.004            −0.003       −0.004
                                                               (0.003)        (0.003)          (0.004)           (0.004)      (0.004)

                 Bolsa verde (log)                            0.0005∗∗       0.0004∗∗           0.000             0.000        0.000
                                                              (0.0002)       (0.0002)          (0.000)           (0.000)      (0.000)

                 Neighbours’ accumulated deforestationt−1                                                    0.0002∗∗∗       0.0003∗∗∗
                                                                                                             (0.0001)        (0.0001)

                 Neighbours’ cultivated area                                                                −0.00003∗∗∗     −0.00004∗∗∗
                                                                                                             (0.00001)       (0.00001)

                 Neighbours’ protected area                                                                      −0.000        0.000
                                                                                                                 (0.000)      (0.000)

                 Neighbours’ indigenous reserves                                                                 −0.000       −0.001
                                                                                                                 (0.001)      (0.001)

                 R2                                             0.217          0.223                              0.228
                 Adj. R2                                        0.211          0.218                              0.221
                 Num. obs.                                      3299           3592              3592             3592         3592
                 AIC                                                                          -16291.331                    -16305.452
                 Log Likelihood                                                                8338.570                      8347.145
                 Lambda: statistic                                                               0.011                         0.011
                 Lambda: p-value                                                                 0.000                         0.000

                    Notes: All specifications include measurement error controls, group intercepts and state and year fixed effects. Monetary
                    values are in 1999 BRL. Standard errors in non-spatial specifications are clustered by micro region. ∗ p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05;
                    ∗∗∗ p<0.01.




specifically, following our model, to increased monitoring. In order to guarantee common support in the proba-
bility of being treated between non-listed municipalities with listed neighbours and non-listed municipalities
with no listed neighbours, we had to trim observations in the first group with a propensity score equal to or
bigger than 43%. This trimming has the additional advantage of removing from the sample municipalities that
might have been intentionally kept out of the List, despite presenting high values for the criteria, which further
reduces the possibility of analysing endogenously created groups.
    We matched groups on propensity score by year. Results with matched sample are consistent with those
from our main specification. Their estimates present no change in the sign or significance of control variables’
coefficient. Estimates for the effect of the blacklist in non-listed neighbours of listed municipalities have a higher
absolute value in this specification, indicating an average reduction of 35% in yearly deforestation. Therefore,
even if we do not take into account the possible economic threat represented by the List, we still have a negative
and significant spillover on non-listed neighbours.


                                                                            17
                                                   Table 6: Robustness checks

                                                                                                        Non-listed with
                                                                                         Listed        listed neighbours
                       Share of INPE’s remaining forest cleared                                             −0.011∗∗
                                                                                                            (0.004)

                       Absolute deforestation (km2 )                                                      −7.845∗∗∗
                                                                                                           (2.058)

                       Share of municipality area cleared                                                 −0.002∗∗∗
                                                                                                          (0.0005)

                       Share of municipality area cleared (spatial regression)         −0.005∗∗∗          −0.001∗∗∗
                                                                                        (0.001)            (0.000)

                       Share of remaining forest cleared (matched sample)                                 −0.009∗∗∗
                                                                                                           (0.003)


                          Notes: All specifications include measurement error controls, group intercepts and state and
                          year fixed effects. Monetary values are in 1999 BRL. Standard errors are clustered by micro
                          region. Other control variables are: share of cultivated area, share of protected areas, share of
                          indigenous lands, bolsa verde, agricultural credit in the previous year (log), GDP per capita in
                          the previous year (log), share of agricultural GDP in the previous year, population density in the
                          previous year. ∗ p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01.



     In table 7, we change the definition of treatment. In model 16, any non-listed municipality with at least one
listed neighbour is considered treated. For our specification in table 7, on the other hand, we take into account the
number of listed neighbours. These results cast more light over possible mechanisms. Municipalities with only
one listed neighbour show no significant response to the listing of their neighbours. As the number of neighbours
grows, however, they seem to show a stronger response: coefficients become significant for municipalities with
two listed neighbours and then monotonically increase in absolute value as the number of neighbours rises. The
exceptions are municipalities with four and seven neighbours, that show non-significant coefficients.
     This is consistent with the model presented in section 3: for municipalities with only one listed neighbours,
the increase in the expected probability of being punished is not strong enough to offset the potential gains from
agricultural activity. However, as the number of listed neighbours grows, so does the police presence in the
region, decreasing the expected value of land clearing as the probability of being caught grows larger.


7    Final remarks
We investigated the spillover effects of a blacklisting policy, the Priority Municipalities List. Unlike other
evaluations of this policy, we are mainly interested in the effects it had on non-listed neighbours of listed
municipalities. We also contribute to the literature by considering a spatial estimator, which to our knowledge had
never been adopted to evaluate deforestation policy impacts. Our results suggest that the Priority Municipalities
List does affect municipalities that are listed, reducing the share of remaining forest cleared yearly by 15% to
36%, on average.
    As modeled in section 3, the List’s effect on non-listed municipalities could, a priori, be either positive or
negative. The negative coefficients observed in our estimates indicate that the incentive to reduce deforestation
caused by increased probability of being punished is greater than the incentives to expand agricultural activities
into neighbouring municipalities. Our initial results indicate that the list caused a 33% reduction in deforestation
on non-listed neighbours of listed municipalities. Once we correct for spatial dependence, however, the estimated
effect falls to a 15% reduction. The negative and significant coefficient is robust to changes in the definition of

                                                                      18
                        Table 7: Results with number of neighbours as treatment variable

                                                                                            Dependent variable:
                                                                                  Deforestation to remaining forest ratio
                                                                      (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)
                             1 neighbour                          −0.015∗∗∗        −0.001          0.00004         0.0003         0.00000
                                                                   (0.002)         (0.003)         (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.002)

                             2 neighbours                         −0.018∗∗∗        −0.005∗        −0.004∗         −0.005∗∗       −0.006∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.002)         (0.003)        (0.002)          (0.002)        (0.002)

                             3 neighbours                         −0.016∗∗∗       −0.005∗∗        −0.006∗∗       −0.007∗∗∗       −0.008∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.003)         (0.002)         (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.003)

                             4 neighbours                          −0.001          −0.002          −0.003          −0.002          −0.002
                                                                   (0.007)         (0.005)         (0.004)         (0.004)         (0.003)

                             5 neighbours                            0.001         −0.005         −0.008∗         −0.008∗        −0.008∗∗
                                                                    (0.005)        (0.005)        (0.005)         (0.004)         (0.004)

                             6 neighbours                         −0.008∗∗∗       −0.012∗∗∗      −0.011∗∗∗       −0.010∗∗∗       −0.010∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.002)         (0.003)        (0.002)         (0.003)         (0.002)

                             7 neighbours                          −0.008          −0.005          −0.008          −0.009          −0.009
                                                                   (0.005)         (0.005)         (0.006)         (0.006)         (0.006)

                             8 neighbours                         −0.010∗∗∗       −0.007∗∗∗      −0.010∗∗∗       −0.010∗∗∗       −0.010∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.003)

                             9 neighbours                         −0.008∗∗∗       −0.008∗∗∗      −0.012∗∗∗       −0.013∗∗∗       −0.013∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.003)

                             10 or more neighbours                −0.010∗∗∗       −0.009∗∗∗      −0.013∗∗∗       −0.014∗∗∗       −0.014∗∗∗
                                                                   (0.002)         (0.003)        (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)

                             State and year fixed effects            No              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
                             Agricultural activities controls        No              No              Yes             Yes             Yes
                             Concurring policies controls            No              No              No              Yes             Yes
                             Economic controls                       No              No              No              No              Yes
                             Observations                           3,488           3,488           3,299           3,299           3,035
                             Adjusted R2                            0.101           0.171           0.210           0.211           0.204

                                Notes: All specifications include measurement error controls and group intercepts. Monetary values are in
                                1999 BRL. Standard errors are clustered by micro region. Agricultural activities control: share of cultivated
                                area. Concurring policies controls: share of protected areas, share of indigenous lands, bolsa verde. Economic
                                controls: agricultural credit in the previous year (log), GDP per capita in the previous year (log), share of
                                agricultural GDP in the previous year, population density in the previous year. ∗ p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01.




both deforestation and neighbourhood. Since the effect on non-listed municipalities is a reduction deforestation,
not taking such an effect into account when evaluating the impact of the blacklist means to underestimate the
policy’s ability to reduce deforestation in the Amazon biome.
    Additional tests suggest that the effect decreases the further a municipality is from the one that is blacklisted
and that the higher the number of listed the neighbours, the higher the reduction in deforestation. Though we do
not perform a definitive causal test indicating that the observed impact is due to stricter police presence, additional
analysis allow us to dismiss the possibility of economic threats as an alternative mechanism. Since unlike
blacklisted municipalities, non-listed neighbours are not subject to further restrictions, the stricter enforcement
remains the most plausible mechanism at work.
    These results are in line with those presented by Assunção et al. (2012), Assunção et al. (2013) and Assunção
and Rocha (2014), highlighting the importance of command and control instruments to reduce deforestation. It
also indicates that these works probably underestimated the policy’s effect in the Amazon biome as whole, and
suggests that the spatial distribution of environmental law enforcement can be used to improve efficiency of
deforestation policies.




                                                                                  19
References
Anselin, L. and D. Arribas-Bel (2013). Spatial fixed effects and spatial dependence in a single cross-section. Papers in Regional Science 92(1), 3–17.
Anselin, L. and R. J. Florax (1995). Small sample properties of tests for spatial dependence in regression models: Some further results. In New directions in spatial
   econometrics, pp. 21–74. Springer.
Arima, E. Y., P. Barreto, E. Araújo, and B. Soares-Filho (2014). Public policies can reduce tropical deforestation: Lessons and challenges from brazil. Land Use
   Policy 41, 465–473.
Assunção, J., C. Gandour, and R. Rocha (2012). Deforestation slowdown in the legal amazon: prices or policies? Technical report, Climate Policy Initiative.
Assunção, J., C. Gandour, and R. Rocha (2013). Detering deforestation in the brazilian amazon: environmental monitoring and law enforcement. Technical report,
   Climate Policy Initiative.
Assunção, J. and R. Rocha (2014). Getting greener by going black: The priority municipalities in brazil. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: Climate Policy Initiative.
Becker, G. S. (1968). Crime and punishment: An economic approach, 76 j. pol. econ. 169 (1968). Becker16976J. Pol. Econ.
Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan (2002). How much should we trust differences-in-differences estimates? Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
   Research.
Butler, J. and C. Moser (2007). Cloud cover and satellite images of deforestation. Land economics 83(2), 166–173.
Casa Civil, . (2004). Plano de Ação para a Prevenção e Controle do Desmatamento na Amazônia Legal. Casa Civil da Presidência da República.
Chagas, A. L., C. R. Azzoni, and A. N. Almeida (2016). A spatial difference-in-differences analysis of the impact of sugarcane production on respiratory diseases.
   Regional Science and Urban Economics 59, 24 – 36.
Chomitz, K. M. and T. S. Thomas (2003). Determinants of land use in amazonia: a fine-scale spatial analysis. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 85(4),
  1016–1028.
Cisneros, E., S. L. Zhou, and J. Börner (2015). Naming and shaming for conservation: Evidence from the brazilian amazon. PloS one 10(9), e0136402.
Florax, R. J., H. Folmer, and S. J. Rey (2003). Specification searches in spatial econometrics: the relevance of hendry’s methodology. Regional Science and Urban
   Economics 33(5), 557–579.
Gray, W. B. and J. P. Shimshack (2011). The effectiveness of environmental monitoring and enforcement: A review of the empirical evidence. Review of Environmental
   Economics and Policy 5(1), 3–24.
Hargrave, J. and K. Kis-Katos (2013). Economic causes of deforestation in the brazilian amazon: A panel data analysis for the 2000s. Environmental and Resource
   Economics 54(4), 471–494.
INPE (2013). Metodologia para o calculo da taxa anual de desmatamento na amazônia legal. Technical report.
Maia, H., J. Hargrave, J. J. Gómez, and M. Röper (2011). Avaliação do plano de ação para prevenção e controle do desmatamento na amazônia legal: Ppcdam:
  2007-2010.
Ministério da Ciência Tecnologia e Informação, M. (2013). Estimativas anuais de emissões de gases de efeito estufa no brasil. Technical report.
Pfaff, A. (1999). What drives deforestation in the brazilian amazon?: evidence from satellite and socioeconomic data. Journal of Environmental Economics and
   Management 37(1), 26–43.
Pfaff, A., J. Robalino, D. Herrera, and C. Sandoval (2015). Protected areas’ impacts on brazilian amazon deforestation: examining conservation–development
   interactions to inform planning. PloS one 10(7), e0129460.
Polinsky, A. M. and S. Shavell (1999). The economic theory of public enforcement of law. Technical report, National bureau of economic research.
Robalino, J. A. (2007). Land conservation policies and income distribution: who bears the burden of our environmental efforts? Environment and Development
   Economics 12(04), 521–533.
Robalino, J. A. and A. Pfaff (2012). Contagious development: Neighbor interactions in deforestation. Journal of Development Economics 97(2), 427–436.
Russell, C. S., W. Harrington, W. J. Vaughn, et al. (2013). Enforcing pollution control laws. Routledge.
Shimshack, J. P. and M. B. Ward (2005). Regulator reputation, enforcement, and environmental compliance. Journal of Environmental Economics and Manage-
   ment 50(3), 519–540.
Sousa, P. Q. (2016). Decreasing deforestation in the southern brazilian amazon—the role of administrative sanctions in mato grosso state. Forests 7(3), 66.
Souza-Rodrigues, E. (2011). Demand for deforestation in the amazon. Job Market Paper.
Stakhovych, S. and T. H. Bijmolt (2009). Specification of spatial models: A simulation study on weights matrices. Papers in Regional Science 88(2), 389–408.
Stigler, G. J. (1974). The optimum enforcement of laws. In Essays in the economics of crime and punishment, pp. 55–67. UMI.
Young, C. E. F. (1997). Economic adjustment policies and the environment: a case study of Brazil. University of London.




                                                                                 20
