               Migratory effectiveness in the labor market: evidence from Brazil1

                                                                        Verônica de Castro Lameira2
                                                                                Eduardo Gonçalves3
                                                                         Ricardo da Silva Freguglia4


ABSTRACT
This paper aims to analyze the importance of migratory or mobility effectiveness of formal workers
in Brazilian microregions. Based on data for individuals, the methodology proposed here makes use
of the hierarchical logit model, by taking into account differences in individual variables and
destination for microregional variables. Main results obtained suggest that microregions that are
historically successful in attracting migrants plays a major role in the mobility decision of
individuals whether they are skilled or not, due to a higher previous knowledge of migrant
destination. Wage loss expectation reflects smaller propensity to move for workers in general. As
far as skilled labor is concerned, a positive wage expectation reduces labor migration, which reflects
minor pecuniary effects of mobility. Some regional attributes prove to be relevant for mobility, such
as GDP per capita, proportion of workers with complete higher education, rates of homicides,
vehicles per capita and industrialization degree. These results are crucial for public policies aimed
at reducing spatial inequalities of human capital by taking into account individual and regional
attributes, as well as the migratory or mobility effectiveness.

Keywords: skilled labor mobility, Migratory Effectiveness Index, wage expectations, Brazil.


RESUMO
Este trabalho tem por objetivo analisar a importância da eficácia migratória ou a mobilidade dos
trabalhadores formais em microrregiões brasileiras. Com base em dados de indivíduos, a
metodologia aqui proposta utiliza o modelo logístico hierárquico de dois níveis, levando-se em
consideração as diferenças nas variáveis individuais e de destino para as variáveis microrregionais.
Principais resultados obtidos sugerem que microrregiões que são historicamente bem sucedidas em
atrair migrantes desempenha um papel importante na decisão da mobilidade de trabalhadores, sejam
eles qualificados ou não, devido a um maior conhecimento prévio com relação ao destino dos
migrantes. A expectativa de perda salarial reflete menor propensão à mobilidade para os
trabalhadores em geral. No que diz respeito à mão de obra qualificada, uma expectativa de ganho
salarial reduz a migração laboral, o que reflete efeitos pecuniários menores à mobilidade. Alguns
atributos regionais são relevantes para a mobilidade, como o PIB per capita, a proporção de
trabalhadores com ensino superior completo, as taxas de homicídios, veículos per capita e o grau de
industrialização. Estes resultados são cruciais para as políticas públicas destinadas a reduzir as
desigualdades espaciais de capital humano, tendo em conta aspectos individuais e atributos
regionais, bem como a eficácia migratória do destino.
Palavras-chave: mobilidade de trabalho qualificado, Índice de Eficácia Migratória, expectativa
salarial, Brasil.


JEL: R23, J61, O15, O18.
Área Anpec: 13 - Economia do Trabalho

1
  Os autores agradecem o apoio do CNPq e FAPEMIG.
2
  Doutoranda em Economia Cedeplar/UFMG.
3
  Professor Associado do PPGEA/UFJF e Pesquisador do CNPq.
4
  Professor Adjunto do PPGEA/UFJF e Pesquisador do CNPq.
                                                                                                    1
1. Introduction
         This paper aims to investigate the importance of Migratory Effectiveness Index - MEI for
mobility of workers, as well as to propose a measure for it. This study also intends to check
mobility of formal workers in the Brazilian microregions between 2004 and 2008. The relevance of
wage expectation and regional attributes for labor mobility are focused as well.
         In the last decades, migration has been intensively studied in social sciences. Mobility of
skilled workers assumes a significant role in economic development as it is related to the possibility
of conveying relevant technical knowledge to other firms and regions, allowing in this way
interfirm and interregional knowledge spillovers (Feldman, 1999; Almeida and Kogut, 1999).
         Although migration may come about as a result of factors connected with life cycle, social
and political determinants, the economic study of migration has demonstrated the increasing
relevance of social and information networks for migration flows, (Poot, 1996; Miguélez and
Moreno, 2013; TerWal and Boschma, 2009; Bergman, 2009). In such a context, networks act as a
facilitating mechanism of social assimilation and a reduction factor of migration costs (Lee, 1966;
Sahota, 1968; Lucas, 1977; Carrington et al., 1996).
         The influence of social networks on the decision to migrate is widely recognized nowadays.
Most of the literature states that family and friends networks of previous migrants encourage further
migration (Davis and Winters, 2001; Winters et al., 2001; Munshi, 2003; Colussi, 2006). However,
only few empirical research efforts have been made in Brazil aiming at identifying the magnitude of
the above mentioned influence especially as far as the labor market is concerned. Migrant networks
may facilitate further migration in different ways by providing information on the migration process
in itself, as well as on its inherent difficulties. Such networks can also provide information on jobs
in the destination and to contribute to the newcomers’ adaptation to their new life conditions, in
addition to allocating a financial aid so as to mitigate migration costs.
         As far as migration is concerned, such networks function particularly grounded on mass
media information and personal contacts as well. Migration networks are significantly important in
conforming migration patterns due to restrained formal information sources. They may start up with
an individual’s pioneering migratory move then followed by his kin or other previous dwellers of
the origin region. Such a migratory move is established following a positive feedback process. And,
according to Poot (1996), information on this process is accumulated over time, which bears
cumulative knowledge inertia.
         In accordance with the idea underlying this statement, the proposed study starts with the
premise that the Migratory Effectiveness Index component (or newcomer) – provided by the
migration network existing in the destination – contributes significantly to the individual’s choice to
migrate. Therefore, highlighting this subject seems to be quite opportune for the Brazilian case.
However, it is worth noting that most studies related to labor mobility neglect the influence of past
mobility flows, i.e., the labor previous mobility effect. In this sense, our main goal is to explicitly
introduce an Migratory Effectiveness Index component into the present study, which is expressed
by an efficiency index of previous labour mobility, in addition to embed other individual and
regional mobility controls. This variable shows the winners and losers regions in terms of net flows
from entries and exits in each destination microregion in the last seven years prior to the decision to
migrate.
         As only few studies dealing with labor mobility in Brazil can be found, this work attempts to
fulfill such an empirical gap by focusing on previous labour mobility. Most of other studies found
in the Brazilian literature highlight individual or family migration by focusing on individual and
regional determinants (Freguglia et al., 2014; Mendes et al., 2012; Ferreira and Matos, 2006).
Motivated by intense mobility of workers in Brazil, the paper adds to the literature on the efficiency
of Brazilian micro to attract or repel workers to insert in the analysis of migration patterns a
measure that captures the extent to which regions are consistently successful in attracting
immigrants that is, the efficiency rate of labor mobility in the past seven years.
         For this purpose, information from the RAIS-MIGRA-MTE database for the period 2003-
2008 is used here. Such data make it possible to identify the changing formal employment relation
                                                                                                     2
between Brazilian microregions, as well as to longitudinally follow workers in the Brazilian formal
labor market, by controlling in this way their individual characteristics, such as schooling degrees.
Additionally, data from IBGE, UNDP, CAGED-MTE on individual workers’ destination and those
from IPEADATA were also incorporated in this study. This kind of data are suitable for our
analysis for different reasons. Firstly, Brazil is characterized as a country having continental
dimensions and intensive labor mobility among its microregions. Secondly, this study allows for an
annual following-up of formal labor moves (census data, 2010).
        As for the methodological aspects, individual conditions associated with wage expectations
and work experiences, as well as regional attributes of labor mobility, are treated here by making
use of a multilevel logit model containing two hierarchy levels – the individual level and the
microregion level. At the individual level, variables were differentiated between a year previous to
mobility and the year after mobility as for ability, proactivity and motivation, in order to control the
non-observable individual effects, which could be correlated with experience and wage variables.
        The results indicated that Migratory Effectiveness Index for mobility has had a positive
impact on propensity to migrate in all estimated hierarchical regressions. Wage expectations
reflected a minor likelihood to migrate for workers in general and a higher propensity for skilled
workers. Workers’ experience in turn appeared as an inhibiting factor to mobility for both skilled
and unskilled workers. Some context variables – such as GDP per capita, proportion of workers
having higher education, homicide rates, vehicles per capita and industrialization degree – were also
significant for explaining mobility.
        The present work comprises five sections including this introduction. The next section
presents a brief literature review on labor mobility in which the role of Migratory Effectiveness
Index, individual determinants of wage expectations and work experience, as well as migration
regional attributes is highlighted. Section 3 presents the methodological aspects by means of which
variables were constructed together with their description, in addition to the basic statistics used.
Section 4 shows the application results followed by main conclusions that are presented in the last
section.

2. Labor mobility: review of literature
2.1. Internal mobility: a look at the previous labor mobility issue
          Distinct theories appear in the literature on population mobility, which attempt to explain
its causes and effects5. Most of such works recognize the relevance of the role performed by social
networks in the decision to migrate (Gottlieb, 1987; Grossman, 1989; Church e King, 1993; Massey
and Espinosa, 1997; Orrenius, 1999; Zahniser, 1999; Davis and Winters, 2001; Winters et al.2001;
Munshi, 2003; Colussi, 2006). As has been discussed before, previous migrants can facilitate
further migration through social networks in this way attracting other migrants from the same
geographic area. The former tend to attract migration of family members to their destination area
(Bartel, 1989; Dunlevy, 1991; Jaeger, 2000).
          The role played by social networks or interpersonal relationship has been focused on in the
literature of mobility determinants, although in most of the studies reported the role of migratory or
mobility effectiveness has not been measured explicitly (Lee, 1966; Kulu and Bilari, 2004; Lucas,
1977; Greenwood, 1973; Levy and Wadycki, 1973; Carrington et al. 1996; Dahl, 2004; Harbison,
1981; Massey et al., 1993). However, there is a consensus among authors on those labor migratory
network help to reduce costs and risks inherent to migration, which also contribute to enhance
expectations of migration return (Massey et al., 1993).
        Access to information and personal contacts are crucial for the decision to migrate (Lee,
1966). According to Lucas (1977), access to a kinship network or other networks in a destination
place makes people more disposed to migrate and choose to move to that place, as such networks
may ease migrants’ assimilation and lessen their migration costs. Previous migrants may attract new

5
  It is noteworthy, however, that the authors do not intend to establish a comparative assessment of the different
theoretical approaches.
                                                                                                                3
ones simply because the latter are more aware of migration advantages and can count on their help
and information on jobs (Sahota, 1968).
        Carrington et al. (1996) argue that labor migration costs are smaller in the presence of a
stock of previously established migrants (earlier migrant networks) and that migration tends to
follow past migration channels. This implies the idea that previous migration movements are a key
element when choosing a given destination, suggesting that costs associated with migration to a
certain region are lower when an earlier migrant network has been previously established.
        Greenwood (1973), using India’s census data for 1961, concluded that migrants were
strongly inclined to migrate to localities that had previously attracted their regions’ natives. For this
author, disregarding the effect of previous migration flows can lead to an overestimation of a direct
relation between migrant flows and variables like income and urbanization.
        The hypothesis by Greenwood (1973) that earlier migrants influence the volume and
direction of current migration flows was tested by Levy and Wadycki (1973) for the particular case
of Venezuela. This study confirmed the hypothesis that past migration patterns do influence current
migratory flows and that disregarding this factor leads to overestimate other variables explaining
migration. Again according to these authors, the fact that Venezuela is not characterized by
linguistic barriers among its states suggests that the effect of migrant stock variable on current
migration can mainly provide a systemic network of informal information.
          Recent studies support the idea that social networks have influence on job searching in a
destination region. Based on samples of individuals from several “origin-communities” in Mexico
over a long time period, Munshi (2003) measured each Mexican community network by the
proportion of sampled individuals localized in their destination places in the USA and verified that
individuals with higher chance to work in the latter country were those who had previously been
related to immigration networks. Mackenzie and Rapoport (2004) studied the effect of the network
financial support. These authors found empirical evidence of a U-shaped relation between
immigration and inequality in Mexican communities based on migration rates at state level and the
American labor market conditions. According to these authors, this result was consistent with the
hypothesis that immigrant networks help newcomers immigrants by financing their migration costs.
        Dolfin and Genicot (2010) in an attempt to investigate how community networks influenced
migration – carried out empirical tests for network effects based on a simple migration model that
allowed individuals to choose to migrate by their own or with the help of a coyote. By using a set of
data on illegal Mexican immigrants in the US, they found that family members had encouraged
them both to migrate by their own and by means of a coyote help.
        In view of the arguments set above, it can be concluded that choosing a destination is not
randomly pursued by individuals, but influenced by previous mobility flows. In this way, there
exists inertia in labor mobility, based on which – as expected – the larger the previous migration
flow to a given destination is, the larger the future mobility to the same destination. This hypothesis
is to be tested in this work by controlling other individual and regional variables that can affect the
decision-making of labor mobility. The idea of migratory effectiveness presented here refers to the
existence of a previous labor migrant stock (or migrant networks) that makes it easier for formal
workers to entry in the labor market due to availability of a greater information set including labor
conditions, cost of living and migration return possibilities.

2.2. Relevance of individual factors: schooling, experience and wages
         Researches on migration have used individual choice models which state that people migrate
aiming to maximize their well-being. In accordance with the theory of human capital, such a choice
is related to an individual’s human capital (Sjaastad, 1962; Becker, 1962). Therefore, some of such
results are agreed upon in the international literature on mobility, such as influence of schooling for
likelihood of migration (Stark and Bloom, 1985; Hazans, 2003; Stambol, 2003; Sahota, 1968; Dahl,
2004 Zimmermann, 2004; Faggian & McCann, 2009).
         The relevance of education for explaining systematic differences between individual
likelihood to migrate, since educated individuals are considered as more flexible and susceptible to
                                                                                                       4
move, as well as more innovative and attentive to opportunities to change. Additionally, high
income regions generally show high rates of education. Educated people from an origin region must
compete with educated people in a region of destination and, ceteris paribus, a high level of
education in the destination may be an inhibiting factor for educated migrants. Therefore, one
cannot predict, a priori, the influence of education in one way or the other (Sahota, 1968).
        Skilled individuals’ behavior is essentially determined by the same motivations and market
forces acting upon those less-qualified individuals. However, more qualified individuals tend to
differently distinguish the various aspects affecting their decision-making, due to the intrinsic
characteristics of their own personalities and education background (Grubel and Scott, 1976).On the
other hand, less-educated people seem to become strongly dependent on their families and friends
in their regions of origin. The psychological costs of leaving their origin are thus higher, as they
have lower opportunities to return home to visit relatives and friends, due to their lower income and
budget restrictions (Faggian and McCann, 2009).
        The risk associated with the choice to migrate is lower for educated people. Their chances to
become unemployed are lower because – if jobs that are compatible with their schooling degrees
are not available – these workers may accept inferior but well-remunerated positions, which are
usually available for those less qualified workers. However, such costs become higher with
distance, since information on labor market tends to become more available in nearby places.
        Income is another important factor in determining workers’ migration. An individual worker
makes a cost-benefit analysis in order to determine if migration is worthwhile by weighing wage
differentials in the origin and destination. An individual chooses to migrate, if expected income in
the destination is higher than that in the origin (Borjas, 2000). Therefore, a decision to move to
another region or urban center is made on the basis of comparison between current wage values of
job opportunities in different places. Wage rate thus is the most important economic variable, since
decision to migrate is not based on the average wage but on prospective earnings (Sahota, 1968).
        Several authors have studied social and individual components of inter- and intra-regional
skilled labor migration in different countries and regions in recent years. Their results indicated the
relevance of sociological factors, such as social networks, in addition to asserting that individual
components like age, gender and experience were nested in labor mobility. On the other hand, more
qualified labor force was more susceptible to move to other places as compared to other workers
(Bover and Arellano, 2002; Stambol, 2003; Dahl, 2004; Kulu and Bilari, 2004; Nakosteen and
Westerlund, 2004; Mitchell, 2008).
        In this way, it is worth noting that decisions to migrate are significantly influenced by
expectations of future gains and seniority. Education is thus an important element of prospective
returns obtained with migration.

2.3. Main regional attributes influencing labor mobilty
        Migration is a complex phenomenon that comprises an interaction between social contexts
with individual beliefs and wishes (Kulu and Bilary, 2004). As for the features of destination places,
many factors make labor attraction to increase or decrease, since economic factors are considered
the most important ones as compared to non-monetary factors (Golgher, 2004). The following
factors are highlighted: wage differentials among regions; different job availability; costs of living
and housing.
        However, non-pecuniary variables have been increasingly relevant in migratory flows,
mainly for skilled labor, which are named amenities and defined as any local geographic attribute,
due to which a potential migrant would be willing to acquire, even if there is no way how to buy a
portion of such an attribute (Garber-Yontes, 2004).
        As for the geographic distribution of labor force in the USA in the last three decades,
Moretti (2011) highlighted the fact that skilled workers had been increasingly concentrated in cities
with high costs of living, while unskilled workers, conversely, had increasingly preferred to move
to centers with low costs of living. This fact might be associated with the fact that amenities could
be more easily found in the skilled labor destinations.
                                                                                                     5
        In their study of domestic mobility in Finland, Ritsilä and Haapanem (2003) emphasized the
highly educated individuals’ preference for densely populated and urbanized centers with better job
opportunities. Hazans (2003) found a quite different result for Baltic countries when analyzing
migrants’ response to wage and unemployment differentials among regions. This author concluded
that a high unemployment rate in the origin region encouraged people’s exit, while high wages gave
rise to an opposite effect. People were less inclined to move to more urbanized regions or regions
presenting higher population density.
        Aldashev and Dietz (2014) analyses economic and spatial determinants of interregional
migration in Kazakhstan using panel data on region to region migration in 2008–2010. The authors
have focused on racial segregation and conclude that people are more likely to move to regions
where incomes are higher. According to the authors, mobility is higher among the most populated
and nearby regions. In addition, investments in public and social infrastructure can facilitate the
convergence of regional income in Kazakhstan and improve living standards in depressed regions.
        As for Brazil – generally characterized as a country of continental dimensions – internal
migration is a remarkable phenomenon. According to Ferreira and Matos (2004), migration has
guaranteed real wages for workers. These authors analyzed labor mobility in the Brazilin formal
labor market based on data from Rais-Migra– 1995-2003. Results showed that a higher dynamism
found in labor markets in localities other than those in great urban agglomerations has improved
attraction of more qualified labor force. Such a move has been verified in medium-size urban
centers and even smaller localities in the Brazilian Center-South region.
        According to Queiroz and Golgher (2008), nonpecuniary determinants of the decision to
migrate associated with regional characteristics has become increasingly important for skilled labor
in the face of economic aspects. Skilled workers have been seeking regions with urban amenities,
such as good climate conditions, housing and leisure availability, as well as absence of negative
urban conditions, such as problems of traffic congestion, crime and pollution. Other regional factors
that are relevant for the decision to migrate made by skilled or unskilled labor force in Brazil are
described by Mata et al. (2007): income differentials between origin and destination, life
expectation, housing conditions, salubriousness, conditions and quality of work places, cultural
environment, comparable habits and customs between origin and destination regions, proximity to
seacoast, less rigorous climate conditions and infrastructure.
        Netto Júnior and Moreira (2003) estimated the relation between migratory flows and income
per capita differentials and found signs of a strong and positive relation between migration and
income level among Brazilian states, which suggested that states showing higher income levels
were greater migrant receivers.
        Migration determinants of highly skilled workers in Brazil were inequalities between origin
and destination places as regions presented opportunity, remuneration differentials, as well as
survey conditions (Sabadini and Azzoni, 2006).
        Based on the aforesaid, the present study is to approach a series of issues that are considered
strategic for the decision to migrate. For all the reasons mentioned above, there is need to consider
such features (pecuniary or not) in destination regions that have made them attractive to the
immigrants’ decision to migrate.

3. Methodology and data
3.1. Empirical model: multilevel approach
         Hierarchical models are used with the aim to investigate phenomena whose data show a
hierarchically organized structure with data variability embedded in more than one hierarchy level.
In a multilevel analysis, data are arranged in levels assuming that the dependent variable is
measured in the most disaggregated level. Independent variables, however, can be specified at the
first level or at higher levels.
         The method adopted here allows violating the hypothesis of error terms independently and
identically distributed (i.i.d.), an outcome of dependence among individuals within the same unit.
Additionally, this method allows avoiding the problem of ecological and atomistic fallacies arising
                                                                                                     6
from data aggregation or disaggregation that consist in analyzing data in one level and formulate
conclusions in another level (Raudenbush and Bryk, 2002). The ecological fallacy occurs when
interpreting aggregated data at the individual level, by confusing the individual effect with the
aggregate effect. The atomistic fallacy happens when conclusions are extracted from an aggregate
hierarchical level in analysis carried out at the individual level (Hox, 2002).
        According to Hox (2002), the best approach to this issue is that which recognizes the
relevance of all hierarchical levels when investigating a phenomenon. Goldstein (1995) stated that
the explicit modeling of each hierarchical level is advantageous from the statistical viewpoint. As
the error structure is partitioned for each hierarchical level, standard errors may be more precisely
estimated resulting in more efficient estimates of coefficients, which make it possible to construct a
more robust significance test.
        This approach also allows us to control heterogeneity of intercept and slope coefficients,
since independent variables at the second level and random error terms as well may affect the
estimated coefficient levels at the first level. In this way, the first level coefficients become
variables due to the nesting of coefficients, which can be explained by variables at the second level.
        For this study, the aforesaid model assumes here the form presented in (1) for the first level
equation, containing different variables at this level. The reason for this is to make it possible the
control of eventual unobservable individual effects that might be correlated with individual
variables, such as abilities, proactivity and motivation:

                                                                                                                      (1)

         where       is a binary variable that assume value 1 if the individual i has migrated and 0
otherwise. Migration is defined as the worker’s moving from one microregion to another where
he/she had employment relations between 2003 and 20086, in which subscripts i and j represent
individuals and microregions, respectively. Additionally,
i = 1...N are the units of level 1, individuals in this case;
j = 1...J are the units of level 2, microregions in this case;
      = wage expectation;
      = experience.
    is the mean result for the jth unit;
   is the random effect related to level 1;
         The specification for level 2 is presented by equation (2):

                                                                                                                     (2)

where       corresponds to the mean result for all individuals and is the random effect related to
level 2. It was assumed that      and     were independent and showed a normal distribution with
zero mean and constant variances,      and , respectively.
where,
   = Migratory Effectiveness Index;
   = GDP per capita;
   = population;
   = proportion of workers with higher education;
   = vehicles/population;


6
 Analyzing the directionality aspect of labor mobility becomes impossible when migration is defined based on
administrative units. Another restraint is that a survey area for skilled workers tends to be non-circular, asymmetric and
elongated toward the dominant urban center. Conversely, as for scarcely qualified workers, such directionality aspect
tends to be more evenly distributed through space (Faggian et al., 2013).
                                                                                                                        7
       = homicide rate;
       = industrialization degree;
       = Dummies for the region;
           Based on the estimation of the null model, it is possible to estimate the intraclass correlation
ρ7 :

ρ                                                                                                                    (3)

where        and     , respectively, represent the variability within and between groups 2.

        According to Raudenbush and Bryk (2002), coefficient ρ indicates the proportion of
variance explained by the group-structured population. This coefficient represents the proportion of
variance at the group level as compared to total variance.
        After estimating the unconditional multilevel model and verify whether the variance is
significantly different from zero, the explaining variables corresponding to the intercept 8 are
gradually placed turning the model into a conditional one. The significance of such variables lies in
that the average likelihood of labor force to migrate is different between microregions due to the
contextual features within which the worker is inserted.
        A randomness test of coefficients involves estimating the model assuming that they are
random coefficients. A null hypothesis of randomness should not be rejected in case the contextual
variance components are significantly different from zero.
        A two-level hierarchical9 logit model is to be estimated in order to treat the binary dependent
variable, which assumes value 1 in case the individual has migrated and value 0, if not. The first
level refers to individual characteristics and the second level refers to information on the 558
Brazilian microregions. In accordance with the scope of the study, the multilevel approach was
chosen which incorporates the nested data structure in different levels each of which is considered
as a submodel. This allows analyzing the relation between variables at the aggregate level
(microregions) and the variable at the individual level (likelihood to migrate). In this study, the
dependent variable is represented at the lowest aggregation level (level 1), while the explaining
variables refer to both levels.

3.2. Description of database and variables
       The data used in this work come from the RAIS-MIGRA (from the Brazilian Labor
Ministry), IPEADATA and UNDP datasets. RAIS is a very broad base which follows up
approximately 75 million workers in the Brazilian formal labor market each year and includes their
personal features, such as age, gender and schooling. It also includes information on employers,
such as size of establishment and sector of activity, in addition to information on geographical and
sectoral aspects and on yield as well.
       As for multilevel approach used, the data comprise the workers’ sample (level 1) and the
geographic unit analyzed – 558 Brazilian microregions (level 2). Mobility is defined as the worker’s
move among microregions in which he/she had labor relations in the years between 2003 and 2008.



7
  The question is whether incorporating more than one hierarchical level is econometrically justifiable, i.e., whether
including a second level helps to explain variability of data used in the model.
8
  It is worth noting that including explaining variables in the equation of the model at level 2, except for that
representing the coefficient β0j, leads to the emergence of interaction terms between variables present in both levels of
the model. This means that a group characteristic can modify the effect of an individual characteristic in the response
variable.
9
  The generalized linear hierarchical model is estimated by means of the restricted PQL (Penalized Quasi-Likelihood)
method. The HLM 6.08 was the statistical software used.
                                                                                                                       8
       We built a 10% random sample due to the high number of individual observations included
in the RAIS-MIGRA database10. Therefore, we obtained a sample containing 7,542,930
observations for individuals – migrants or not – who had any schooling degree, from illiteracy to
complete higher learning. Based on this sample, eight subsamples were constructed for the
following two-year periods: 2005-2004, 2006-2005, 2007-2006, 2008-200711, out of which four
included general workers comprising 1,257,155 individuals in each (table 1), and the remaining four
included skilled workers. The number of the latter increased over time, since – as soon as
individuals had completed their higher education in the course of years – they started taking part in
the sample of skilled individuals in the following years (table 2).
         Table 1 shows information on the number of migrants and nonimmigrants for the
considered year combinations in the Brazilian formal labor market for general workers in the period
2003-200812, according to the RAIS-MIGRA. Migrants comprised approximately 3.41% of total
workers in the Brazilian formal labor market as for the two-year periods considered. Approximately
21% out of the migrant labor force were skilled workers.

Table 1: Structure of subsamples for workers in general constructed based on RAIS-MIGRA
                                                 Total
Couple of
                Migrants     Non-migrants     (Migrants +
  years
                                            Non-migrants)
2005-2004        44,800        1,212,355       1,257,155
2006-2005        44,055       1 ,213,100       1,257,155
2007-2006        42,059       1 ,215,096       1,257,155
2008-2007        40,976        1,216,179       1,257,155
  Total         171,890        4,856,730       5,0286,20
Source: Prepared by the authors based on RAIS-MIGRA-MTE.

       As for skilled labor samples, the absolute number of migrant workers was slightly increased,
although its percentage is practically the constant.

  Table 2: Structure of subsamples for skilled workers constructed based on RAIS-MIGRA.
                                                   Total
 Couple of
                Migrants      Non-migrants      (Migrants +
   years
                                               Non-migrants)
 2005-2004        8,383         228,436           236,819
 2006-2005        9,185         241,514           250,699
 2007-2006        9,255         253,195           262,450
 2008-2007        8,559         268,849           277,408
   Total         35,382         991,994          1,027,376
Source: Prepared by the authors based on RAIS-MIGRA-MTE.

       As for all samples, differences in variables at the individual level are considered in
accordance with the two-year period in question with the aim to control the unobserved individual


10
   A possible bias could arise if a random sample of individuals maintaining their formal work relation in the period
analyzed is withdrawn, i.e., individuals who have not left the database. This sample could not be avoided as it would be
needed in order to construct a migration variable between t and t-1, as well as in the following-up of such individuals
through time.
11
   The absence of estimates for the 2004-2003 hierarchical model is justifiable, as the individuals are not considered
migrants in 2003, i.e., only the origin microregion of all individuals can be considered for that year as they can only be
taken as migrants from the year 2004 and on.
12
   It is worth noting that the migration period focused extended from 2004 to 2008. For this reason, a difference appears
as for the number of individuals from 2003 to 2008 (7,542,930) and that from 2004 to 2008 (5,028,620).
                                                                                                                        9
abilities, such as capability, proactivity and motivation. Such individual characteristics may be
correlated with work experience and wage variables, i. e., they may be endogenous.
        Therefore, hierarchical models were estimated – though not shown – including variables
such as sex, age, age-squared, which were considered as relevant for the decision to migrate.
However, due to the relevance for controlling fixed effects by working with data on first-differences
at the individual level, such variables were suppressed in the models presented in this paper.
Nevertheless, these variables were still under control, even though their respective marginal effects
were not made explicit.
        As for the regional level, the variables considered were those present in the destination
place. The samples referred to those individuals who did not migrate in the period and to the
destination of individuals who have migrated between the periods of years analyzed. An individual
having a complete higher learning was considered as a skilled worker. A binary dependent variable
was constructed for each two-year period, in which value one (1) was attributed to the individual
who had migrated in the last year of the difference in question, and zero otherwise. Value (1) was
determined in the destination, not in the origin, i.e., after verifying change in labor relation.
Regional characteristics are related to the microregion of destination in the base year used in
differentiating variables at the individual level.
        The theory on labor interregional mobility justifies the focus on the characteristics of the
worker’s destination place in detriment of those in the origin. This theory states that destination
place is the local exerting a higher influence on the decision to migrate as compared to that of the
origin (Massey et al., 1993). The modeling of labor mobility between regions carried out in
empirical studies tends to point out such mobility in the destination (Pekkala, 2003; Kulu and Bilari,
2004). Chart 1 describes individual and regional variables.

                                     Chart 1: Description of variables
Variables                                                      Description
Level 1
Experience                         Number of months worked under the same labor relation. RAIS-
                                   MIGRA.
Wage delta                         Difference between average wage of labor occupation in the origin
                                   microregion and that found in the destination place. RAIS-MIGRA.
Level 2
Migratory Effectiveness            The ratio between the migratory balance in the last seven years
Index - MEI                        (subtraction of entries and exits) divided by the volume of migrants
                                   (addition of entries and exits) in the destination microregion
                                   (prepared by authors based on the Rais-Migra).
Higher education                   Labor stock having complete higher education divided by total
                                   labor in the microregion. RAIS.
GDP per capita                     Income per capita in the microregion. IPEADATA.
Population                         Number of inhabitants. IPEADATA.
Industrialization degree           Proportion of workers in extractive and manufacturing industries
                                   divided by total labor force in the economy (prepared by the authors
                                   from the Rais-Migra).
Vehicles/population                Number of automotive vehicles divided by the population. Data
                                   taken from there gistration system of national automotive vehicles
                                   (Sistema de Registro Nacional de Veículos Automotores -
                                   RENAVAN / DENATRAN).
Homicide rate                      Total of homicides divided by 100,000 inhabitants (IPEADATA).
Source: Prepared by the authors.




                                                                                                          10
        The variable wage delta13 reflected the mobility wage expectation. This variable was
constructed based on the difference between the average wage of the individual’s occupation (four
digits) in t and the individual’s wage also in t. Constructing this variable is justified by the fact that
the worker – ex-ante mobility – did not count on any precise information on wages at the
destination in case of an eventual job change. Therefore, as the destination wage was not observable
ex-ante, workers were at best supposed to compare their earnings to the average wage of their
occupations both measured before changing their labor relation. This proxy for the wage benefit of
mobility was equally estimated for workers who did not move from their microregions with the aim
to capture eventual job proposals the individuals might have received from other microregions.
        The labor experience variable was measured by taking into account the number of months
worked under the labor relation prior to mobility. This variable measures the commitment to the
current employer and the negative relation between experience and propensity to mobility suggested
that workers having more tacit knowledge were less inclined to move to other microregions as
compared to those with lower level of experience.
        We proposed to measure efficacy labour mobility by using an index that was constructed
based on Baeninger (2000) who analyzed migration among regions through time in Brazil. The
variable of mobility – Migratory Effectiveness Index – was created based on the argument that
migration networks bear an inertial behavior in migration and mobility. Such variable was
constructed by the balance of workers received (immigrants) and sent (emigrants) for the
destination microregion in the last seven years before mobility divided by the volume of migrant
workers. The related index varies from -1and 1 whose values near to 1 indicate high absorption
capacity. On the other hand, values near to -1 suggest high capacity of population exit, while values
near to zero point to equilibrium between entries and exits in a given microregion. This indicator
allows us to compare microregions irrespectively of absolute volume of entries (immigration) and
exits (emigration).

                                                                                                                 (4)

        The positive sign of this variable’s coefficient suggested that the destination places with
more significant Migratory Effectiveness Index mobility efficiency had attracted an increased
number of migrants.
        A variable was created viewing to determine the competitiveness degree the worker would
be facing in the labor market when moving between microregions. The variable higher education
represented the relation between labor stock with higher education (proportion of labor with
complete higher education) and total labor stock in a microregion. The negative sign of this variable
indicated that the larger the amount of professionals with complete higher education, the smaller the
propensity to move as competitiveness for jobs tends to be higher in the destination (Beals et al.
1967). On the other hand, cities having abundant human capital can be attractive due to human
capital spillovers (Moreti, 2011).
        The GDP per capita variable comprised the economic prosperity degree in a given
microregion. The higher the income level in a region is, the higher the probability of labor mobility
toward this region.
        The population variable was related to the size of the city and availability of services, as
well as employment opportunities14. A higher number of people going to a destination place could
reflect over population and this would discourage labor mobility. A negative sign of this variable
may suggest that people are less inclined to move to more urbanized regions with higher population
density (Hazans, 2003).

13
   This variable was created based on the solution presented by Mendes et al. (2012) for inter-firm labor mobility in
formal Brazil.
14
   The unemployment rate could be used as a proxy for employment opportunities in a destination region. However,
these statistics are not available at a regional level in Brazil, mainly in the period analyzed.
                                                                                                                  11
        The industrialization degree variable was constructed based on data from the RAIS-MIGRA,
which constituted the ratio between total labor in manufacturing and extractive industries and total
labor force in the economy. In case of positive sign, highly industrialized microregions can attract
labor force and vice-versa. This variable captures the industrial development degree of the region in
question.
        The vehicles/population variable acted as a proxy for traffic congestion and CO2 emission,
reflecting the pollution level in the microregion. The higher this proportion is, the lower the
probability that this microregion receives migrant labor force. The homicide rate variable was an
indicator of quality of life. High criminality can be understood as a relatively short life expectation.
There is a negative relationship between the rate of crimes and the degree of attractiveness of a
region for migrant people (Mata et al., 2007).
        As for the advantage of using the RAIS-MIGRA database, it should be emphasized that this
database makes it possible to follow-up individual labor relations each year, which conveys
information on origin and destination microregions, as well as on migrant labor skillfulness.

4. Results
4.1. Migratory Effectiveness Index - mobility in Brazil for the period 2003-2008:
characteristics of     the formal labor market
        Migratory Effectiveness Index mobility indices of formal workers in 2003-2008 can be seen
in Figure 1. First of all, areas characterized as turnover areas prevailed in all two-year periods
considered, i.e., areas showing equilibrium between formal labor entries and exits. On the other
hand, those microregions characterized as sending areas were mostly localized in the North and
Northeast regions, and in the South regions as well. In the North, the state of Pará, which showed
the highest volumes of immigrants and emigrants in the region, proved to be predominantly
characterized as a labor attracting area.
          The states of Amazonas, Acre and Rondônia were highly heterogeneous, since they had
microregions characterized as both labor attracting areas and turnover areas and, conversely, as
sending areas; a fact that evidenced alternate functions over the years. On the other hand, the state
of Amapá –which due to efficiency indices in 2003-2005, was ranked as a labor sending area –
turned out to be mostly attractive in the following two-year periods. Roraima and Tocantins could
be seen as population attracting areas and labor turnover areas.
          Microregions in the Northeast region were mostly characterized as showing labor turnover
patterns. Microregions containing state capitals in the Northeast were predominantly ranked as
labor turn over areas all through the analyzed period. Maceió, Salvador, Fortaleza, João Pessoa,
Recife, Natal and Aracaju showed to have their migratory effectiveness indices near zero, except for
São Luis, the capital of the state of Maranhão. The latter was predominantly a labor sending area in
2004-2007, while it presented an previous turnover pattern in the last biennium, 2007-2008. On the
other hand, the microregion containing Teresina, the capital city of Piauí state, was characterized as
a labor turnover area in the first three biennial periods, while in the last two years it proved to show
labor attractiveness.
          As for the Southeast region, distinct roles were observed for the microregions
encompassing its state capitals. The state of Minas Gerais, traditionally a population sending space,
was ranked as a labor turnover area. The state of Rio de Janeiro, once a population receiver, had its
capital city ranked as a turnover space all through the period studied. Similarly, São Paulo and
Espírito Santo were considered areas where labor turnover prevailed, although having their capital
cities ranked as receivers of large labor contingents and at the same time classified as senders of
many workers to the remaining Brazilian microregions.




                                                                                                     12
     Figure 1: Migratory Effectiveness Index–MEI
     (2003- 2008)




Source: Prepared by the authors based on Rais-Migra.




                                                       13
         The South region –the smallest among Brazilian regions – comprises three states – Paraná,
Santa Catarina and Rio Grande do Sul. As observed for almost all capital cities mentioned before,
the microregions encompassing the capital cities of the southern states – Curitiba, Florianópolis and
Porto Alegre – were areas with large movement of formal workers characterized by labor turnover.
A traditional population sender, the state of Paraná proved to be converted predominantly into a
labor turnover state. As for Rio Grande do Sul, its capital city was observed as a labor turnover
area, while some microregions that counted on smaller labor opportunities –like Soledade and São
Gerônimo – appeared to be labor senders. Similarly, Santa Catarina was observed as a
predominantly labor turnover region, except for the microregion of Tabuleiro, where labor had
mostly moved out.
         The Center-West region is comprised of the states of Mato Grosso, Goiás and Mato Grosso
do Sul, in addition to the Federal District – Brasília, the Capital of Brazil. Most of their
microregions were ranked as formal labor turnover areas, including their capital cities – Campo
Grande, Cuiabá, Goiânia and Brasília as well.

4.2. Empirical results
        Individual and regional conditions for the likelihood to migrate of general labor were
estimated together with first level variables by taking into account the differences between the
respective two-year pairs, as follows: 2005-2004, 2006-2005, 2007-2006 e 2008-2007, which
constitute 4 hierarchical models with 7 specifications each (Table 3). As microregional variables
were included, it could be concluded that an average of 20% of the variability of migration
likelihood of workers in general was a result of regional characteristics.
        As for individual characteristics, labor cumulative experience was negatively related with
mobility likelihood in all models and significant at 1%. This suggested that a higher opportunity
cost associated with mobility for experienced individuals in relation to those less-experienced or
inexperienced workers, because of their previously acquired experience. This result was in
accordance with that found by Dahl (2004) in a study of mobility for Denmark in which cumulative
experience along years of work was less liable to be transferred.
        The sign of the wage variable coefficient that reflected mobility expectation was positive
and significant at 1% in all models for workers in general. This suggested that workers whose
wages were below the average of the occupations in the microregion were more likely to move as
their wages encouraged them to look for better job opportunities.
        The Migratory Effectiveness Index mobility had a positive impact on propensity to migrate
in all estimated models, confirming the initial hypothesis that previous migration flows toward the
destination region chosen by the individual affected positively the decision to migrate. This fact
occurred in view of the reduced risks associated with the decision to move away (Sahota, 1968;
Massey et al., 1993; Carrington et al., 1996). That is, the chance to migrate was higher when the
destination microregion showed a larger previous migrant stock. When the Migratory Effectiveness
Index was increased by a standard deviation, an increase of 7% in the chance to move away could
be observed from the odds ratio of this variable, which was represented by odds ratio for standard
deviation.
        Such results showed that the coefficient of the variable vehicles/population was negative and
significant in two subsamples for the period studied, indicating that migrant workers sought job
opportunities in microregions with smaller fleet of vehicles and traffic congestion, which meant less
pollution indices.
        It can be noted that the output per capita affected mobility positively, meaning that
microregions having higher economic prosperity were more attractive to immigrants. The
proportion of individuals with complete higher education had a negative impact on the mobility of
workers in general as it represented a higher level of competition for the latter. And this is because
qualified individuals were better-off than less-educated people as for job opportunities in a
competitive labor market.

                                                                                                   14
 Table 3: Results of the best hierarchical models for labor mobility likelihood for workers in
                                       general in Brazil.
                                     Best Hierarchical      Best Hierarchical      Best Hierarchical     Best Hierarchical
  Dependent Variable
                                    Model for the years   Model for the years    Model for the years    Model for the years
  Migrate =1 ; non-migrant = 0
                                        2005-2004              2006-2005              2007-2006              2008-2007
                                                Odds-                 Odds-                  Odds-                  Odds-
  Fixed component                    coef.                 coef.                  coef.                  coef.
                                                 Ratio                 Ratio                  Ratio                 Ratio
                Intercept           -3.519      0.029     -3.641      0.026      -3.749      0.023      -3.683      0.025
                                    (0.000)               (0.000)                (0.000)                (0.000)
    Migratory Effectiveness Index    0.068      1.070      0.029      1.092       0.082      1.085       0.067      1.089
                                    (0.044)               (0.365)                (0.009)                (0.043)
    Vehicles/population             -0.007      0.993     -0.059      0.942      -0.097      0.908      -0.127      0.881
                                    (0.890)               (0.257)                (0.053)                (0.015)
    GDP per capita                   0.148      1.160      0.154      1.167       0.175      1.190       0.246      1.279
                                    (0.000)               (0.000)                (0.000)                (0.000)
    Homicide rate                    0.013      1.142      0.078      1.081       0.045      1.046       0.043      1.045
                                    (0.000)               (0.008)                (0.106)                (0.127)
    Higher education                -0.062      0.940     -0.062      0.940      -0.045      0.955      -0.048      0.952
                                    (0.036)               (0.045)                (0.106)                (0.104)
    Industrialization degree         0.082      1.086      0.087      1.092       0.076      1.079       0.086      1.089
                                    (0.008)               (0.006)                (0.013)                (0.007)
    Population                      -0.041      0.959     -0.020      0.979      -0.021      0.979      -0.027      0.973
                                    (0.159)               (0.493)                (0.448)                (0.338)
    North                            0.111      1.117      0.324      1.382       0.253      1.288       0.162      1.176
                                    (0.286)               (0.002)                (0.013)                (0.122)
    Southeast                        0.259      1.296      0.349      1.418       0.458      1.581       0.307      1.360
                                    (0.007)               (0.001)                (0.000)                (0.002)
    South                            0.029      1.030      0.149      1.162       0.207      1.229       0.035      1.036
                                    (0.805)               (0.222)                (0.077)                (0.767)
    Center-West                      0.389      1.476      0.458      1.581       0.528      1.696       0.339      1.404
                                    (0.001)               (0.000)                (0.000)                (0.004)
  Experience                        -0.017      0.983     -0.018      0.982      -0.015      0.985      -0.016      0.984
                                    (0.000)               (0.000)                (0.000)                (0.000)
  Wage delta                         0.179      1.196      0.162      1.177       0.089      1.093       0.054      1.055
                                    (0.000)               (0.000)                (0.000)                (0.000)
                                        2                      2                      2                      2
  Random Component                              p-valor                p-valor                p-valor              p-valor
  Coefficient null model             0.362       0.000      0.358       0.000      0.319       0.000      0.359     0.000
  Coefficient complete model         0.293       0.000      0.303       0.000      0.271       0.000      0.287     0.000
  % Of variance explained           19.061                 15.363                 15.047                 20.056
  Number of observations
  Level 1                           1257154               1257154                1257154                1257154
  Level 2                             558                   558                    558                    558
  Note: variables were standardized for estimation [(variable- average) / standard deviation] for all cut-offs analyzed.
  Therefore, the odds ratios were expressed in terms of standard deviation and not marginal variation of the variable in
  question.
  Note: we have tested models not containing the variable of Migratory Effectiveness Index mobility index and noted
  a marginal percentage contribution of the models.
  Source: Prepared by the authors based on the models’ results.

          It is worth noting that the wage delta variable captured slight portion of the effect that
cities having large numbers of skilled workers caused on qualified people. As for our case, the sig
was negative for skilled labor delta. That is, they moved, despite wage losses. Non-pecuniary
reasons could be more relevant for those with higher schooling levels. As for the general sample, if
we look at its effect, the higher education variable seems to difficult migration (negative sign) and
the wage issue seems to attract (positive sign) migrants. Therefore, as the general worker’s wage
was controlled, competition seemed to occur in both cases. Destination places with large numbers
of skilled people repel both types of labor force.
        The coefficient of the homicide rate variable was positive and significant in two subsamples
and this could be reflecting the onus for better job opportunities on microregions with higher crime
rates; however, this result is different from the previous Brazilian evidence (Mata et al., 2007). The
variable of industrialization degree revealed a positive relation to labor mobility likelihood in
general, which indicated preference for more developed destination places. As compared to the

                                                                                                                              15
Northeast region, the Southeast and Center-West regions showed higher chances of being receivers
of labor force. The population variable does not affect the decision of general workers to migrate.
       Table 4 shows the results for skilled individuals. When contextual variables were included,
the explained data variability was significantly increased in all models – 32% in average, which was
higher than that verified for workers in general. Therefore, microregional features affected the
mobility likelihood of skilled labor force.

       Table 4: Results of the best hierarchical models for skilled labor mobility in Brazil
                                   Best Hierarchical     Best Hierarchical    Best Hierarchical   Best Hierarchical
   Dependent Variable
                                   Model for the years   Model for the years Model for the years Model for the years
   Migrate =1 ; non-migrant = 0
                                      2005-2004              2006-2005           2007-2006           2008-2007
                                                 Odds                 Odds                Odds                Odds
                                     coef.                 coef.               coef.               coef.
 Fixed component                                 Ratio                Ratio               Ratio               Ratio
 Intercept                          -3.163       0.042    -3.409      0.033   -3.430      0.032   -3.534      0.029
                                    (0.000)               (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)
   Migratory Effectiveness Index     0.093       1.098     0.100      1.105    0.148      1.160    0.105      1.111
                                    (0.060)               (0.032)             (0.002)             (0.025)
   Vehicles/population              -0.273       0.761    -0.433      0.648   -0.361      0.697   -0.271      0.763
                                    (0.000)               (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)
   GDP per capita                    0.031       1.032     0.058      1.059    0.081      1.085    0.143      1.153
                                    (0.463)               (0.173)             (0.028)             (0.000)
   Homicide rate                     0.052       1.053    -0.060      0.942   -0.055      0.946   -0.030      0.970
                                    (0.125)               (0.095)             (0.095)             (0.360)
   Higher education                 -0.084       0.919    -0.065      0.936   -0.025      0.975   -0.072      0.931
                                    (0.003)               (0.039)             (0.350)             (0.009)
   Industrialization degree          0.099       1.104     0.092      1.096    0.161      1.175    0.071      1.074
                                    (0.012)               (0.026)             (0.000)             (0.067)
   Population                       -0.057       0.945    -0.046      0.955   -0.053      0.948   -0.040      0.961
                                    (0.035)               (0.128)             (0.041)             (0.121)
   North                             0.404       1.497     0.586      1.797    0.366      1.442    0.451      1.571
                                    (0.007)               (0.000)             (0.011)             (0.002)
   Southeast                         0.596       1.815     1.014      2.755    0.866      2.376    0.589      1.804
                                    (0.000)               (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)
   South                             0.463       1.589     0.835      2.304    0.587      1.798    0.364      1.438
                                    (0.002)               (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.010)
   Center-West                       0.684       1.983     0.873      2.394    0.832      2.297    0.648      1.912
                                    (0.000)               (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)
 Experience                         -0.015       0.985    -0.016      0.984   -0.012      0.988   -0.013      0.987
                                    (0.000)               (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)
 Wage delta                         -0.079       0.923    -0.151      0.859   -0.098      0.907   -0.073      0.929
                                    (0.001)               (0.000)             (0.000)             (0.000)
                                        2                      2                   2                   2
 Random Component                                p-valor              p-valor             p-valor            p-valor
 Coefficient null model              0.333        0.000     0.467      0.000    0.360      0.000    0.313     0.000
 Coefficient complete model          0.237        0.000     0.300      0.000    0.233      0.000    0.218     0.000
 % Of variance explained            28.829                 35.760              35.277              30.351
 Number of observations
 Level 1                             236686                250561              262290               277203
 Level 2                              558                   558                 558                  558
 Note: variables were standardized for estimation. Therefore, odds ratios were expressed in terms of standard deviation
 and not in terms of marginal variation for the variable in question.
 Source: Prepared by the authors based on the models’ results.

        As for the variables at level 1, the coefficient of the variable of experience revealed the same
sign found for that of unskilled workers. Differently from the sample for unskilled workers, the
wage variable coefficient– which reflected expectation of pecuniary change – was negative and
significant This indicated that the propensity to move for skilled labor decreased the higher the
wage was, as compared to the occupation average wage. This could mean a lower impact of
pecuniary variables on the mobility of skilled labor force or that these workers would initially
accept reduced wages.
        A previous migrant network enhanced the chance of skilled labor mobility, suggesting that
past migratory flows would act positively on current moves all through the years considered. This


                                                                                                                    16
result was similar to that associated with subsamples for workers as a whole.15 This variable was in
turn the one with the highest positive impact on the chance to migrate for both labor force groups;
an evidence also found in previous works (Greenwood, 1973; Levy and Wadycki, 1973).
         It should be noted that the variable of vehicles/population presented a similar result to that
found for estimated models for workers as a whole, which indicated that skilled labor also sought
less-congested regions. However, the negative impact on mobility likelihood was higher for skilled
workers.
         The variables of GDP per capita and proportion of skilled individuals – similarly to the
results for workers in general – had a positive and negative influence, respectively – on mobility
likelihood of skilled workers. This result suggested that these workers tended to move to more
prosperous regions having less-skilled individuals, which reflected migrant workers’ concern about
competition for jobs in the microregions of destination.
         The homicide rate did not prove to be related to likelihood to migrate in general, except for
one subsample in which a negative and significant coefficient at 10% was evidenced, as showed by
Mata et al. (2007). An even higher propensity to migrate for destinations showing higher
industrialization degree and lower population density should be emphasized. All other regions – as
compared to the Northeast region – presented higher propensity to receive skilled workers.
         As can be seen, regional factors were more important for skilled labor than for unskilled
workers (34% against 21% of the explanatory variability of the intercept). Skilled labor was subject
to wage loss with mobility, while workers in the general sample showed prospective wage increase.
For both kinds of workers, migratory effectiveness index was a determinant of mobility likelihood,
being the main variable as far as the magnitude of positive marginal effect was concerned.
Robustness testing was carried out in order to control spatial autocorrelation in all subsamples
analyzed in this study.
         The several temporal cut-offs used in this work served as a robustness test. For testing the
stability of estimated coefficients, the confidence intervals coefficient has been used. Based on such
an analysis, we conclude that the estimated coefficients for the different cross-sections were
statistically identical.

5. Conclusions
         This study aimed to verify the role played by Migratory Effectiveness Index mobility, wage
expectation and regional attributes in labor mobility of individuals – educated or not – in order to
understand the different nuances and features found in the spatial mobility of these two groups. The
present study was carried out using a multilevel logit model in which the first differences were
focused at the individual level in order to capture unobservable effects that could be correlated with
the remaining variables present in this level.
         For this, a data containing information from the Relatório Anual de Informações Sociais –
Migração (RAIS-MIGRA – annual report on social data of the Brazilian Ministry of Labor and
Employment – MTE) for the period 2003-2008 was constructed at the individual level. As for the
regional context (level 2), the data used were those from IBGE (the Brazilian census data and
statistics agency), UNDP (United Nations Development Programme), CAGED-MTE (register for
employed and unemployed labor of MTE) and IPEADATA. (information from the Brazilian
institute for applied economic research).
         The hierarchical model approach confirmed the relevance of Migratory Effectiveness Index
mobility for studying labor spatial mobility, regardless the worker’s schooling degree due to the
previous higher knowledge stock to which the potential migrant has access to in view of the
destination to be chosen.


15
  As was the case for the remaining workers, the effect of a standard deviation increase in this variable was given by
the expression [exp(1* 0.093)] x100 for the 2005-2004 sample. The authors concluded that the effect of this variable
was statistically identical to that observed for general workers.
                                                                                                                   17
         Individual attributes, wage expectations and experience have proved to influence the
likelihood to migrate in all samples analyzed. Labor experience was an inhibiting factor of
migration both for skilled labor and workers in general, which restrained the intrinsic tacit
knowledge transfer to the labor force as a whole. The labor wage variable has distinctly contributed
for the decision to migrate by workers in general and skilled labor. The former were encouraged to
move to the extent that their earnings were lower than their occupations’ average wage. On the
other hand, skilled workers were more likely to move when their earnings were above the average
wage, which revealed that the pecuniary advantage was less relevant for labor mobility.
        When the context variables were included, the explanatory variance of the intercept
increased in all estimated models for general labor force and also for skilled workers, confirming
the relevance of contextual features in determining the mobility of migratory flows. In addition to
being relevant in both labor force samples, regional factors were particularly important as far as
skilled workers were concerned.
        Finally, understanding labor mobility determinants between the Brazilian microregions is
relevant when designing public policies intended for reducing human capital spatial inequalities. In
this context, the dynamics of labor mobility should be understood so as to predict its effects, as well
as to act on motivations and guidance of such flows. In view of these targets, the present analysis
combines individual and regional attributes, in addition to joining the migratory effectiveness index.

REFERENCES
Aldashev, A., Dietz, B., 2014. Economic and spatial determinants of interregional migration in
Kazakhstan. Economic Systems 38, 379–396.
Almeida, P., Kogut, B., 1999. Localization of knowledge and the mobility of engineers in regional
networks. Management Science 45, 905-917.
Baeninger, R. A., 2000. Região, metrópole e interior: espaços ganhadores e espaços perdedores nas
migrações recentes: Brasil, 1980-1996. In: Redistribuição da população e meio ambiente: São Paulo
e Centro-Oeste. Campinas: Universidade Estadual de Campinas - Unicamp, Núcleo de Estudos de
População - NEPO: [s.n.], 2000. cap. Textos NEP, p. 1-200. Disponível em:
,http://www.nepo.unicamp.br/textos/publicacoes/ textos\_nepo\_35.pdf>
Bartel, A.P., 1989. Where Do the New US Immigrants Live? Journal of Labor Economics 7(4),
371–391.
Beals, R., Levy, M., Moses, L., 1967. Rationality and Migration in Ghana. The Review of
Economics and Statistics 49, 480-486.
Bergman, E.M., 2009. Embedding network analysis in spatial studies of innovation. Annals
Regional Science 43, 559–565.
Borjas, G.J., 1996. “Labor mobility” In: Borjas, G.J., Labor economics. Singapura: McGraw-Hill
Book Co. pp. 279-317.
Carrington, W.J., Detragiache, E., Vishwanath, T., 1996. Migration with Endogenous Moving
Costs. American Economic Review 86 (4), 909-930.
Church, J., King, I., 1993. Bilingualism and network externalities. Canadian Journal of Economics
26, 337-345.
Colussi, A., 2006. Migrants’ networks: An estimable model of illegal Mexican migration. Work.
Pap., University of Western Ontario, Canada.
Dahl, G.B., 2002. Mobility and the Return to Education: Testing a Roy Model with Multiple
Markets. Econometrica 70, 2367-2420.
Dahl, M., 2004. Embodied Knowledge Diffusion, Labor Mobility and Regional Dynamics: Do
Social Factors Limit the Development Potential of Regions? Paper for the DRUID Summer
Conference.
Davis, B., Winters, P., 2001. Gender, networks and Mexico-US migration. Journal of Development
Studies 38(2), 1-26.
Dolfin, S., Genicot, G., 2010. What do networks do? The role of networks on migration and
"coyote" use. Review of Development Economics 14 (2), 343-359.
                                                                                                    18
Faggian, A., MCcann, P., 2009. Human capital and regional development. In, Capello, R., Nijkamp,
P. (eds.) Handbook of Regional Growth and Development Theories. Cheltenham, UK, Edward
Elgar, pp. 131-151.
Feldman, M.P., 1999. "The new economics of innovation, spillovers and agglomeration: a review of
empirical studies". Economics of Innovation and New Technology 8, 5-25.
Ferreira, R.N., Matos, R., 2006. Migração de trabalhadores no mercado formal brasileiro entre 1995
e 2003 e as tendências da reestruturação territorial. In: ENCONTRO NACIONAL DE ESTUDOS
POPULACIONAIS, 14, 2004, Caxambu. Anais. Belo Horizonte: ABEP.
Freguglia, R.S., Gonçalves, E., Silva, E.R., 2014. Composition and determinants of the skilled out-
migration in the Brazilian formal labor market: A panel data analysis from 1995 to 2006. EconomiA
15, 100–117.
Garber-yontes, B.E., 2004. The economics of amenities and migration in the Pacific Northwest: a
review of selected literature with implications for national forest management. General Technical
Report. PNW-GTR-617. USDA Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station, Portland, OR.
Goldstein, H., 1995. Multilevel Statistical Models. London: Arnold.
Gottlieb, P., 1987. Making Their Own Way: Southern Blacks Migration to Pittsburgh, 191630.
Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Greenwood, M.J., 1973. The Influence of Family and Friends on Geographic Labour Mobility in a
Less - Developed Country : the Case of India. Review of Regional Studies 3, 27-36.
Grossman, J.R., 1989. Land of Hope: Chicago, Black Southerners, and the Great Migration.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Grubel, H.G., Scott, A., 1976. The brain drain: determinants, measurement and welfare effects.
Canadá: Waterloo 1.ed.
Hall, B.H., 2005. Innovation and diffusion. In: Fagerberg, J., Mowery, D.C., Nelson, R.R. (Eds.),
The Oxford Handbook of Innovation, New York: Oxford University Press.
Harris, J., Todaro, M., 1970. Migration, Unemployment and Development: A Two-Sector Analysis.
The American Economic Review 60, 126-142.
Hazans, M., 2003. Determinants of inter-regional migration in the Baltic countries. ZEI working
paper B17.
Hox, J., 2002. Multilevel Analysis: Techniques and Applications. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc.
Kulu, H., Bilari, F.C., 2004. “Multilevel analysis of internal migration in a transitional country: the
case of Estonia”. Regional Studies 38, 697-696.
Lee, E.A., 1966. Theory of Migration. Demography 3, 47-57.
Levy, M.B., Wadycki, W.J., 1973. The Influence of Family and Friends on Geographic Labor
Mobility: An International Comparison. Review of Economics and Statistics 55, 198-203.
Lucas, R.E.B., 1997. Internal migration in developing countries. In: Rosenzweig, M.R., stark, O.
Handbook of population and family economics. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers.
Mckenzie, D., Rapoport, H., 2004. “Network Effects and the Dynamics of Migration and
Inequality: Theory and Evidence from Mexico.” BREAD Working Paper No. 063.
Martin, P., 2003. Highly Skilled Labor Migration: Sharing the Benefits. International Labor
Organization (International Institute for Labor Studies).
Massey, D., Arango, J., Hugo, G., Kouaouci, A., Pellegrino, A., Taylor, J.E., 1993. Theories of
international migration: a review and appraisal. Population and Development Review 19 (3), 431-
466.
Massey, D., Espinosa, K., 1997. “What’s Driving Mexico U.S. Migration? A Theoretical,
Empirical, and Policy Analysis.” American Journal of Sociology 102(4), 939–99.
Mata, D., Oliveira, C., Pin, C., Resende, G., 2007. Quais Características das Cidades Determinam a
Atração de Migrantes Qualificados? Revista Econômica do Nordeste, Fortaleza 38 (3), jul-set.
Mendes, P.S., Gonçalves, E., Freguglia, R.S., 2012. Mobilidade interfirmas de trabalhadores no
Brasil formal: Composição e determinantes. Revista Pesquisa e Planejamento Econômico 42(2).

                                                                                                    19
Miguélez, E., Moreno, R., 2013. Skilled labor mobility, networks and knowledge creation in
regions: a panel data approach. Annals Regional Science 5, 191–212.
Mitchell, W., 2008. Migration and labour market outcomes by skill in Australia. Centre of Full
Employment and Equity. Working Paper No. 08-02.
Moretti , E., 2011. Local labor markets. Handbook of Labor Economics 4, Part B, Chapter 14,
1237-1313.
Mukkala, K., 2005. Knowledge spillovers - mobility of highly educated workers within high
technology sector in Finland. Congress of the European Regional Science Association 45,
Amsterdam, Holanda.
Munshi, K., 2003. Networks in the modern economy: Mexican migrants in the US labor market.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 549-599.
Nakosteen, R., Westerlund, O., 2004. The effects of regional migration on gross income of labour in
Sweden. Pap. Reg. Sci. 83, 581-595.
Netto júnior, J.L.S., Moreira, I.T., 2003. Migrações e diferenciais de renda estaduais: uma análise
por dados em painel no período de 1950-2000. In: ENCONTRO TRANSDISCIPLINAR ESPAÇO
E POPULAÇÃO. Anais. Campinas.
Orrenius, P.M., 1999. “The Role of Family Networks, Coyote Prices and the Rural Economy in
Migration from Western Mexico,” Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Research Paper no. 99-10
(Dallas, November).
Poot, J., 1996. Information, communication and networks in international migration systems.
Annals of Regional Science 30, 55-73.
Queiroz, B.L., Golgher, A.B., 2008. Human capitals differentials across municipalities and states in
Brazil. Population review 47, 25-49.
Raudenbush, S.W., Bryk, A.S., 2002. Hierarchical linear models: applications and data analysis
methods. 2.ed. Londres, Nova Deli: Sage, 265p.
Ravenstein, E.G., 1889. The Laws of Migration. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 52, 241-
305.
Ritsilä, J., Haapanen, M., 2003. Studies on the determinants of migration and spatial concentration
of Labour. Finlândia: University of Jivaskila, Dissertation.
Sabbadini, R., Azzoni, C., 2006. Migração Interestadual de Pessoal Altamente Educado: Evidências
sobre a Fuga de Cérebros. Anais do XXXIV Encontro Nacional de Economia.
Sahota, G.S., 1968. An Economic analysis of Internal Migration in Brazil. Journal of Political
Economy 76, 218-245.
Sjaästad, L.A., 1962. Os custos e os retornos da migração. In: Moura, H., (Org.). Migração interna:
Textos selecionados. Fortaleza: BNB - ETENE.
Smith K., 2001. Human Resources, Mobility and Systems Approach to Innovation. In: OECD –
Innovative People: Mobility of skilled personnel in: National Innovation Systems, (cap. 1).
Stambol, L., 2003. Regional labour market mobility by education and income. Economic Survey,
Statistics Norway.
Stark, O., Bloom, D., 1985. The American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings of the
Ninety- Seventh Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association 75, 173-178.
Ter wal, A.L.J., Boschma, R.A., 2009. Applying social network analysis in economic geography:
framing some key analytic issues. Annals Regional Science 43,739–756.
Winters, P., De janvry, A., Sadoulet, E., 2001. Family and community networks in Mexico-US
migration. Journal of human resources 36, 159-184.
Wozniak, A.K., Malamud, O., 2012. The impact of college education on geographic mobility.
Journal of Human Resources 47, 913-950.
Zahniser, S.S., 1999. Mexican Migration to the United States: The Role of Migration Networks and
Human Capital Accumulation. New York, N.Y.: Garland Publishing, Inc.
Zimmermann, K.F., 2004. European labour mobility: challenges and potentials. Berlin: University
of Bonn and DIW.

                                                                                                 20
