  The E¤ect of Preschool on Pro…ciency Level: An Analysis from Longitudinal
                                    datay
                              Igor Procópio+ , Ricardo Freguglia , Flávia Cheinx


                                                     RESUMO

    Este artigo estima o efeito da pré-escola sobre o nível de pro…ciência de alunos do primeiro ciclo do
ensino fundamental, utilizando um banco de dados longitudinal produzido pelo Projeto GERES. O uso
do GERES permite a avaliação da evolução da aprendizagem, bem como o controle de características
não observadas dos estudantes. O efeito da pré-escola foi estimado através de uma função de produção
educacional considerando o processo dinâmico de aprendizado, conforme Cunha e Heckman (2007) e Todd
e Wolpin (2003). A estratégia empírica utilizada foi uma adaptação da estimação por valor adicionado e
especi…cação cumulativa. Os resultados encontrados indicam o efeito cumulativo dos insumos e a presença
de heterogeneidade individual. Para Matemática o efeito direto encontrado foi positivo e signi…cativo.
Já para português, os coe…cientes de pré-escola apresentaram resultados não signi…cativos, indicando
que não há efeito direto sobre as habilidades em português. O efeito indireto, manifestado através
da pro…ciência inicial, foi positivo e crescente ao longo dos anos para Matemática. Por outro lado,
os estudantes com maiores habilidades em linguagem no início do ensino fundamental aumentam suas
diferenças comparativamente aos menos habilidosos, mas esse efeito se inverte ao longo dos anos, indicando
que a desigualdade de habilidades em Português podem ser reduzidas durante o período escolar.

                                                   ABSTRACT

    This article estimates the preschool e¤ect on the child’s pro…ciency level based on a database built by
GERES Project, which is a longitudinal study that monitories a sample of students from 1st grade for four
years. The use of GERES allows the evaluation of the evolution of learning, controlling for unobserved
characteristics of the students that a¤ect pro…ciency or performance. Following Cunha & Heckman (2007)
and Todd & Wolpin (2003), the preschool e¤ect is estimated through an educational production function
that incorporates a dynamic process of learning. The empirical strategy is an adaptation of value added
and cumulative speci…cation estimates. Our …ndings show evidence of cumulative e¤ect of inputs and the
presence of individual heterogeneity. In the case of Mathematics the direct e¤ect of preschool on child’s
pro…ciency was positive and signi…cant, while in Portuguese, there is no direct e¤ect. Furthermore, the
indirect e¤ect shown by the coe¢ cient of initial pro…ciency is positive and increased over the years for
Math. On the other had, the students with higher skills in language at the beginning of elementary
school expanded their di¤erences in relation to less skilled students, but this e¤ect inverts over the years,
indicating that the inequality of skills in Portuguese can be reduced during the schoolar period.

   JEL Classi…cation: I21; I24
   Key Words: Preschool, GERES, Dynamic Process of Learning, Pro…ciency, Educational Production
Function
   Palavras Chaves: Pré-escola, GERES, Dinâmica do Aprendizado, Pro…ciência, Função de Produção
Educacional
   Área 12: Economia Social e Demogra…a Econômica
  0
    yWe are thankful to CAPES and to INEP for …nancial support through "Observatório da Educação-2010: Projeto 34 -
Análise da Evolução da Educação Básica no Brasil a partir de indicadores de ‡uxo e pro…ciência". We are also grateful to
CAED/UFJF for providing GERES database.
 +
   PPGEA/UFJF; Email: igor.procopio@ufjf.edu.br
   PPGEA/UFJF; Email: ricardo.freguglia@ufjf.edu.br
 x
   PPGEA/UFJF; Email: ‡avia.chein@ufjf.edu.br
1    Introduction

Results from the 2009 Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) show that Brazil progressed
in relation to the results from the edition of the previous evaluation, done in 2006. However, this progress
was not su¢ cient to remove Brazil from the bottom of the global ranking. From a total of sixty-…ve
countries evaluated in 2009, Brazil occupied the 53rd position in the ranking in reading and the 57th
position in the ranking in mathematics. These results show the need for public policies aimed at an
improvement in education in Brazil. Among the diverse types of policies in this area, such as valorization
and capacity building of teachers, better infrastructure in schools, increasing the school day, the policies
directed at younger children, under 6 years of age, stand out.
    Graph 1 shows the progress of Brazil during the past decade, in the years in which the international
assessment was applied. A monotonic increase for pro…ciency in mathematics can be seen, going from a
mean of 334 points in the year 2000 to 386 points in 2010. As for reading pro…ciency, despite the increase
between the years 2000 and 2010, this growth was less accentuated; there was also a fall between the
years 2003 and 2006.

                                              [Insert Graph 1]

    In comparison with participating Latin American countries, Brazil appears in front of Argentina and
Colombia, but behind Mexico, Uruguay and Chile. China, a developing country and belonging to BRIC,
showed the best result among all the countries participating in the 2009 edition of PISA, both in reading
and in mathematics. The comparison with these countries shows that, despite the Brazilian progress
between 2000 and 2009 being inferior only to the progress of Chile and Luxembourg, in absolute terms,
the country still needs to progress much to approach the countries with the best results.
    As a strategy for improvements in the level of learning of children the need for investments in early
childhood, a period that precedes the entrance of the child into mandatory regular schooling, that is,
under six years of age, has come to prominence. Recent advances in neuroscience have demonstrated
the importance of investments and stimuli in the …rst years of live to cerebral development and learning
capacity. In this sense, several studies evaluated the e¤ect of interventions done in early childhood on the
success of school learning and labor market allocation. Considering this evidence, preschool attendance
is identi…ed as a mechanism of stimulating cognitive and non-cognitive development of children, mainly
for children in vulnerable situations.
    Cunha and Heckman (2007, 2009, 2010) show that educational investments in early childhood focused
on children from families of low socioeconomic level present high rates of return in contrast with invest-
ments done in adolescence. According to the authors, there is a tradeo¤ between equality and e¢ ciency
in the last kind of investment, but not in the early childhood’s investments.
    The international literature shows the existence of several programs directed at the promotion of
child development, mainly for children of disadvantaged families. In the United States the High/Scope
Perry PreSchool Project, the Carolina Abecedarian Project, the Early Training Project, and Head Start
stand out. In Latin America, the best-known programs are Mexico’s Oportunidades, Bolivia’s Proyecto
de Desarollo Infantil and the construction of preschools in Argentina.
    In Brazil, the analysis of the impact of investments in early childhood focuses on the e¤ect of preschools
and day care centers. Enrollment in preschool is not mandatory and public provision is not universal
as occurs in elementary school. Data from the World Bank (2006) show that children of families from
poorer classes have lower attendance in child education. Considering the evidence of the positive e¤ects
on child development in children who attend preschool, this unequal access has a perverse e¤ect on the
creation of inequalities.
    The Brazilian government is already taking some actions in order to improve children skills. One …rst
step was the reduction of the mandatory age for enrollment in elementary school from 7 to 6 years of age.

                                                      1
Another initiative was the creation of the Fund for the Maintenance and Development of Basic Education
and for the Valorization of Educational Professionals (FUNDEB) that serves educational levels from day
care centers to secondary schools.
    Data from the National Survey by Household Sample (PNAD) show an increase in the percentage of
children aged 6 years old or less attending school in the past decade. Graph 2 shows the evolution of
attendance for the age group of 0 to 6 years, a period denominated early childhood, and of the speci…c
period of preschool, 4 to 6 years. The results show a monotonic increase of school attendance and that
for the preschool period the values go from 65% at the beginning of the decade to a little more than 81%
in the year 2009. For early childhood as a whole, attendance was around 35% in 2001 and reached 47%
in 2009.

                                             [Insert Graph 2]

    A series of recent studies evaluates the e¤ect of preschool on pro…ciency tests of students in primary
and secondary education. The results found indicate a positive relationship between preschool attendance
and academic success. This paper contributes to the analysis of the impact of investments in early
childhood using a database still little explored in the domestic literature, the 2005 School Generation
project –GERES. GERES is a longitudinal study that monitories a sample of students from 1st grade for
four years. The use of a longitudinal study allows the evaluation of the evolution of learning, controlling
for unobserved characteristics of the students that a¤ect pro…ciency or performance. Policy education’s
evaluators recommend such a strategy as the best option for identifying the determinants of learning.
    This paper is structured in the following manner. Besides this introduction, Section 2 brings a brief
review of the international and domestic literature about the evaluation of the e¤ect of early childhood
programs. Section 3 presents the database used and the strategy of identifying the e¤ect of preschool.
Section 4 shows some descriptive statistics and Section 5 brings the econometric results. Finally, in
Section 6 conclusions are made.


2    Literature Review
Studies of neuroscience have demonstrated the importance of the …rst years of life on cerebral formation
and development (Knudsen, 2004; Casella et al., 2011 ). Advances in magnetic resonance equipment
allow us to see how the brain reacts to stimuli, permitting us to detect what types of stimuli and in what
phase of the lifecycle the results are most favorable for cerebral development.
     In face of these advancements, in the understanding of cerebral function, Cunha and Heckman (2007)
develop an economic model for the formation of skills throughout the lifecycle of an individual. This
model presents by means of a production function the learning dynamic, emphasizing the importance of
investments done in the …rst years of life for educational and labor market success. The understanding
of the process of formation of individual capacities expands the knowledge about the origins of inequality
between people and contributes to the design of policies for inequalities reduction.
     Cunha et al (2006) and Cunha and Heckman (2007, 2009) show the importance of investment in
disadvantaged children and that the return from these investments is high when done in the …rst years
of life. Furthermore, Cunha and Heckman (2007) present evidence and theoretical arguments that there
is not a tradeo¤ between equality and e¢ ciency in investments in early childhood. Public policies whose
aims are to improve human capital should be focused on children from poor families, given the lower
private investment of these families on the training of their children’s skills.
     The international literature presents a vast analysis of governmental programs focused on child devel-
opment. Barnett (1992), Currie (2001), Currie and Blau (2006), Cunha et al. (2006) present a review of
the principal programs and results found. In general, the results point to a positive relationship between
the interventions and gains in skills.

                                                    2
    The Unites States stands out for some programs implemented with random selection of participants,
seeking to obtain more precise assessments of the results. High/Scope Perry PreSchool was implemented
during the years from 1962 to 1967 in about 120 low-income students between 3 and 4 years old. The
children were divided into treatment and control groups. The treatment group received half a day of
preschool, weekly visits during eight month per year over the course of two years. The program collected
information about the children from the two groups of 3 to 15 years and later at 17, 27 and 40 years. The
results of the assessment show that the treatment group showed a low repetition rate, high performance
in cognitive tests, high rates of elementary school completion, besides lower involvement in crime, high
salaries and low use of government assistance program at the adult age.
    The Carolina Abecedarian Project selected a group of 111 children from families in risk situations,
with low schooling levels’parents, low salaries and high levels of health problems. Children were selected
in the …rst months of life and randomly separated into two groups. The treatment groups had intensive
attention for eight hours per day, …ve days per week until reaching 5 years. When the children reached
5 years old there was another drawing for the formation of another treatment groups until 8 years old.
At the end of the program there were, thus, four groups. One group that received the treatment in the
two periods, one group that received the treatment in the …rst period but not the second, another group
that did not receive treatment in the …rst period but did in the second and a group that did not receive
treatment in either period. This division in four groups allowed the evaluation of whether the treatment
received in the …rst period continued to have an e¤ect even if interrupted.
    These two programs had in common a small sample design, which does not permit the generalization
of their results. A high-level program was Head Start, which began in 1965. The program was aimed at
3 to 5 year old children, guaranteeing access to preschool to disadvantaged children. The results of the
evaluations show positive e¤ects on university entrance and lower rates of criminality.
    For Latin America, Mexico’s Oportunidades, Bolivia’s Proyecto Integral de Desarrolo Infantil and
the analysis of the construction of preschools in Argentina stand out. For the program Oportunidades,
the results indicate an improvement in the motor activities of children, an increase in the probability
of preschool enrollment and expected years of education for the treatment group (Gertler and Fernald,
2004; Behrman, Parker and Todd, 2004; Schady, 2006). The expanding supply of preschools in Argentina
contributes to the improvement in performance in the Spanish language for the bene…ciary children
(Berlinsk et al., 2006).
    For Brazil, the studies that evaluate e¤ects of interventions in early childhood focus on the analysis
of the e¤ect of preschool on the pro…ciency levels of students in primary and secondary education and
also on results in the labor market.
    Curi and Menezes-Filho (2009) estimate the e¤ect of preschool on the conclusion of academic cycles,
on academic performance measured by pro…ciency tests and on future salaries. They use data from
PPV and from SAEB 2003. These authors used the MQO and Probit estimators and found a positive
relationship between preschool and future results, though not signi…cant in all the speci…cations.
    Felício and Vasconcellos (2007) evaluate the e¤ect of preschool on pro…ciency in mathematics of
4th-grade students from public schools using data from SAEB 2003 and Prova Brasil 2005. Based on a
matching analysis for the individual data from SAEB 2003 and schools’…xed e¤ects built from the schools’
panel data of SAEB 2003 and Prova Brasil 2005, the authors conclude that preschool has positive e¤ect
on pro…ciency.
    Calderini and Souza (2009), using data from Prova Brasil 2005, adopt an instrumental variables
approach in order to evaluate the e¤ect of preschool on pro…ciency in mathematics and Portuguese of
4th-grade students and found positive results in this relation.
    Felício, Terra and Zoghbi (2012) analyze the relationship between age of entrance in school and literacy
measurements in 2nd-grade children in the municipality of Sertãozinho-SP using data from Provinha
Brasil. By means of an analysis by matching estimators they concluded that students who enrolled in
school at 5 years of age or less obtained higher scores in relation to children who entered school at 6 or

                                                     3
older. Another result presented is noteworthy, signi…cant di¤erences were not found between students
who attended one year of Child Education and students who attended for more years.
    Almeida and Pazello (2010) used data from the 1982 and 2007 PNAD and work with aggregated data
from successive educational generations, relating the proportion of individuals from a certain generation
that attended preschool and their future academic performance. The authors conclude that enrolling
earlier in school has positive e¤ects on the conclusion of primary education, but there are not signi…cant
e¤ects on the conclusion of secondary and higher education.
    The chart below shows a summary of the principal results found in the empirical literature, as well
as the database used and method applied.

                                              [Insert Chart 1]


3    Database and Variables
The database used is GERES, a longitudinal study performed in order to evaluate the quality and
equality of Brazilian primary education. The project was coordinated by six Brazilian higher education
institutions: Federal University of Bahia –UFBA, Federal University of Juiz de Fora –UFJF, Ponti…cal
Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro –PUC Rio, Federal University of Minas Gerais –UFMG, University
of Campinas – Unicamp and State University of Mato Grosso do Sul – UEMS and was funded by the
Ford Foundation and PRONEX –Center of Excellence Program/CNPq.
    GERES evaluated three hundred three schools in …ve Brazilian cities over the course of four years.
The cities evaluated were Salvador (BA), Belo Horizonte (MG), Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Campinas (SP)
and Campo Grande (MS). A sample of students was followed over the course of these four years and
…ve waves of tests with these students were applied. The students selected were studying, in the …rst
year of the project, the second grade of elementary school or the equivalent grade when the educational
system still had an eight-year primary school. At the beginning of the …rst year a test was applied in
order to serve as a baseline and an adjustment for the other tests. After this …rst wave, the tests were
administered at the end of each year. Due to changes of schools it was not possible to follow all of the
students initially registered. The city of Salvador only participated in the …rst four waves.
    Despite the longitudinal characteristic of GERES database, some questionnaires were not applied in
all years, except the one related to the teacher. Then it is not possible to accomplish neither the evolution
of many inquiries about school’s characteristics nor the socio-economic level of families. This limitation
of database prevents us to monitoring the evolution of investments in schools and family inputs. In order
to dealing with such a restriction we sought information about schools in the schools census, conducted
annually by Anísio Teixeira National Institute of Research and Studies – INEP. On the other hand, an
important variable considered in the analysis of learning is the teacher’s salary. This information was
obtained from RAIS-MIGRA, matching schools’ CNPJ we could get the average salary of teacher per
school. For public schools the average salary is the average for county and school system.
    The selection of the variables used as inputs in the educational production function was based on
several studies on the e¤ect of characteristics of the teachers and of the schools assembled on the Itaú
Social Foundation site, in particular in the Factors Associated with Educational Success project. Chart
2 shows the variables used and the source database .

                                              [Insert Chart 2]


4    Empirical Strategy
The estimation of the educational production function considering the theory of child development re-
quires information about the entire history of investments in the child, from the …rst years until school

                                                     4
age, besides a measurement of the innate ability of the child. Due to the limitation of the existing data-
bases not having all of this information, several strategies have been adopted in the literature. Todd
and Wolpin (2003) perform a review of the main methods utilized, as well as the need for information
and hypotheses of identi…cation strategy for each method to obtain consistent estimations. The section
brie‡y presents the overall model used in Todd and Wolpin (2003) and the empirical strategy used in
this paper.
    Equation (1) shows the overall form, where Aia represents the skill level of individual i at age a, Fi (a)
represents the history of the family’s investments until age a, Si (a) the school inputs until age a, ui0
indicates innate ability, acquired at the moment of birth, and fa is a function that relates the inputs to
the formation of skills. Overall, this function can vary with age.

                                                Aia = fa [Fi (a); Si (a); ui0 ]                                       (1)
   To simplify the display of the strategy, school and family inputs are represented by a single vector
X = (F; S).
   Considering that the technology of skill formation is the same for all ages, fa = f . And considering
that f is a linear and additive function separable in its arguments, (1) can be rewritten as (2):

                                   a              a              a                  a
                      Aia = Xia    1   + Xi;a   1 2   + Xi;a   2 3   + ::: + Xi;1   a   +   a ui0   + "i (a)1         (2)


    where    represents the e¤ect of X on the ability level, the superscript indicates the e¤ect of the
age input a and the subscript indicates the distance between the period in which the input was applied
and the period in which pro…ciency is measured. According to Todd and Wolpin (2003), Equation (2)
represents the true model.
    The main di¢ culties for the estimation of (2) are: i) scarcity of databases containing information
about the entire history of investment in the child; ii) lack of a measurement of innate ability acquired
at the moment of birth; iii) possible correlation between innate ability and the level of investments.
    The correlation indicated in item (iii) is veri…ed if we consider the optimizing behavior of families. In
this scenario, the choice of investment level in children’ skills formation depends on the level of innate
ability.
    Considering speci…cally the case of preschool, enrollment in early childhood education is not manda-
tory in Brazil, this decision is a free choice of the parents. This fact may produce a correlation between
non-observed abilities of the child and preschool attendance. Rodrigues et al. (2010) indicated four
possible channels through which the correlation between the decision to enroll in preschool and the score
on pro…ciency tests can occur; (i) if the families that enroll their children in preschool are families that
value value more human capital investment, the children that attend preschool will have greater stimulus
to study and thus will obtain higher pro…ciency levels not due to preschool; (ii) it is possible that parents
with higher opportunity costs of time are those who send their children in preschool in order to exploit
their advantages in the labor market. Considering that some of these advantages are also important
in the formation of the child’s human capital (education of the parents), it is possible that part of the
di¤erence between those that went to preschool and those that did not is due the fact that parents, in the
…rst case, present higher level of human capital; (iii) if the parents that enroll the children in preschool
are those with less ability to care for their children, it is possible that part of the di¤erence between the
pro…ciency levels of the children that attend preschool and those that do not is, in part, from the inability
of the parents to promote the formation of children’s human capital; and (iv) it is possible that sending
children to preschool is a way of compensating de…ciencies in child development, which would mean that
   1
   The subscript 1 indicates the e¤ect of input applied throughout the year in pro…ciency measured at the end of the year.
The subscript 2 indicates the e¤ect of the previous year and so the following



                                                               5
the children with less ability are those who are enrolled in preschool. If one of these hypotheses occurred,
the simple di¤erence between the pro…ciency levels of the children that attended preschool and those
that did not would not re‡ect the causal e¤ect of preschool. In the …rst two cases, this di¤erence will be
overestimated whereas in the last two it will be underestimated.
    Despite the empirical and theoretical evidence of the correlation between the preschool variable and
the innate ability of the child, several studies ignore this fact and use strategies adopting the hypothesis
of non-correlation. Therefore, the problem of estimation is restricted to the absence of information about
the history of investments. Two strategies are indicated in the literature.
    The …rst strategy is to ignore the learning dynamic and to consider that only the contemporaneous
inputs determine learning, this strategy is known as contemporaneous speci…cation. And the second
strategy, known as value added, is possible to be applied when there is at least one lagged measure of
pro…ciency. This lagged measurement captures the history of investments.
    The simplest strategy that can be adopted in terms of the quantity of information is the contem-
poraneous speci…cation, however, it is the one that demands a greater number of restrictions on the
identi…cation hypotheses. This speci…cation considers only the inputs applied during the year in which
pro…ciency is being measured and adopts the following hypotheses: i) only the contemporaneous inputs
matter, or the past inputs are not correlated with the present inputs; ii) the contemporaneous inputs are
not correlated with non-observed innate ability. The contemporaneous speci…cation assumes the form
de…ned in Equation (3):

                                            Aia = Xia + "i (a)                                          (3)
    In this speci…cation the error term includes all the past inputs, innate ability and measurement errors.
If hypotheses (i) and (ii) in the previous paragraph are satis…ed, the estimation by OLS will produce
consistent estimates.
    Due to the di¢ culties in observe the entire history of children’s human capital investment and the
evidence that the hypotheses of the contemporaneous speci…cation seldom hold, many studies now use
a strategy known as value added. For this strategy, we need to observe one lagged measurement of
pro…ciency that is assumed to capture the entire past history of investments. As can be seen by comparing
Equations (3) and (4), the only di¤erence from the value added to the contemporaneous speci…cation is
the presence of lagged pro…ciency.

                                       Aia = A1;a    1   + Xia + "ia                                    (4)
    Despite this estimation considering that the learning process is a dynamic phenomenon, and, conse-
quently approaching the true model of skill formation, the estimation of this model by OLS requires the
non-presence of non-observed abilities, even if the non-observed abilities are not correlated with the level
of inputs of vector X. If there is the presence of non-observed abilities in the formation of skills, these
skills will be correlated with the lagged pro…ciency measurement.
    Owing to the limitations of the contemporaneous and the value added speci…cations, Todd and Wolpin
(2003) proceed to outline the properties of estimation of the cumulative model. If the choice of inputs
is not correlated with non-observed innate ability, the estimation of (2) by OLS produces consistent
estimates. However, if the choice of the parents and of the school is correlated with the skill level the
estimates will be inconsistent.
    To control for the correlation between non-observed ability and the inputs, at least two observations
at di¤erent periods of time are necessary. An estimate of the …xed e¤ects is used in order to expunge the
e¤ect of the non-observed innate abilities. Todd and Wolpin (2003) detail the hypotheses necessary for
obtaining consistent estimates using the estimation of the cumulative model with …xed e¤ects.
    The GERES database does not have information about the entire history of investments; it only has
information about the four …rst years of the school period and an evaluation at the beginning of the

                                                     6
school period, a diagnostic assessment. This assessment is used for supplement the absence of investment
information in the period preceding the academic one. Therefore, taking into account the information
available in the GERES database and the strategies previously presented, in this article a mixed strategy
is adopted, with cumulative speci…cation and value added.
    The mean pro…ciency of the …fth wave is de…ned as Aia . There is, therefore, vector A = (Aia ; Ai;a 1 ;
Ai;a 2 ; Ai;a 3 ; Ai;a 4 ) and vector X = (Xia ; Xi;a 1 ; Xi;a 2 ; Xi;a 3 ). Besides these two information
vectors, it is also possible to know if the child has attended preschool. Preschool is an input applied
before Xi;a 3 . Therefore, Ai;a 4 captures the information of vector X0 = (Xi;a 4 ; Xi;a 5 ; :::; Xi1 ) and
whether the child has attended or not preschool. Thus, it is assumed that the e¤ect of vector X0 on
pro…ciency, measured during the school term, is manifested through Ai;a 4 . This is an adaptation of the
hypothesis of dynamic completeness. Formally,

                  E [Aia jXia ; Xi;a          1 ; :::; Xi1 ; ui0 ]   = E [Aia jXia ; Xi;a             1 ; Xi;a 2 ; Xi ;a 3 ; Ai;a 4 ; ui0 ]

..
    Considering the four years of elementary school in which the students are followed in GERES, the
model of skill formation for each year can be visualized by means of the system of equations de…ned in
(5).

                                         a               a                    a                     a             a                           a
                       Aia = Xia         1   + Xi;a    1 2    + Xi;a        2 3   + Xi;a          3 4     +           Ai;a        4   +           ui0 + "ia

                                          a 1                  a 1                     a 1                a 1                             a 1
                Ai;a    1   = Xi;a      1 1        + Xi;a    2 2           + Xi;a    3 3          +               Ai;a        4   +                ui0 + "i;a   1          (5)

                                                     a 2                     a 2          a 2                             a 2
                            Ai;a   2   = Xi;a      2 1      + Xi;a         3 2       +            Ai;a        4   +               ui0 + "i;a          2


                                                               a 3             a 3                        a 3
                                       Ai;a    3   = Xi;a    3 1           +         Ai;a     4   +               ui0 + "i;a              3

    According to what is presented in (5), the preschool input would have its e¤ect only upon the level
of pro…ciency in the diagnostic assessment and therefore it would not be possible to identify it with this
strategy. However, studies show that the fact of the child attending preschool increases cognitive and
non-cognitive capabilities and these capabilities continue to have e¤ects on learning. For example, the
increase in non-cognitive skills such as motivation and/or concentration can make the children’s learning
in the school term greater than the learning of children who did not attend preschool. The new hypothesis
of dynamic completeness can be written as in (6).


        E [Aia jXia ; Xi;a          1 ; :::; Xi1 ; Pr ei ; ui0 ]     = E [Aia jXia ; Xi;a             1 ; Xi;a 2 ; Xi;a 3 ; Ai;a 4 ; Pr ei ; ui0 ]                         (6)

   With this new hypothesis de…ned, the system of equations de…ned in (5) comes to be written by the
new system de…ned in (7).


                               a                  a                    a                  a           a                           a                   a
                Aia = Xia      1   + Xi;a       1 2   + Xi;a         2 3   + Xi;a       3 4   +           Ai;a        4   +           Pr ei +             ui0 + "ia


                              a 1                    a 1                     a 1         a 1                              a 1                       a 1
     Ai;a   1   = Xi;a      1 1        + Xi;a      2 2      + Xi;a         3 3      +             Ai;a     4   +                  Pr ei +                 ui0 + "i;a   1   (7)




                                                                                7
                                            a 2                   a 2              a 2                         a 2                   a 2
                    Ai;a   2   = Xi;a     2 1      + Xi;a       3 2        +             Ai;a         4   +          Pr ei +               ui0 + "i;a      2


                                                     a 3             a 3                      a 3                        a 3
                               Ai;a   3   = Xi;a   3 1          +          Ai;a     4   +                 Pr ei +              ui0 + "i;a      3



    With the system of equations de…ned in (7), it is possible to estimate the e¤ect of the inputs applied
during the school term, the e¤ect of initial ability level of the child and the direct e¤ect of preschool
on each year in which the child is evaluated. However, the fact of the child having attended preschool
can increase the skill level with which the child begins elementary school, in other words, part of the
preschool e¤ect is captured by the measurement of pro…ciency in the diagnostic assessment, an indirect
e¤ect. Thus, the e¤ect obtained with this strategy could be underestimating the real e¤ect.
                                                                                             0
    Todd and Wolpin (2003) adopt the hypothesis of constant age e¤ect, that is, ax = ax . This assump-
tion reduces the number or parameters. Here this hypothesis is relaxed, allowing the e¤ect of the input to
vary with the age. In this context it is possible to verify, for instance, if a "good teacher" has a di¤erent
impact on the child’s learning in the …rst grade and in the fourth grade. In order to implement such a
strategy we introduce variables of interaction between inputs and a wave dummy that indicates the wave
in which pro…ciency is being measured. As an example a1 measures the e¤ect of an input applied in the
wave a on the child’s pro…ciency observed in the same wave; a1 1 indicates the e¤ect of the same input
applied in the wave a 1 on the child’s pro…ciency achieves on wave a 1; a2 represents the e¤ect of
an input applied in the wave a 1 on the child’s pro…ciency in wave a: The system of equations in (8)
shows the modi…ed system in (7) with the inclusion of interaction variables:
    The estimation of the system presented in (8) by OLS will produce inconsistent estimates if the non-
observed innate ability is correlated with the other inputs. To control for this possible endogeneity, the
strategy of …xed e¤ects is used by an estimator of …rst di¤erence.


                                a                           a                                     a                                  a
  Aia = (Xia Wa )               1   + (Xi;a   1    Wa )     2   + (Xi;a        2       Wa )       3   + (Xi;a        3    Wa )       4+
                                                                                              a                                  a                              a
                                                                                                  (Ai;a        4    Wa ) +           (Pr ei Wa ) +                  ui0 + "ia



                                         a 1                                   a 1                                           a 1
  Ai;a     1   = (Xi;a     1    Wa    1) 1        + (Xi;a    2       Wa     1) 2          + (Xi;a              3    Wa    1) 3 +
                                                            a 1                                               a 1                                  a 1
                                                                    (Ai;a      4       Wa     1)      +             (Pr ei Wa         1)   +             ui0 + "i;a     1   (8)



                                        a 2                            a 2 a 2                                                 a 2                              a 2
Ai;a   2   = (Xi;a    2    Wa       2 ) 1 +(Xi;a 3        Wa        2) 2 +     (Ai;a 4                         Wa     2 )+           (Pr ei Wa           2 )+          ui0 +"i;a   2




                                               a 3          a 3                                            a 3                                 a 3
       Ai;a     3   = (Xi;a     3     Wa    3) 1     +              (Ai;a   4      Wa       3)    +                (Pr ei Wa          3)   +         ui0 + "i;a         3

   To purge the e¤ect of observed abilities from the system de…ned in (8) it is necessary to assume
the hypothesis that their e¤ect would not vary with age, in other words, ( a = a 1 ), in this case the
di¤erentiation eliminates non-observed ability.




                                                                                   8
5    Descriptive Statistics
This section presents some descriptive statistics from the GERES data. Table 1 shows the mean and
standard deviation of the variables used separately both for the students who attended preschool and for
the students who did not.
    It can be seen that the students who did preschool have, on average, a higher skill level during the
four …rst years of the academic period. In mathematics the mean pro…ciency is 192.4 for the students
who attended preschool and 166.4 for those who did not, a di¤erence of 26 points on the pro…ciency
scale, or 0.37 standard deviations. For Portuguese, the mean values are 151.8 and 139.4, for those who
attended preschool and those who did not, respectively, which corresponds to a di¤erence of 0.42 standard
deviations. This di¤erence cannot be interpreted as the e¤ect of preschool in function of non-randomness
in the preschool selection.
    With respect to the characteristics of the students, it is perceived that approximately 35% of the
students were white, but this percentage of whites is less for those who did not attend, 28%, in other
words, white children had greater access to preschool. In relation to gender there is certain homogeneity,
with a slightly higher attendance rate for girls. Socioeconomic level presents a greater inequality between
the two groups (attended and did not attend preschool). Children who attended preschool had a higher
socioeconomic level than those who did not, which indicates a positive selection with respect to attending
preschool.
    The information of the teachers showed that the teachers of students that attended preschool had,
in general, higher salaries, more time in the profession and a higher percentage of teachers with higher
education. As for the schools, 82% of the students who attended preschool enrolled in public schools and
95% of those who did not attend preschool went to public schools. Scholastic resources, computer labs
and libraries are well distributed between the groups; only the presence of a science lab is more signi…cant
for the group of students who did preschool, 30%, versus 17% for those who did not. The last line in the
table shows that 87% of the children in the sample attended preschool.
    In general, the results presented in Table 1 indicate that the students who attended preschool had a
higher level of investments during the …rst four years of primary school, both for academic inputs and
for private inputs, considering the socioeconomic levels of the families as a proxy.

                                             [ Insert Table 1]

    Graphs 3 and 4 show the evolution of pro…ciency in mathematics and Portuguese, respectively, for
the students who attended preschool and for those who did not. The behavior of the two disciplines is
di¤erent, however, there is a feature in common, in both the group of students that attended preschool
starts elementary school with higher pro…ciency scores than the group of students who did not attend
preschool and continues with higher scores during the four years evaluated. The di¤erence is that for
mathematics the evolution is relatively parallel, it is only between the 2nd and 3rd wave that the group
that did not attend preschool has a lesser evolution, but later the development rate recovers and continues
increasing at rates close to the group of students that did preschool. For Portuguese, from the beginning
of the series the development rate of the group that attended preschool is greater, making the distance
between the groups expand.

                                      [Insert Graph 3 and Graph 4]

    Graph 5 shows the relationship between the child’s attendance in preschool and the mother’s educa-
tion. The relationship is strictly increasing, that is, the greater the mother’s education, the higher the
percentage of children enrolled in preschool. Considering the evidence of a positive e¤ect of preschool on
learning, this fact implies the generation of a vicious cycle, in which children of parents with a low level
of education have a lower probability of achieving academic success.

                                                     9
                                             [Insert Graph 5]


6    Results
This section presents the econometric results of the paper. First, we discuss the results of preschools
e¤ects estimates on pro…ciency in Mathematics. Then we compare these estimates with the results
related to pro…ciency in Portuguese. Our estimates are presented in a sequence. First we report an
exploratory estimation with a contemporaneous speci…cation for Ordinary Least Squares. Afterwards, the
cumulative estimations are presented with and without considering the value added. These speci…cations
are estimated by the OLS estimator and First Di¤erence.
    For each speci…cation four models are utilized with the gradual inclusion of controls. Model 1 in-
cludes as controls only characteristics of the child and the family, more precisely race of the student and
socioeconomic level of the family. In Model 2 the school system is added, whether it is public or private.
In Model 3 characteristics of the infrastructure of the school are used: the presence of a computer lab,
a science lab, a library and Internet access. And …nally, in Model 4 variables with characteristics of the
teachers, experience, salary and education, are added.
    Table 2 shows the …rst results for pro…ciency in Mathematics. Only the coe¢ cients of the variable
of interest, preschool, are reported. This …rst speci…cation separately shows the e¤ect of preschool in
each wave. It can be seen that the e¤ect in wave 4 is greater than in wave 2, indicating that the e¤ect
of preschool persists throughout the …rst years of elementary school and that the distance in pro…ciency
between those who attended preschool and those who did not increases.
    Comparing the four models, it can be noted that the magnitude of the preschool coe¢ cient decreases
as controls related to the school and the teachers are included. This fact indicates that there is a
positive correlation between the preschool variable and the school inputs, in other words, the children
who attended preschool form a group that receives better school inputs. For the estimations in this
speci…cation to be consistent it is necessary to assume that there is not a correlation between the inputs
present and the past inputs, nor between the inputs present and non-observed innate ability.

                                             [Insert Table 2]

    Table 3 shows the …rst results of the cumulative speci…cation. In general, the coe¢ cients present
a smaller magnitude in relation to the coe¢ cients shown in Table 4. This shows that the hypothesis
necessary for the estimation by contemporaneous speci…cation of non-correlation between inputs present
and past inputs is not veri…ed, in other words, the formation of knowledge is a dynamic process, as
indicated by the Theory of the Lifecycle of the Skill Formation of Cunha and Heckman (2007).

                                             [Insert Table 3]

    Table 4 shows the results for the mixed speci…cation, cumulative with value added. The inclusion of
pro…ciency from the diagnostic assessment has the objective of capturing the e¤ect of the inputs used
before the academic period and not observed in the GERES database. In order for this speci…cation to
obtain consistent estimates, it is necessary that there is not an e¤ect from non-observed abilities on the
skill formation.
    The results found present a lower magnitude with respect to those presented in Table 3. This decrease
in magnitude indicates a positive correlation between past inputs, not observed, and inputs applied during
the academic period.

                                             [Insert Table 4]



                                                    10
    To control for possible correlations between the level of investments and innate non-observed ability
the next two speci…cations are done by means of the technique of …rst di¤erences.
    In estimations by First Di¤erence we need to omit one of two interactive dummies between preschool
and wave and also between initial pro…ciency and wave. The interactions with wave 2 were omitted in
the two cases. Therefore, the coe¢ cients of the other interactions should be analyzed as the di¤erence
in relation to the omitted dummy. In Table 5 the results show that the e¤ect of preschool on pro…ciency
in Mathematics is greater in waves three, four and …ve than its e¤ect in wave two.

                                              [Insert Table 5]

    Table 6 reports the results for the estimation of …xed e¤ect with value added. Focusing the analysis
on Model (4), it can be seen that only the coe¢ cient of wave three is signi…cant, that is, the students
who attended preschool gained more skills than the students who did not attend preschool until wave
three, afterwards the di¤erence between the two groups stabilizes.
    Comparing the results from Table 6, cumulative speci…cation with value added and …xed e¤ects, with
the results from Table 5, cumulative speci…cation with …xed e¤ect without value added, it can be seen
that the inclusion of initial pro…ciency as an independent variable made the coe¢ cients of the interactive
preschool dummies decrease in magnitude in wave two and lose signi…cance in waves three and four. This
indicates that it is not possible to accept the hypothesis of non-correlation between the inputs applied in
the academic period and the inputs invested before entrance of the child into school, nor the hypothesis
of non-correlation between the decision of the parents to enroll their children in preschool and the other
investments of the parents in the skill formation of their children before their entrance in school.
    The coe¢ cients of the interactive variables between initial pro…ciency and test administration wave,
with positive and signi…cant values, shows that learning development in Mathematics during the academic
period depends on the skill level with which the child starts elementary school. The coe¢ cients increase
in magnitude over the years. In reinforces the assumptions made by Cunha & Heckman (2007)’s model.
In this model learning is a step that depends on the level of learning in the previous step. This implies
that an inequality of Mathematical skills in children tends to increase in the academic period.

                                              [Insert Table 6]

    The following tables show the results for pro…ciency in Portuguese. Table 7 shows the results for
the estimate by OLS of the contemporaneous speci…cation for the four years of the GERES project. In
this estimation, the e¤ect of preschool is positive and signi…cant for all the waves analyzed and for all
the models. The same occurred for pro…ciency in Mathematics, however, the magnitude of the e¤ect
is smaller for Portuguese and has similar values in all the waves, in Mathematics the e¤ect increased
over the years. In the same manner as for mathematics, the inclusion of controls reduces the e¤ect of
preschool, which indicates the correlation between the level of inputs applied during the academic period
and the preschool variable.

                                              [Insert Table 7]

   Table 8 presents the results for the cumulative speci…cation without value added estimated by OLS.
The same comments made about the results in Table 7 are valid. Similar to Mathematics, the results are
positive and signi…cant, but the magnitude is less and more stable over the years.

                                              [Insert Table 8]

    In order for the results in Table 8 to be consistent, the inputs invested before the entrance of the child
in school should be orthogonal to the inputs invested in the academic period. With the estimation using

                                                     11
the strategy of value added it is possible to test this hypothesis. If the coe¢ cients of initial pro…ciency,
which capture the information about investments in the period preceding school, are signi…cant, it is
not possible to assume the hypothesis of orthogonality between inputs from the academic period and
from past inputs. Table 9 shows that the coe¢ cients are positive and signi…cant. Therefore, part of the
preschool e¤ect presented in Table 8 is, in fact, an e¤ect from the skills with which the child entered
school.

                                              [Insert Table 9]

  Table 10 brings the results for estimation controlled for …xed e¤ects, without value added. In all the
models speci…ed and for all the waves, the e¤ects were not signi…cant.

                                             [Insert Table 10]

    Table 11 presents the results for the estimation of value added controlling for non-observed e¤ects.
Again, the results of the preschool dummies were not signi…cant. The results for initial pro…ciency are
noteworthy. Di¤erently from what happened with the results in Table 6 for pro…ciency in Mathematics,
the e¤ect of initial pro…ciency decreased over the years, even becoming negative in waves 4 and 5 . This
result shows that for Portuguese the skill level with which the child starts school does not determine
academic success, that is, even if there is an inequality of skills in Portuguese at the moment in which
a child starts elementary school, this inequality tends to decrease if the academic inputs are distributed
e¢ ciently.

                                             [Insert Table 11]


7    Final Considerations
The aim of the paper was to estimate the e¤ect of preschool attendance on the level of pro…ciency in
Mathematics and Portuguese. To achieve this objective a longitudinal database that followed a sample
of children from four Brazilian municipalities over the course of the …rst four years of elementary school
was used. The children evaluated were those who, in 2005, the …rst year of the project, attended the 1st
grade of elementary school.
    The e¤ect of preschool was estimated based on an educational production function taking into ac-
count the dynamic learning process. The empirical strategy used was an adaptation of estimation by
value added, in order to consider the cumulative e¤ect of the inputs and the presence of non-observed
heterogeneities. To verify how the hypotheses utilized in the more restrictive strategies, contemporaneous
speci…cation and value added, do not hold, the results for all the speci…cations were presented gradually.
    The results found indicate that the most adequate speci…cation is that which considers the cumulative
e¤ect of the inputs and controls for individual non-observed heterogeneity. The e¤ect of preschool di¤ers
between the pro…ciencies in Mathematics and Portuguese. For Mathematics the direct e¤ect found was
positive and signi…cant. As to the indirect e¤ect, manifested through initial pro…ciency, the e¤ect found,
besides positive, increases over the years.
    In the case of Portuguese, the preschool coe¢ cients display non-signi…cant results, indicating that
there is not a direct e¤ect on skills in Portuguese. As for the indirect e¤ects, the students with higher
skills at the beginning of elementary school expanded their di¤erences in relation to less skilled students,
but this e¤ect inverts over the years, indicating that the inequality of skills in Portuguese can be reduced
during the schoolar period.
    As a subside to public policies for reducing inequalities and increasing the population level of educa-
tion, the results of this article corroborate the evidence of investments need in early childhood, mainly


                                                     12
for the increase of skills in Mathematics. Considering that preschool attendance is higher for children of
higher socioeconomic level’families, a policy of child education aimed at poorer families could contribute
to decreasing the e¤ect of the vicious cycle of skill formation, reducing the e¤ect of social origin upon
children’s learning.


References
 [1] Almeida, R. B. and Pazello, E. T. (2010). O efeito da pré-escola sobre o desempenho escolar futuro
     dos indivíduos. Proceedings of the 38th Brazilian Economics Meeting, ANPEC - Brazilian Association
     of Graduate Programs in Economics.

 [2] Barnett, W. S. (1992). Bene…ts of Compensatory Preschool Education. Journal of Human Resources,
     University of Wisconsin Press, vol. 27(2), pages 279-312.

 [3] Barnett, W. S. (1995). Long-Term E¤ects of Early Childhood Programs on Cognitive and School
     Outcomes. Future of Children. Volume 5 Number 3 Winter.

 [4] Behrman, J., Parker, S. W. and Todd, P. E. (2004). Medium Term E¤ects of the Oportunidades
     Program Package, Including Nutrition, on Education of Rural Children Age 0-8 in 1997. Technical
     Document. Number 9 on the Evaluation of Oportunidades.

 [5] Berlinski, S., Galiani, S. and Manacorda, M. (2008). Giving children a better start: Preschool
     attendance and school-age pro…les. Journal of Public Economics, Elsevier, vol. 92(5-6), pages 1416-
     1440, June.

 [6] Berlinski, S., Galiani, S. and Gertler, P. (2009). The e¤ect of pre-primary education on primary
     school performance. Journal of Public Economics, Elsevier, vol. 93(1-2), pages 219-234, February.

 [7] Casella, E. B., Amaro Jr, E. and Costa, J. C. (2011). As Bases Neurológicas da Aprendizagem
     da Leitura. In: Aprendizagem Infantil: Uma abordagem da neurociência, economia e psicologia
     cognitiva. Aloisio Araújo (coord.). Rio de Janeiro.

 [8] Blau, D., and Currie, J. (2006). Preschool, daycare, and afterschool care: Who’s minding the kids? In
     E. Hanushek, & F. Welch (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Education, Handbooks in Economics,
     vol. 2, chap. 20. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 1163-1278.

 [9] Calderini, S. R. and Souza, A. P. (2009). Pré-escola no Brasil: Seu Impacto na Qualidade da Ed-
     ucação Fundamental. Proceedings of the 37th Brazilian Economics Meeting, ANPEC - Brazilian
     Association of Graduate Programs in Economics. Foz do Iguaçu, Paraná, p. 1-21.

[10] Cunha, F. and Heckman, J. (2007). The Technology of Skill Formation. American Economic Review,
     97(2): 31–47.

[11] Cunha, F. and Heckman, J. (2009) The economics and psychology of inequality and human devel-
     opment. NBER Working Paper no. 14695. 2009.

[12] Cunha, F. and Heckman, J. (2010). Investing in Our Young People. NBER Working Paper No.
     w16201.

[13] Cunha, F., Heckman, J. , Lochner, L. J., and Masterov, D. V. (2006). Interpreting the evidence
     on life cycle skill formation. In E. A. Hanushek, & F. Welch (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of
     Education, chap. 12. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 697-812.


                                                   13
[14] Cunha, F., Heckman, J., and Schennach, S. M. (2010). Estimating the technology of cognitive and
     noncognitive skill formation. Econometrica, 78 (3), 883-931.

[15] Curi, A. and Menezes-Filho, N. A. (2009). A Relação entre Educação Pré-Primária, Salários, Esco-
     laridade e Pro…ciência Escolar no Brasil. Estudos Econômicos, São Paulo, v. 39, n. 4, p. 811-850.

[16] Currie, J. (2001). Early Childhood Education Programs. Journal of Economic Perspectives, Ameri-
     can Economic Association, vol. 15(2), pages 213-238, Spring.

[17] Felício, F. de and Vasconcellos, L. (2007) O Efeito Da Educação Infantil Sobre O Desempenho
     Escolar Medido Em Exames Padronizados. Proceedings of the 35th Brazilian Economics Meeting,
     ANPEC - Brazilian Association of Graduate Programs in Economics.

[18] Felicio, F., Terra, R. and Zoghbi, A. C. (2012). The e¤ects of early childhood education on literacy
     scores using data from a new Brazilian assessment tool. Estud. Econ., São Paulo, v. 42, n. 1, Mar.

[19] IBGE - Instituto Brasileiro de Geogra…a e Estatística. Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicílios
     –PNAD, 2001-2009. Rio de Janeiro.

[20] GERES, (2005). Estudo Longitudinal sobre a Qualidade e Equidade no Ensino Fundamental
     Brasileiro.

[21] Gertler, P. and Fernald, L. (2004). The Medium Term Impact of Oportunidades on Child Develop-
     ment in Rural Areas. Unpublished manuscript, University of California at Berkeley.

[22] Knudsen, E. I. (2004). Sensitive Periods in the Development of the Brain and Behavior. Journal of
     Cognitive Neuroscience, 16(1), 1412{1425.

[23] PISA –Programme for International Student Assessment. (2009).

[24] Rodrigues, C.G, Pinto, C. X. C. and Santos, D. D. (2010). The impact of daycare attendance on
     mat test scores for a cohort of 4 graders in brazil. Working paper.

[25] Todd. P. E. and Wolpin, K. I. (2003). On The Speci…cation and Estimation of The Production
     Function for Cognitive Achievement. Economic Journal, Royal Economic Society, vol. 113(485),
     pages F3-F33, February.

[26] Schady, N. (2006). Early Childhood Development in Latin America and the Caribbean. Economía
     6(2): 185-213.




                                                   14
                           Graph 1 - Average Proficiency - Brazil (2000-2009)                              Graph 2 - Early Education Attendance - Brazil (2001-2009)

              420                                                                                   .8

                                                                                                    .7
              400




                                                                                  Percentage
Proficiency




                                                                                                    .6
              380
                                                                                                    .5
              360
                                                                                                    .4

              340                                                                                   .3
                                                                                                         2001     2002   2003    2004     2005      2006      2007   2008   2009
                    2000                 2003               2006                 2009
                                                                                                                                          Years
                                                   Years
                                                                                                                                0 a 6 years         4 to 6 years
                                           Mathematics     Language
                                                                                                          Source: PNAD/IBGE (2001-2009)
                     Source: PISA (2000-2009)




                                    Chart 1 – Review of main empirical brazilian studies of preschool effect
                               Authors           Datasets       Estimation method                 Main results
                     Curi e Menezes-         SAEB 2003                          Ordinary Least Square                    Positive effects, not significant
                     Filho (2009)
                     Felício and             SAEB 2003 and                      Matching and school                      Positive effects
                     Vasconcellos (2007) Prova Brazil 2005                      fixed effects
                     Calderini and Souza Prova Brazil 2005                      Instrumental variable                    Positive effects
                     (2009)
                     Felício et al (2009)    Provinha Brazil                    Matching                                 Positive effects
                     Rodrigues et al         SAEB 2005                          Instrumental variable                    Positive effects
                     (2010)
                    Source: Authors' Elaboration.




                                                    Chart 2 – Variables Used in the Empirical Analysis
                                                 Variables                                Data set source/Year
                      Mathematics and Language proficiency                 Geres/2005-2008
                                                             Child and family variables
                      Race                                                 Geres/2008
                      Socioeconomic level                                  Geres/2008
                                                                 Teacher variables
                      Education e experience                               Geres/2005-2008
                      Teacher wage                                         Rais-Migra/2005-2008
                                                                  School variables
                      Computer lab, Science lab and Librarie               Censo Escolar/2005-2008
                      Public school/Private school                         Geres/2005-2008
                    Source: Authors' Elaboration.



                                                                   Table 3 – Mean and standard error
                                                                              Preschool                         Non Preschool                 Difference
                                                                           attendance (A)                       attendance (B)                 (A – B)
                            Mathematics Proficiency                            152.002                              139.460                   12.542***
                                                                               (29.551)                             (28.136)
                            Language Proficiency                               192.718                              166.698                   26.020***
                                                                               (69.646)                             (63.965)
                            Socioeconomic level                                  0.164                                -0.216                      0.380***
                                                                                (0.619)                              (0.472)
                            White                                                0.349                                0.282                       0.067***
                                                                                (0.477)                              (0.450)

                                                                                               15
                          Race not reported                                      0.006                            0.010                          -0.004***
                                                                                (0.080)                          (0.102)
                          Boys                                                   0.492                            0.533                          -0.042***
                                                                                (0.500)                          (0.499)
                          Girls                                                  0.500                            0.455                          0.046***
                                                                                (0.500)                          (0.498)
                          Gender not reported                                    0.008                            0.012                          -0.004**
                                                                                (0.091)                          (0.110)
                          Public school                                          0.813                            0.948                          -0.136***
                                                                                (0.390)                          (0.221)
                          Computer lab                                           0.723                            0.753                          -0.031***
                                                                                (0.448)                          (0.431)
                          Science lab                                            0.303                            0.169                          0.134***
                                                                                (0.460)                          (0.375)
                          Libraries                                              0.739                            0.721                            0.017**
                                                                                (0.439)                          (0.448)
                          Teacher experience - 0 to 5 years                      0.060                            0.058                            0.001
                                                                                (0.237)                          (0.235)
                           Teacher experience - 6 to 10 years                    0.116                            0.120                            -0.004
                                                                                (0.321)                          (0.325)
                          Teacher experience – 11 to 15 years                    0.159                            0.153                            0.006
                                                                                (0.366)                          (0.360)
                          Teacher experience – more than 15                      0.519                            0.468                          0.052***
                          years                                                 (0.500)                          (0.499)
                          Teacher experience – not reported                      0.146                            0.201                          -0.056***
                                                                                (0.353)                          (0.401)
                          Teacher with higher education                          0.706                            0.665                          0.041***
                                                                                (0.456)                          (0.472)
                          Teacher wage                                         2,160.15                         2,065.95                         94.197***
                                                                              (1,288.73)                       (1,027.83)
                          Teacher wage – not reported                            0.024                            0.012                          0.011***
                                                                                (0.152)                          (0.110)
                          Belo Horizonte city                                    0.283                            0.302                          -0.019**
                                                                                (0.451)                          (0.459)
                          Campinas city                                          0.301                            0.244                          0.057***
                                                                                (0.459)                          (0.430)
                          Campo Grande city                                      0.124                            0.297                          -0.173***
                                                                                (0.330)                          (0.457)
                          Rio de Janeiro city                                    0.292                            0.156                          0.135***
                                                                                (0.454)                          (0.363)
                         Source: Geres (2005-2008)
                         Note: Standard errors in parentheses.




                                                                                                                 Graph 4 - Language Proficiency (2005-2008)
                          Graph 3 - Mathematics Proficiency (2005-2008)
                                                                                                    180

              250
                                                                                                    160
                                                                             Proficiency
Proficiency




              200                                                                                   140


                                                                                                    120
              150

                                                                                                    100

              100                                                                                         1               2                  3                 4    5
                    1               2                  3                4                  5                                               Waves
                                                     Waves
                                                                                                                               Preschool            Non preschool
                                         Preschool           Non preschool
                                                                                                          Source: Geres(2005-2008)
                    Source: Geres(2005-2008)


                                                                                               16
% Preschool Attendance                                              Graph 5 - Preschool attendance and mother education

                                                           1
                                                          .95
                                                           .9
                                                          .85
                                                           .8




                                                                                                             s




                                                                                                                                                               n
                                                                s




                                                                                      s




                                                                                                                                        n
                                                                                                          ar
                                                            ar




                                                                                      ar




                                                                                                                                                            tio
                                                                                                                                      io
                                                                                                                                   at
                                                                                                         ye
                                                          ye




                                                                                    ye




                                                                                                                                                         ca
                                                                                                                                   uc




                                                                                                                                                       du
                                                                                                     11
                                                      4




                                                                                8




                                                                                                                                 ed
                                                     an




                                                                               an




                                                                                                                                                  E
                                                                                                    an




                                                                                                                              er
                                                   th




                                                                             th




                                                                                                                                                   r
                                                                                                                                                he
                                                                                                  th




                                                                                                                           gh
                                              s




                                                                        s




                                                                                                                                              ig
                                               s




                                                                         s




                                                                                             s




                                                                                                                        hi
                                            Le




                                                                      Le




                                                                                              s




                                                                                                                                             H
                                                                                           Le




                                                                                                                        e
                                                                                                                     et
                                                                                                                   pl
                                                                                                                  m
                                                                                                                co
                                                                                                              In
                                                                                                   Mother Education

                                                                Source: Geres(2005-2008)




                                                                              Table 4 – OLS – Mathematics
                           Dependent variable– Mathematics
                                                                                           Wave2                              Wave3                        Wave4      Wave5
                                     Proficiency
                                                                             Model 1
                                                                          6.573***           12.055***        10.650***     13.090***
                         Preschool
                                                                           (0.979)            (1.615)           (1.799)       (1.956)
                         Observations                                       8,476              8,476             8,476         8,476
                         R-square                                           0.219              0.248             0.229         0.228
                                                                             Model 2
                                                                          6.472***           11.866***        10.495***     12.940***
                         Preschool
                                                                           (0.965)            (1.592)           (1.783)       (1.938)
                         Observations                                       8,476              8,476             8,472         8,476
                         R-square                                           0.240              0.269             0.243         0.242
                                                                             Model 3
                                                                          6.019***           10.803***         9.803***     12.229***
                         Preschool
                                                                           (0.949)            (1.555)           (1.784)       (1.927)
                         Observations                                       8,452              8,381             8,079         8,334
                         R-square                                           0.274              0.312             0.272         0.254
                                                                             Model 4
                                                                          5.158***           10.076***         9.088***      9.906***
                         Preschool
                                                                           (0.941)            (1.544)           (1.772)       (1.888)
                         Observations                                       8,452              8,381             8,079         8,334
                         R-square                                           0.290              0.323             0.283         0.289
                         Note 1: Model 1: race and socioeconomic level; Model 2: model1 + public/private school; Model 3: model 2 +
                         computer lab, science lab, library, internet; Model 4: model 3 + teacher wage, education and experience.
                         Note 2: ***Significant at 1%. **Significant at 5%. *Significant at 10%.
                         Note 3: Standard errors in parentheses.



                             Table 5 – Cumulative Specification - OLS without Value Added – Mathematics Proficiency
                              Dependent variable–
                                                                                     (1)                           (2)                          (3)                  (4)
                             Mathematics Proficiency
                                                                              6.573***                        6.472***                      5.992***               5.131***
                           Preschool*wave2
                                                                               (1.630)                         (1.613)                       (1.577)                (1.539)
                                                                              12.055***                       11.881***                     10.518***              9.498***
                           Preschool*wave3
                                                                               (1.630)                         (1.613)                       (1.578)                (1.542)
                                                                              10.650***                       10.495***                     9.245***               8.285***
                           Preschool*wave4
                                                                               (1.630)                         (1.613)                       (1.580)                (1.544)
                                                                              13.090***                       12.944***                     11.299***              7.811***
                           Preschool*wave5
                                                                               (1.630)                         (1.613)                       (1.580)                (1.548)
                          Observations                                         33,904                          33,904                        33,904                 33,904
                          R-square                                              0.513                           0.523                         0.549                  0.572
                          Notes: see notes to table 4

                                                                                                     17
       Table 6 – Cumulative Specification - OLS with Value Added – Mathematics Proficiency
     Dependent variable–
                                     (1)                (2)                    (3)                  (4)
    Mathematics Proficiency
                                  2.641**             2.661**              2.378*                  2.148
   Preschool*wave2
                                   (1.342)             (1.338)             (1.324)                (1.310)
                                  6.066***            6.097***            5.258***               4.828***
   Preschool*wave3
                                   (1.342)             (1.338)             (1.325)                (1.313)
                                  4.258***            4.276***            3.517***               3.289**
   Preschool*wave4
                                   (1.342)             (1.338)             (1.327)                (1.315)
                                  6.578***            6.624***            5.247***               3.413***
   Preschool*wave5
                                   (1.342)             (1.338)             (1.327)                (1.317)
                                  0.753***            0.741***            0.726***               0.718***
   Initial proficiency*wave2
                                   (0.017)             (0.018)             (0.018)                (0.018)
                                  1.147***            1.124***            1.086***               1.069***
   Initial proficiency*wave3
                                   (0.017)             (0.018)             (0.018)                (0.018)
                                  1.225***            1.208***            1.166***               1.141***
   Initial proficiency*wave4
                                   (0.017)             (0.018)             (0.018)                (0.018)
                                  1.248***            1.227***            1.219***               1.140***
   Initial proficiency*wave5
                                   (0.017)             (0.018)             (0.018)                (0.018)
   Observations                    33,904              33,904              33,904                 33,904
   R-square                         0.671               0.673               0.683                  0.691
   Notes: see notes to table 4

Table 7 – Cumulative Specification – First difference without Value Added – Mathematics Proficiency
         Dependent variable–
                                           (1)                (2)               (3)                 (4)
       Mathematics Proficiency
   Preschool*wave2                                                  omitted
                                      5.482***          5.399***              4.742***           4.296***
   Preschool*wave3
                                       (1.163)           (1.162)               (1.161)            (1.161)
                                      4.078**           4.011**               3.356**             3.130*
   Preschool*wave4
                                       (1.645)           (1.643)               (1.642)            (1.643)
                                      6.517***          6.426***              5.351***           4.392**
   Preschool*wave5
                                       (2.015)           (2.012)               (2.012)            (2.014)
   Observations                        25,428            25,428                25,428             25,428
   R-square                             0.553             0.554                 0.560              0.563
   Notes: see notes to table 4

 Table 8 – Cumulative Specification – First difference with Value Added – Mathematics Proficiency
        Dependent variable–
                                      (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)
     Mathematics Proficiency
   Preschool*wave2                                           omitted
                                    3.425***          3.427***         2.982***          2.748**
   Preschool*wave3
                                     (1.150)           (1.149)          (1.150)          (1.150)
                                      1.617             1.606            1.189            1.171
   Preschool*wave4
                                     (1.626)           (1.625)          (1.627)          (1.628)
                                    3.936**           3.924**            2.938            2.271
   Preschool*wave5
                                     (1.992)           (1.991)          (1.993)          (1.996)
   Initial proficiency*wave2                                 omitted
                                    0.394***          0.383***         0.363***          0.354***
   Initial proficiency*wave3
                                     (0.015)           (0.015)          (0.015)           (0.016)
                                    0.472***          0.467***         0.446***          0.448***
   Initial proficiency*wave4
                                     (0.021)           (0.021)          (0.022)           (0.022)
                                    0.494***          0.486***         0.496***          0.490***
   Initial proficiency*wave5
                                     (0.026)           (0.026)          (0.027)           (0.028)
   Observations                      25,428            25,428           25,428            25,428
   R-square                           0.565             0.566            0.570             0.573
   Notes: see notes to table 4


                                                 18
                                   Table 9 – OLS – Language
         Dependent variable– language
                                             Wave2            Wave3        Wave4     Wave5
                 proficiency
                                              Model 1
                                             5.201***         5.753***    5.898***   5.206***
     Preschool
                                              (0.654)          (0.786)     (0.781)    (0.746)
     Observations                              8,476            8,476       8,476      8,476
     R-square                                  0.259            0.234       0.210      0.202
                                              Model 2
                                             5.123***         5.670***    5.831***   5.158***
     Preschool
                                              (0.642)          (0.777)     (0.774)    (0.741)
     Observations                              8,476            8,476       8,472      8,476
     R-square                                  0.286            0.251       0.224      0.213
                                              Model 3
                                             4.853***         5.063***    5.479***   4.947***
     Preschool
                                              (0.627)          (0.761)     (0.781)    (0.738)
     Observations                              8,452            8,381       8,079      8,334
     R-square                                  0.327            0.292       0.244      0.225
                                              Model 4
                                             4.312***         4.765***    5.179***   3.910***
     Preschool
                                              (0.623)          (0.757)     (0.776)    (0.716)
     Observations                              8,452            8,381       8,079      8,334
     R-square                                  0.340            0.300       0.256      0.275
    Notes: see notes to table 4




     Table 10 – Cumulative Specification - OLS without Value Added – Language Proficiency
     Dependent variable–
                                    (1)                 (2)                (3)           (4)
     language proficiency
                                  5.201***           5.123***            4.875***      4.330***
Preschool*wave2
                                   (0.744)            (0.736)             (0.720)       (0.705)
                                  5.753***           5.676***            5.033***      4.745***
Preschool*wave3
                                   (0.744)            (0.736)             (0.720)       (0.706)
                                  5.898***           5.827***            5.497***      5.048***
Preschool*wave4
                                   (0.744)            (0.736)             (0.721)       (0.707)
                                  5.206***           5.165***            4.697***      3.379***
Preschool*wave5
                                   (0.744)            (0.736)             (0.721)       (0.709)
Observations                       33,904             33,904              33,904        33,904
R-square                            0.444              0.456               0.484         0.507
Notes: see notes to table 4




                                                19
       Table 11 – Cumulative Specification - OLS with Value Added – Language Proficiency
     Dependent variable–
                                         (1)                     (2)                (3)                 (4)
     language proficiency
                                       1.501**               1.537**             1.573***         1.378**
  Preschool*wave2
                                        (0.597)               (0.597)             (0.596)          (0.590)
                                       1.802***              1.824***            1.601***         1.458**
  Preschool*wave3
                                        (0.597)               (0.597)             (0.596)          (0.591)
                                       2.363***              2.378***            2.384***         2.048***
  Preschool*wave4
                                        (0.597)               (0.597)             (0.597)          (0.592)
                                       2.043***              2.062***            1.829***          1.069*
  Preschool*wave5
                                        (0.597)               (0.597)             (0.597)          (0.593)
                                       0.606***              0.596***            0.582***         0.576***
  Initial proficiency*wave2
                                        (0.009)               (0.009)             (0.009)          (0.009)
                                       0.647***              0.640***            0.624***         0.616***
  Initial proficiency*wave3
                                        (0.009)               (0.009)             (0.009)          (0.009)
                                       0.579***              0.573***            0.562***         0.556***
  Initial proficiency*wave4
                                        (0.009)               (0.009)             (0.009)          (0.009)
                                       0.518***              0.515***            0.513***         0.481***
  Initial proficiency*wave5
                                        (0.009)               (0.009)             (0.009)          (0.010)
  Observations                          33,904                33,904              33,904           33,904
  R-square                               0.644                 0.645               0.649            0.657
  Notes: see notes to table 4

Table 12 – Cumulative Specification – First difference without Value Added – Language Proficiency
               Dependent variable–
                                                    (1)                (2)         (3)          (4)
               language proficiency
          Preschool*wave2                                                 omitted
                                                   0.552            0.542         0.272        0.294
          Preschool*wave3                         (0.500)          (0.500)       (0.502)      (0.502)
                                                   0.697            0.692         0.684        0.622
          Preschool*wave4                         (0.708)          (0.707)       (0.710)      (0.711)
                                                   0.004            0.015         -0.149       -0.251
          Preschool*wave5                         (0.867)          (0.866)       (0.869)      (0.872)
          Observations                            25,428           25,428        25,428       25,428
          R-square                                 0.476            0.477         0.480        0.482
         Notes: see notes to table 4



 Table 13 – Cumulative Specification – First difference with Value Added – Language Proficiency
              Dependent variable –
                                                    (1)                (2)          (3)          (4)
               language proficiency
          Preschool*wave2                                                  omitted
                                                   0.301             0.276           0.055      0.083
          Preschool*wave3
                                                  (0.500)           (0.500)         (0.502)    (0.503)
                                                   0.862             0.830           0.809      0.698
          Preschool*wave4
                                                  (0.708)           (0.708)         (0.710)    (0.712)
                                                   0.542             0.503           0.270      0.093
          Preschool*wave5
                                                  (0.867)           (0.867)         (0.870)    (0.872)
          Initial proficiency*wave2                                        omitted
                                               0.041***            0.044***       0.039***    0.040***
          Initial proficiency*wave3
                                                (0.007)             (0.007)         (0.008)    (0.008)
                                               -0.027***           -0.023**        -0.022**     -0.014
          Initial proficiency*wave4
                                                (0.010)             (0.010)         (0.011)    (0.011)
                                               -0.088***          -0.081***       -0.075***   -0.069***
          Initial proficiency*wave5
                                                (0.012)             (0.013)         (0.013)    (0.014)
         Observations                           25,428              25,428          25,428     25,428
         R-square                                0.480               0.481           0.483      0.485
         Notes: see notes to table 4

                                                            20
