    "Does risk aversion increase the willingness to become a teacher in Brazil? An investigation
     of risk preference and occupation choice among students of teacher training programs"

           Ariana Britto (IBMEC), Fábio Waltenberg (UFF) e Roberta Mendes e Costa (UFF)1
                                              July 2019

                                                Resumo
No Brasil, a maioria dos professores de escolas públicas trabalha dentro de sistemas educacionais que
fazem uso de contratos de compensação defasados. Sob tais contratos de trabalho, os salários dos
professores dependem essencialmente da experiência e do nível de qualificação. Propostas que
objetivam reformar a remuneração, o recrutamento e a retenção de professores há muito tempo
consideram o uso de sistemas de remuneração baseados no mérito. Os professores geralmente não
apoiam tais propostas. Uma possível explicação para essas objeções é o fato de que mecanismos
baseados no desempenho introduzem incerteza. Se professores são relativamente avessos ao risco,
como sugere uma vasta literatura sobre este tópico, um mecanismo de compensação baseado em
mérito poderia reduzir a atratividade da carreira docente a longo prazo e a satisfação dessa carreira a
curto prazo. Este trabalho contribui para a literatura, investigando o papel das preferências de risco e
escolha ocupacional entre os alunos de cursos de formação de professores. Os dados foram extraídos
de uma pesquisa aplicada a uma amostra representativa de concluintes em cursos de formação docente
no Brasil. Os primeiros resultados parecem sugerir que a profissão docente pode atrair indivíduos que
possam ser, pelo menos, mais receptivos a modelos alternativos de remuneração. Para abordar a
potencial preocupação com a endogeneidade, fez-se uso de modelo de variáveis instrumentais e
identificou-se uma correlação negativa entre indivíduos que escolhem a carreira docente e a
disposição para assumir riscos. Este resultado aplica-se apenas a medida qualitativa utilizada para
mensurar riscos. Até agora, esses resultados devem chamar a atenção para a importância de considerar
as preferências dos professores ao projetar novos sistemas de remuneração para professores.
Palavras-chaves: Escolha ocupacional, preferências de risco, remuneração docente, educação

                                                  Abstract
In Brazil, most public school teachers work within educational systems that make use of lagged
compensation contracts. Under such employment contracts, teachers’ salaries depend essentially on
their years of experience and level of qualification. Proposals that aim to reform teacher
compensation, recruitment and retention have long considered the use of merit-based compensation
systems. Teachers have generally not embraced these policies. One possible explanation for their
objections is the fact that these mechanisms introduce uncertainty into teachers’ income. If teachers
are relatively risk averse, as a vast literature on this topic suggests, a merit-based compensation
mechanism could potentially reduce the attractiveness of a teaching career over the long term, and
the satisfaction of this career in the short term. This paper contributes to the literature by investigating
the role of risk preferences and occupational choice among students of teacher training courses. Data
were drawn from a survey administered to a representative sample of recent teaching graduates in
Brazil. First results seems to suggest that teaching profession may attract individuals that might be,
at least, more receptive to alternative compensation models. To address potential concern about
endogeneity, we use instrumental variable estimation and find a negative correlation between
individuals who choose a teaching career and willingness to take risks. This result applies only to the
general risk measure. So far, these results should call attention to the importance of considering
teachers’ preferences when designing new compensation systems for teachers.
Keywords: Occupational choice, risk preferences, teacher compensation, education

Área ANPEC: 13 (Economia do Trabalho)
JEL: J24, D81, I20

1
    Corresponding authors. Emails: ariana.britto@ibmec.edu.br; rmendes@id.uff.br; waltenberg@economia.uff.br.
                                                                                                                1
1.   Introduction2

        In Brazil, most public school teachers work within educational systems that make use of
lagged compensation contracts. Under such employment contracts, teachers’ salaries depend not on
the performance of their students, but essentially on their years of experience and level of
qualification. Some authors believe compensating teachers based on the performance of their students
would both incentivize teachers to work harder in the short term, and alter the composition of the
teaching profession in the long term, attracting better teachers (Lazear, 2003; Biasi, 2018; Dohmen
& Falk, 2010; (Goldhaber, Bignell, Farley, Walch, & Cowan, 2016). In line with this literature, a
uniform compensation system, such as that which currently operates in Brazil, could be failing to
extract maximum effort from teachers and to increase teacher productivity.

        However, the use of merit-based compensation systems would introduce uncertainty into
teachers’ income, given that it would be subject to oscillation over time. Additionally, pay would
depend on their students’ performance, which means teachers would not perfectly control their
incomes. If teachers are relatively risk averse, as a vast literature on this topic suggests (Goldhaber,
Bignell, Farley, Walch, & Cowan, 2016); (Bowen, Buck, Deck, Mills, & Shuls, 2015); (Dohmen &
Falk, 2010); (Hernani-Limarino, 2005); (Liang, 2000), a merit-based compensation mechanism could
potentially reduce the attractiveness of a teaching career over the long term, and the satisfaction of
this career in the short term, eventually increasing rates of exit from the teaching profession.

        A key question related to this dynamic is how the effects of a merit-based compensation model
may vary over teachers who already have years of experience, new entrants into the teaching
profession, and individuals who are currently choosing a future career. Recent studies appear to
document a preference for less-volatile compensation mechanisms, or at least for mixed models that
retain an element of predictability (Goldhaber, Bignell, Farley, Walch, & Cowan, 2016) (Biasi, 2018).
It appears that for school districts in the United States that adopted, either totally or partially merit-
based compensation models, the results remain unclear. Nonetheless, there does appear to be an
observable tendency in relation to new entrants into the teaching profession. If teachers are not in fact
more risk averse, teachers’ opposition to performance pay system could be less strong than we
supposed, especially regarding new entrants.

        Flexible compensation systems are still new to a majority of teachers, and in this case,
teachers’ choices may be affected not only by aversion to income risk, but also by information
asymmetries. Teachers may require time to acquire the information necessary to evaluate new
compensation models, whatever these may be. In this context, teachers still appear to exhibit
relatively high levels of resistance to productivity-based compensation models, perhaps due to their
complexity and ambiguity. As a result of the limited information available to them, many teachers
may not be totally cognizant of the magnitude of the potential risks and rewards associated with these
models (Goldhaber, Bignell, Farley, Walch, & Cowan, 2016).

       To our knowledge, there are no studies in the Brazilian literature that specifically analyze the
individual risk preferences of a specific occupational group – in Brazil, the relation between risk
preferences and career choice has traditionally been examined in the context of wage differentials
between public and private sector workers. In general, studies of this topic have demonstrated that
public sector workers in Brazil are more risk averse than their private sector counterparts when
considering total lifetime earnings, including bonuses and pension benefits along with basic pay


2 This material was carried out with the technical and financial support of the Lemann Foundation and Itau BBA through the "How to
ensure that all Brazilian students have a good teacher every day in the classroom?". All opinions, results, conclusions and
recommendations expressed in this material are the responsibility of the author (s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Lemann Foundation and Itau BBA.
                                                                                                                                 2
(Barbosa, Barbosa-Filho, & Lima, 2013); (Becker & Kassouf, 2012); (Barbosa-Filho, Pessôa, &
Afonso, 2009).

       From a methodological point of view, the primary difficulty in analyzing heterogeneity in
individual risk preferences lies in the fact that these preferences are not directly measurable. Most of
the economic literature assumes not only that risk preferences are stable over time, but that they are
homogenous across individuals. A growing, albeit exclusively international literature has made
important progress in developing empirical measurement of individual risk preferences (Beauchamp,
Cesarini, & Johannesson, 2017); (Dohmen, et al., 2011); (Dohmen, et al., 2005).

        Further methodological limitations apply when considering the labor market for teachers.
First, there is a lack of information gathered on risk preferences in standard questionnaires
administered in Brazil. Second, of the data that do exist about teachers, most encompass information
on teachers who have already entered the profession. Yet these experienced teachers’ preferences
may already have been shaped or influenced by their own experiences or by the opinions of their
colleagues, and may not represent their original individual preferences (Perez, 2011). Collectively,
these challenges make it difficult to foresee how teachers’ preferences should be incorporated into
the design of new incentives to attract future teaching professionals and retain those who are already
involved in the profession.

        In this article, we analyze the responses of undergraduate students in teacher training courses
on how to identify themselves in relation to their risk behavior from open questions. Open questions
were used, following the approach of Dohmen et al. (2011, 2005), whose objective was to compare
the judgment of individuals on open questions versus questions traditionally used in the literature that
measures risk preferences such as coefficients of risk aversion, measures based on hypothetical
lotteries, or measures of variance in wages in different segments of the labor market. The hypothesis
underlying these models is that riskier occupations may offer higher pay in order to incentivize
workers to participate. By correlating results with specific occupations, within which the literature
has traditionally assumed that risk preferences are homogenous, we hope to find a measure capable
of reflecting specific individual traits and behaviors (Bowen et al., 2015).

        The data used in our analyses come from a survey administered to a representative sample of
nearly 2,000 undergraduate teaching majors, distributed over Brazil’s five regions in 2015. By
focusing on undergraduate students preparing to enter the teaching profession, it is possible to
incorporate the problem of self-selection into low-risk careers, while eliminating any interference that
experience may have on behavior. The participants of the research were also analyzed in relation to
their possibilities of entering the teaching career and their preferences for different remuneration
systems that involve different degrees of risk. The survey sought to directly measure the risk
preferences of individuals at the moment they are confirming their occupational choice, and to relate
these preferences to characteristics of the teaching profession, including income risk, job security,
and chances of upward mobility within teaching careers. One of the fundamental takeaways regarding
risk preferences is that context matters (Fouarge, Kriechel, & Dohmen, 2014). Thus, we use a context-
specific measure of risk that allow us to correlate the influence of local contexts on risk behaviors.

        Descriptive statistics demonstrate that individuals who choose a teaching career seems to be
not more risk averse than other students, contrary to what theory has tended to predict. Being older,
having parents with at least a high school education increase willingness to take risks. However, these
results were unstable among the four measures of risk preferences, including two versions of general
risk measure that we apply. It is possible that observable characteristics incorporate some aspects of
individual risk preferences. Other potential explanations are discussed in the text. These results seems
to suggest that teaching profession may attract individuals that might be, at least, more receptive to
alternative compensation models, and should call attention to the importance of considering teachers’
                                                                                                      3
preferences when designing new compensation systems for teachers. To address potential concern
about endogeneity, we exploited information of having children and living with them during
undergraduate courses. Using instrumental variable estimation, we find a negative correlation
between individuals who choose a teaching career and willingness to take risks. This result applies
only to the general risk measure on 11 points scale.

2.   Risk Measures

        To measure risk preferences, four variables were constructed based on survey questions that
sought to capture how respondents would behave in hypothetical situations involving risk. We define
these variables as general risk, risk context, contract risk, and financial risk. Risk attitudes are
measured on a discrete scale, where higher values represent a greater inclination to take risks in
different contexts. The measures were constructed based on (Dohmen, et al. 2005); (Dohmen, et al.,
2011); (Bowen, et al. 2015). Table 1 presents a summary of the four risk measures and their format
in the econometric models.

                              Table 1: Description of Dependent Variables

                                 Question to Generate
     Dependent Variable                                                    Functional Form
                                       Measure
     1. General Risk
                                                                 Continuous response scale from 0 to
     Continuous              How do you see yourself? Are
                                                                 10
                             you a person who is inclined to
                                                                 Binary
                             take risks, or do you avoid
                                                                   1 = Risk-neutral or loving (responses
     General                 risks?
                                                                 ≥5)
                                                                   0 = Risk averse (responses <5)
                             Choose to live in City 1 (low       Binary
     2. Risk Context (risk   employment rate and relatively        1 = Risk-neutral or loving (choose
     in the labor market–    low salaries) or City 2 (high       City 2, the riskier option);
     employability)          employment rate but higher            0 = Risk averse (choose City 1, the
                             salaries).                          less-risky option)
                             Indicate preferences among          Binary
     3. Contract Risk
                             different types of pay systems        1 = Risk-neutral or loving (responses
     (risk in the labor
                             (using a satisfaction scale, with   ≥5 for variable compensation based on
     market – different
                             higher values representing          individual and team performance)
     payment models)
                             greater satisfaction).                0 = Risk averse (responses <5)
                             Suppose you won R$100,000 in
                             the lottery. Immediately after
                                                                 Scale constructed from six possible
                             receiving your prize, you
                                                                 responses:
                             receive an investment offer
                             from a bank (of good
                                                                  0 = don’t invest;
                             reputation) with the following
                                                                  1 = invest R$20,000;
                             conditions:
     4. Financial Risk                                            2 = invest R$40,000;
                             1. It is possible to double the
     (hypothetical                                                3 = invest R$60,000;
                             value of your investment in one
     investment)                                                  4 = invest R$80,000;
                             year
                                                                  5 = invest R$100,000;
                             2. It is equally possible to lose
                             half of the value invested.
                                                                 The larger the number, the lower the
                             Respondents should choose
                                                                 risk aversion
                             what fraction of the R$100,000
                             they should invest from a set of
                             six possible options.
       Created by authors


                                                                                                           4
        Various studies have made use of general self-reported risk aversion measures, demonstrating
the ability of these measures to predict individual risk-related behaviors (Dohmen, et al., 2005);
(Fouarge, Kriechel, & Dohmen, 2014); (Dohmen & Falk, 2010). In the measures related to labor
market risk, respondents are left free to imagine the risks involved in each choice.

        Most of our analysis focuses on the general risk measure. It is possible to observe that it is a
qualitative measure that does not involve any explicit lottery. Instead, consider the assessment of
individual risk-taking in general, which may incorporate various types of lottery-based risk elicitation
tools – including those that do not involve monetary rewards – that could be addressed in decision-
making processes.

        The approach follows that proposed by Dohmen et al. (2011, 2005). For the authors, as there
are no specific stakes or probability in this general measure, there may be potential factors besides
risk preferences that lead to a variation in individual responses. Specifically subjective beliefs about
the degree of risk in the decision environment could affect the stated willingness to take risks. For
this reason, it is important to evaluate if the general generic variable is able to explain the risk behavior
in our model, compared to other measures that involve explicit risks. A positive result from the
validation exercise would confirm that the measure does not only reflect subjective beliefs. The
validation exercise is presented in section four.

       Risk context was a measure coded as one for respondents who would prefer to live in a city
with high unemployment and high average wages and zero for respondents who would choose a city
with both low indicators, average wages and unemployment rate.

        In the third measure respondents should choose their preferences from four different pay
systems, two non-competitive (based on experience and qualifications) and two competitive ones
(based on individual performance and team performance). Like general risk measure described above,
this was constructed considering the discrete scale of grades from zero to ten, with higher values
indicating a greater risk propensity. Given that interest here falls on the implications of individual
heterogeneity in incentive contracts, regression models were considered only responses to pay
systems based on performance, either individual or team.

         The last measurement included in the survey is a hypothetical lottery. This measurement
shares a common characteristic with other lottery measures in that it presents respondents with risks
and probabilities for each decision, thus holding risk stable across individuals. As argued by Dohmen
et al. (2005; 2011), this method allows responses to be more clearly attributed to risk preferences by
holding subjective beliefs constant.




    3. Data

       The sample consisted of approximately 2,000 individuals distributed over 35 Brazilian
municipalities that are representative of Brazil’s five regions. In total, 66 higher education institutions
(51% public and 49% private) were visited between June and December, 2015. Survey participants
were approached by enumerators within these institutions’ teaching departments. The universe of




                                                                                                           5
participants was considered students enrolled in education courses3 and teaching licensure programs4,
who planned to graduate within eighteen months of the interview. These individuals are referred to
in the survey as “graduates.”5 Of the 2,000 face-to-face interviews conducted, 1,994 were completed
successfully and were valid for analysis.6 Surveyed individuals were drawn from the following
majors: education, and seven teaching licensure programs: biology, physics, geography, history,
literature, mathematics, and chemistry.

       The survey collected information on individuals’ educational background and demographic
and socioeconomic characteristics, as well as information on professional plans, choice of college
major and undergraduate educational trajectory. The key survey questioned focused on whether or
not they intended to work as a basic education teacher upon graduation, and what their motivations
were for this choice, including social influences, their perceptions of their own teaching abilities, the
personal and social attractiveness of the teaching profession, job demands, social status, and financial
considerations. Based on this survey, we construct two comparison groups that are relatively
homogenous within themselves: individuals who choose to become basic education teachers upon
graduating (57.1%), and individuals who affirm that they will not continue with a teaching career or
are unsure of their plans (Table 2).

       Table 2: Proportion of undergraduate students among possibilities of occupational choice7

                           Occupational Choices                                   Quantity        Participation in
                                                                                                   the total (%)
     Act as teacher of Basic Education in the public sector                           965                48.4%
     Act as teacher of Basic Education in the private sector                          173                8.7%
     Act as a teacher in preparatory college courses                                   49                2.5%
     Act as a teacher of Higher Education                                             389                19.5%
     Acting in the area of Education, but not as a teacher                            200                10.0%
     Do not work in the area of Education                                             112                5.6%
     Do not know                                                                      106                5.3%
     Total                                                                           1,994              100.0%
         Constructed by authors based on survey data described in text.

        By focusing on undergraduate students who are preparing to enter the professional career,
whether teaching or not, it is possible to focus on the issue of self-selection in potentially low-risk
careers, while eliminating the interference that experience may have on behavior individual.
Considering that the results estimated in the following sections depend on the construction of the
comparison groups, it would be expected that there would be no significant difference between
students wishing to be teachers of basic education and those who answered negatively or had doubts
about becoming a teacher.

       The results presented in Table A in the Appendix do not corroborate this differentiation.
Individuals who intend to pursue a teaching career differ in terms of average for most of the

3
  Education courses trains teacher for preschool and the first years of elementary education.
4
  Teacher training courses in Brazil are called licenciaturas, translated here to licensure. They are four-year undergraduate
courses encompassing various fields that lead to the teacher profession. Teachers with licensure have pedagogical training
during those years.
5
  The sampling plan followed the Proportional Probability to Population Size method, considering the total number of
graduates reported in the School Census (Censo Escolar) of 2011. Based on this framework, we proceeded by selecting
states, municipalities within each state, and education institutions within each municipality with respect to proportionality
over each of the three specialty areas mentioned.
6
  The survey was conducted by a company that offered multiple trained survey teams over Brazil’s five regions. The
survey took an average of 20 minutes to complete.
7
  Students should choose only the first preference among the alternatives presented.
                                                                                                                           6
observable characteristics, statistically significant at 1%, when compared to those who do not or are
unsure. This difference was found for the majority of controls: gender, age, parental schooling,
previous work as teacher, except: color and socioeconomic level. Among the institutional
characteristics, most of them presented differences: those who intend to pursue a teaching career
study mainly in private institutions, in pedagogy courses and have attended high school in public
schools. Regarding risk measures, the differences are not maintained: future teachers and non-
teachers do not differ in terms of preferences regarding risk, regardless of the measure used.

        Therefore, it is observed that, in general, the sample that was used to carry out the estimations
of occupational choice underestimates individual characteristics, family background and school
situation of the graduates wishing to pursue their career as teachers of basic education, but in terms
of preferences in relation to risk, the differences are less relevant.

4.   Determinants of Risk Preference Measures

         This section presents the distributions of preferences regarding risk in the population of
students to be become teachers measured by the general question. Figure 1 describes the distribution
of risk preferences in our sample. Each bar represents the fraction of respondents who chose a
particular point on the 11-point scale. The figure reveals some heterogeneity in risk preferences
among the population: mode is 8, demonstrating that there seems to be a higher concentration of data
at the higher levels, which may indicate individuals less risk averse. A fraction greater than 10% of
the respondents chose the value 10, indicating that they are fully willing to take risks, while about 4%
of all individuals chose 0, indicating that they would be totally at odds in taking risks. Nevertheless,
it was observed that preferences regarding risk vary throughout the scale.

                       Figure 1: Willingness to take risks in general: full sample




                                          Answers to general risk measure
                     0: Completely inclined to avoid risks, 10: Completely inclined to take risks
                           Constructed by authors based on survey data described in text.

          The next step is to assess whether any heterogeneity in preferences over risk is systematic,
thus leading to differences in economic decisions between the two comparison groups. That is, to
what extent this heterogeneity prevails when analyzing the impact of other observable traits that could
affect attitudes toward risk: gender, age, color, wealth, and family background. These characteristics
may be considered exogenous to preferences and risk behavior. Dohmen, et al. (2005; 2011) show
that, if this were the case, some causal interpretation would be possible for correlations and regression
results.
                                                                                                       7
        Table 3 summarizes the results. The coefficients presented in columns 1-4 correspond with
average marginal effects, which capture effects on the mean graduate, while the results in column 1
are from Ordinary Least Squared (OLS) with heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors. The majority
of estimated coefficients are not statistically significant, and this result appears stable across
alternative risk measures. Nevertheless, it is important to highlight the impact of a few exogenous
and statistically significant characteristics in each of the specifications. The dependent variable
represents the individual responses to each of the risk measures described in the previous section.

        Age appears to be positively correlated with disposition to take risks (statistically significant
at the 5% level in columns 1 and 5). Older graduates would also be more satisfied with payment
models based on either individual or team performance. The table also shows that whites are relatively
more risk averse than black or brown individuals. These results are robust to changes in the
formulation of the outcome variable and are negative and significant only in the general risk measure
(columns 1 and 2). One possible explanation for this association may be self-selection of white
individuals at the moment of choosing a course of university study. Less risk averse white students
may self-select into riskier occupations, as characterized by greater variability in incomes. In this
sense, those white students that become teachers would be disproportionately risk averse.

        Furthermore, not only is access to higher education unequal between whites and blacks in
Brazil; relative career opportunities are unequal as well. Relatively more black students are required
to balance their time between pursuing their undergraduate degrees and participating in the labor
market, and are more likely to pursue night courses or distance-learning, leading to lower
participation in courses of study that require full-time participation or whose cost is high (e.g.
medicine or engineering). For those black students that not only managed to make it to university,
but who are within sight of graduating, the disposition to take risks is likely an important part of the
characteristics that enabled them to get there.

        The relation between our indicator of wealth per capita and measures of risk is substantially
less consistent. Within theories of uncertainty, an important question regards whether risk aversion
should increase or decrease with individual or family wealth (Nicholson & Christopher, 2008);
(Weiss, 1972). Intuitively, one may argue that as family wealth increases, the disposition to take risks
will increase as well, given that potential losses are less relevant. This would make wealth endogenous
in our model. This is indeed the result identified, though only in the lottery risk measure (column 3)
and only at the 10% level of significance.

        The coefficients for parents’ education are less robust. Father’s education is statistically
significant at the 5% level in the specification that analyzes determinants of preference for merit-
based contracts. Evidently, having a more educated father is associated with increased satisfaction
with merit-based contracts, while having a more educated mother has the opposite effect. In contrast,
mother’s education has a positive effect (significant at the 5% level) on general disposition to take
risks.

        A comparison of the results presented in columns 1-5 shows that the estimated coefficients
for each of the observable characteristics in each of the risk measures seem to be – weakly – correlated
with the way the risk preferences are measured. Although a causal interpretation is not possible, it
does not seem that we can completely rule out the idea that these measures reflect only subjective
opinions.

                   Table 3: Determinants of Risk Preferences in Different Contexts

          Dependent                   General Risk          Financial      Risk      Contract
                                                                                                       8
           Variable                  Continuous        Binary          Risk        Context          Risk
                                         (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)
                                        0.264          0.0143        -0.0362        0.0234       -0.00724
           Female (=1)
                                       (0.206)        (0.0366)      (0.0574)       (0.0427)      (0.0338)
                                      0.0272**        0.00312       -0.00498       0.00205      0.00476**
           Age (in years)
                                      (0.0125)       (0.00234)     (0.00354)      (0.00256)     (0.00201)
           Mother graduated             0.324        0.0808**         0.0123       -0.0280       -0.0788*
           high school                 (0.239)        (0.0362)      (0.0365)       (0.0406)      (0.0443)
           Father graduated            -0.259         -0.0624        0.0839*        0.0561       0.0634**
           high school                 (0.206)        (0.0424)      (0.0435)       (0.0360)      (0.0292)
                                      -0.519**       -0.103**        0.0620*        0.0557         0.0102
           White (=1)
                                       (0.245)        (0.0454)      (0.0369)       (0.0516)      (0.0285)
                                        0.137          0.0198        0.0379*        0.0205        0.00413
           Wealth per capita
                                      (0.0968)        (0.0214)      (0.0207)       (0.0220)      (0.0140)
                                      5.903***
           Constant
                                       (0.533)
           R-squared                    0.051
           Observations                 1,711          1,711          1,711         1,711          1,708
Note: All specifications include the complete sample of graduates. Colum 1 present average effects estimated based on a
linear probability model (OLS). Columns 2 and 5 present average marginal effects estimated based on a probit model.
The variable High School Graduated assumes a value of 1 in cases where each parent possesses at least a completed high
school education, and assumes a value of 0 otherwise. The measure of wealth per capita was constructed based on
questions regarding household assets and number of household members. The maximum value observed for this variable
was 8. Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. We estimate all models with standard errors clustered at the
educational institutional level. Regional fixed effects are included in all models.
***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% e 10%, respectively.

        The fact that we have a pre-selected sample of individuals who are relatively homogenous
over observable characteristics facilitates our analysis of risk preferences by making it possible to
separate background socioeconomic characteristics from risk-related behaviors. Furthermore, our
focus on a specific occupational category allows us to examine the effects of individual heterogeneity
in risk preferences on choices made by young individuals just as they are preparing to enter the labor
market.

         On the other hand, it is possible that individuals who have chosen teaching-related majors
have already self-selected in terms of risk preferences. Fouarge, Kriechel, and Dohmen (2014) argue
that self-selection on risk preferences may occur because individuals who are more disposed to risk-
taking will be more likely to opt for riskier occupations, and to receive higher compensation as a
result. In this sense, the predictive power of our measures of risk preferences may not be sufficiently
strong to capture heterogeneity at the individual level.

5.   Results: Are Future Teachers More Risk Averse?

        One of our aims in this paper was to evaluate individual heterogeneity in students’ decisions
regarding career choice. To do so, we sought to understand the preferences of young, soon-to-be
graduates of teacher licensure and education programs, who may be distinct from individuals who
have already worked in the teaching profession for some time. Could it be the case that future teachers
have already self-selected by opting for a course of study that is relatively less risky than engineering
or medicine, for example? If this were true, these future teachers’ preferences would still be less
influenced by experience or the visions and opinions of the teaching profession than would the
opinions of their future colleagues who have already taught for some time (Perez, 2011) 8.

8
 It is important to note that two in every ten graduates interviewed had already had some sort of teaching experience.
One of the survey questions dealt directly with this topic: “Before beginning your current course of study, had you ever
                                                                                                                      9
        The analyses above were focused on individual heterogeneity in risk preferences and the
determinants of these individual differences. In this final section, we adopt a different perspective in
order to evaluate whether measures of risk preferences are capable of predicting risk-related economic
decisions, specifically the decision of whether or not to become a teacher. The hypothesis underlying
this analysis supposes that the measures of risk are valid proxies of real risk preferences and that
heterogeneity in these preferences is an important determinant of individual variation in risk-related
behaviors among students deciding whether to become basic education teachers.

        In order to analyze these questions, we focus on analyzing behavior of the two occupational
groups as a function of the risk measures discussed previously. The empirical strategy was developed
based on the idea that occupations offer systematically different risk profiles and lifetime earnings
curves. To keep things simple and analogous to other studies that analyze occupational choices, we
assume that risk is a characteristic that may be separated from the bundle of additional factors that
determine individual occupational choice.

        Each estimated coefficient is based on a regression of a reported occupational decision
(whether or not to become a basic education teacher) on associated measures or risk preference. All
regression specifications include an extensive set of control variables, including region, sex, race,
wealth, family composition, parents’ education, course of study, presence of children, a proxy for
individual ability, an indicator of whether the respondent had previously worked as a teacher, and
educational background. The outcome variable of interest is the binary variable that assumes a value
of one if the respondent reports they will choose to enter the basic education profession as a teacher
upon graduation, and assumes a value of zero if the respondent is unsure of their plans or plans to
follow a different career path.

         The estimated equation for the probit model takes the form:

                                     Equation 1: 𝑦𝑖∗ = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 𝑋𝑖 + 𝛽2 𝑅𝑖 + 𝜖𝑖

Where: 𝑦𝑖∗ = 1, if the i-th student intend to become a teacher of Basic Education and 𝑦𝑖∗ = 0, otherwise. R
represents each of the risk measures considered separately in the regressions; i indexes each of the respondents
and X contains a set of control variables. Our observations presuppose multiple individuals who study at the
same institution of higher education, so we need to cluster our standard errors at the institutional level.

        For each result, Table 4 presents average marginal effects based on estimates from a
traditional probit model9. Columns 1 through 4 and 6 present the relationship between the outcome
variable (occupational choice) and each of the measures of risk individually. Columns 5 and 7
estimates occupational choice as a function of all risk measures simultaneously. It is evident from the
results that, independently of specification, there does not appear to be a significant association
between willingness to take risks and the decision of whether or not to become a teacher. Previous
international studies that sought to measure risk preferences have argued that a common problem
among studies seeking to analyze occupational choice and risk preferences is that of self-selection
(Guiso & Paiella, 2005). The idea behind this critique is that individuals’ occupational choice is

worked before? [If necessary, mark more than one option].” The possible responses for a student who had already worked
as a teacher before included: as a school teacher, as a private tutor, as a teaching assistant, or as a teacher in some other
institution (college prep courses, nonprofits, companies, churches, social movements, etc.). As a robustness check, we
opted to re-estimate all specifications in Table 4 including a variable to take into account whether the respondent had had
some previous contact with the teaching profession. Results are similar in sign and significance when we include this
measure of occupational choice.
9
  Coefficients were estimated for marginal effects at the mean and average marginal effects, which should yield similar
results to those from a linear ordinary least squares model (Cameron & Trivedi, 2010). We present results only for the
marginal effects at the mean, which take into account the behavior of the mean individual.
                                                                                                                          10
      endogenous, since individuals who are more risk averse self-select into “safer” occupations with
      lower variability in pay (King, 1974) or less risky conditions (Bonin et al., 2007), which may include
      the teaching profession (Bowen, Buck, Deck, Mills, & Shuls, 2015). We specifically address to this
      problem in next section.


      Table 4: Individual risk attitude and occupational sorting: Probit (Marginal Effects at Means –MEM)
                                                 and OLS Models

Dependent Variable: Occupational choice of undergraduates

                                            (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)            (6)            (7)
General Risk –
Binary Variable                          -0.00513                                               -0.0102
                                         (0.0362)                                               (0.0330)
Financial Risk                                          0.0597                                   0.0574                        0.0505
                                                       (0.0406)                                 (0.0397)                      (0.0394)
Risk Context                                                         -0.0493                    -0.0398                       -0.0434
                                                                     (0.0404)                   (0.0415)                      (0.0407)
Contract Risk Performance                                                          -0.0423      -0.0337                       -0.0386
                                                                                   (0.0327)     (0.0321)                      (0.0320)
General Risk –
Continuous Variable                                                                                            0.00862        0.00774
                                                                                                              (0.00745)      (0.00685)
Observations                               1,677         1,677         1,677        1,674         1,674         1,677          1,674
      Note: Standard errors in parentheses. We estimate all models with standard errors clustered at the educational institutional
      level. Regional fixed effects are included in all models.
      ***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% e 10% levels, respectively.
      Source: Constructed based on survey data described in text.

              Thus, it is necessary to develop measures of risk preference that are consistent with individual
      behavior and specific to the context of economic choices (Dohmen, et al., 2005). Our study replicated
      specific measures of risk, and sought to explore individual heterogeneity by considering individuals
      who are near the point of making an occupational choice and who have previously self-selected into
      a specific course of study.

              In a recent paper, Beauchamp, Cesarini & Johannesson (2017) associate the difficulty in
      evaluating the effects of individual risk preference heterogeneity on economic decision-making with
      errors in the construction of risk measurements. The authors estimate proxies for risk preferences that
      account for individual behavior in diverse risk contexts, including financial risks, alcohol
      consumption, smoking, or opening a new business. They draw data from a national survey of nearly
      25,000 twins born in Sweden between 1926 and 1958. They use their proxies for risk preferences to
      estimate a model of generalized method of moments (GMM) to measure the role of risk in individual
      behavior. The authors find that their measures of risk preferences have robust and strongly significant
      effects, illustrating the importance of constructing meaningful and well-measured proxies for risk
      preferences.

              Beyond the insignificant effects of risk measures on individual occupational choices, other
      characteristics do appear to be associated with the choice to enter the teaching profession. Estimated
      coefficients that appear statistically significant in any specification remain so over alternative




                                                                                                                               11
specifications. In terms of magnitude, the inclusion of risk measures appears to have little effect on
the magnitudes of other estimated coefficients10.

        These results appear to confirm the findings of an extensive literature on teacher labor supply,
which has largely focused on understanding which types of individuals feel attracted to the teaching
profession. In sum, the profile of future basic education teachers is composed primarily of women,
those with children and who are enrolled in academically weaker private education institutions. Many
of these individuals come from families with lower levels of education, with parents employed in
sectors such as commerce, services, and domestic services. If these characteristics already incorporate
some levels of relative risk preferences, it is possible that the teaching profession does indeed attract
individuals who are relatively more averse to risk.

6.      Taking into account the selection effect

        In this section we discuss a potential issue concerning to our analyses around career risk
attitude and occupational sorting. Individual decisions can have an effect on risk attitudes. In other
words, not only can risk attitudes affect individual decisions, but the opposite is possible as well. To
address potential concern about endogeneity, we exploited information of having children and living
with then during undergraduate courses. Using this variable as an instrumental variable estimation.
The hypothesis behind this argument is that parents might be more risk averse. In our sample, 20%
of undergraduate students have children and live with them.

       We exploit the effect of having children on occupation sorting in instrumental variable
estimations of the following form:

                                                 Equation 2:
                                 First stage: 𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘 𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑖 = 𝛼 + 𝛽1 𝑋𝑖 + 𝐾𝑖𝑑𝑠𝑖 + 𝜖𝑖

                                Second stage: 𝑦𝑖∗ = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 𝑋𝑖 + 𝛽2 𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘 ̂
                                                                         𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑖 + 𝜖𝑖

        In order for the variable to live with the children to be a good instrument, it could not be
correlated with the error term. The second requirement is that risk measures and having children are
to some extent correlated. When we tested this correlation, we observed a negative correlation only
regarding the generic measure of risk. Not all other risk measures are statistically significance and
coefficients signals are now positive, sometimes negative in relation to the risk measures.

        Estimates of IV regression are given in Table 5. Results shows that there is a negative
relationship between willingness to become a teacher and general risk measure, statistically
significant at 1%. This coefficient implies that, with the other fixed factors, those who wish to pursue
a teaching career would be, on average, more risk averse than those who do not intend or are not sure
about being a teacher of Basic Education. The findings in Table 5 hold once despite several relevant
background characteristics. The covariates are reported at Annex C.




10
     The covariates are reported at Annex B.
                                                                                                      12
                    Table 5: Individual Risk attitude and occupational sorting: IV Model

 Dependent Variable: Occupational choice of undergraduates
 Instrumental Variable: having children and live with them

 VARIABLES                                          (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)
 General Risk – Binary                            -0.517
                                                  (0.520)
 Financial Risk                                                   16.12
                                                                 (185.1)
 Risk Context                                                                   -3.078
                                                                                (8.096)
 Contract Risk: Performance                                                                     -2.351
                                                                                                (3.729)
 General Risk – Continuous                                                                                    -0.401***
                                                                                                               (0.0225)
 Observations                                      1,677          1,677          1,677           1,674          1,677
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. We estimate all models with standard errors clustered at the educational institutional
level. Regional fixed effects are included in all models.
***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% e 10% levels, respectively.
Source: Constructed based on survey data described in text.




7.   Discussion and Final Considerations

       Heterogeneity in risk preferences is a frequently recurring feature of observational data. This
paper makes two important contributions. First, it investigates a collection of measurements of risk
as applied to a specific occupational group. Second, it investigates whether or not variation in
measurement of risk preferences, based on cross-sectional data, may explain self-selection into the
teaching profession, where risk preferences are measured in terms of alternative compensation
models, job security, financial decisions, and general disposition to take risks. To do so, we surveyed
a representative sample of young soon-to-be graduates of education and seven teacher licensure
programs who were planning to enter the labor market or had entered only recently. Risk preferences
were measured for each surveyed individual, taking into account these diverse scenarios.

        Analyses of occupational choice did not demonstrate any effect of risk types or preferences.
These findings appear to suggest that behaviors in risk-related activities do not constitute important
factors in the determination of future decisions to enter the teaching profession. Further, results did
not indicate that future teachers are more risk averse, as the literature has sometimes proposed. At the
same time, it is not possible to affirm whether or not graduates were more or less favorable of merit-
based compensation systems. It appears that the measurements of risk considered in our survey were
not capable of explaining why some individuals choose to pursue teaching careers.

        In the following paragraphs, we analyze five possible explanations for the lack of robustness
in these results. First, our survey collected cross-sectional data from a sample of individuals who had
not yet had substantial experience in the labor market. Studies on this topic have argued that one
difficulty in responding accurately about one’s risk preferences is that these preferences may only
solidify some years after making one’s occupational choice. Ideally, we would be able to measure
risk preferences repeatedly over time for the same individuals (panel data) or measure preferences in
comparison to other occupational groups or to more experienced teachers. These comparisons would
assist us in disentangling the extent to which individuals who are attracted to certain aspects of the


                                                                                                                         13
teaching profession end up teaching, while other individuals who do not value these characteristics
eventually abandon the profession (Bowen, Buck, Deck, Mills, & Shuls, 2015); (Findeisen, 2013)
         Second, the questionnaires administered to students were relatively long, potentially reducing
the level of attention and effort given to responses to specific questions. During the interviews, some
of the risk-related questions were not explained as clearly as would be desirable due to time
constraints, which may have led some respondents to answer without completely understanding the
nuances of each question. Third, it is possible that future teachers responded to the risk-related
questions without effectively considering the different levels of risk associated with different answers.
This possibility is supported by the fact that students show themselves to be more disposed to take
risks in hypothetical settings (financial risk) and that they may have erroneous or inflated expectations
regarding their own future performance in the classroom (payment contract risk). Bowen, Buck,
Deck, Mills & Shuls (2015) argue that respondents may potentially think that merit-based contracts
would merely offer bonuses, without any risk of pay cuts. The questionnaire’s focus on behavior
under risk may have given the impression that merit-based contracts and risky financial investments
would merely result in bonuses, with no risk of loss.

        Fourth, risk preference measures were observed as continuously distributed categorical
variables, thus imparting them with some sort of ordinal significance in our analysis. In fact, true risk
preferences are unobservable. By imposing an ordinal pattern on these categorical variables, we are
assuming that a graduate who evaluated their general disposition to take risks to have a value of eight
is more risk tolerant than a comparable respondent who evaluated their preferences at six. However,
given that, these responses are highly subjective and only proxy for an underlying latent variable (true
risk preferences); it is not possible to interpret these reported values as exact magnitudes. By modeling
the latent risk preference variable, it would be possible to exactly interpret the effects of risk
preferences (Beauchamp, Cesarini, & Johannesson, 2017).

       Finally, it could be the case that the observable characteristics that are robustly significant in
our specifications already incorporate some aspect of individual risk preferences. The profile of future
basic education teachers is disproportionately composed of women, with children, who are enrolled
in academically weaker private education institutions, and who come from families or lower
socioeconomic standing.

        Though there are numerous limitations that should be taken into account when considering
how individual risk preferences may influence the attractiveness of teaching careers, our results are
relevant to future studies that focus on this topic in Brazil. We see this work as a first attempt at
introducing research methods focused on measuring risk into a literature that asks if, how, and why
risk preferences differ among future teachers. Finally, evaluating how occupational choices are
correlated with risk preferences may add to our knowledge of public policies focused on improving
the attractiveness of the teaching profession.

        The results presented here complement an extensive literature on teacher labor supply
(Dolton, 2006). The estimates presented in this chapter appear to suggest that teachers (and perhaps
other public servants) respond to incentive schemes in more complex ways than the basic theory of
incentives would predict. This theory suggests that payment contracts based on individual
performance are a superior form of compensation when output is well defined and easily measurable.
Riskier occupations would require greater compensation in order for individuals to feel motivated
and enticed to enter these professions (Lazear, 2003). In general, performance-based incentives may
conflict with fundamental characteristics of teachers and public servants more generally, who may be
more motivated by benefits than career results (Dixit, 2002), (Watt et al., 2012). This is not to say
that merit-based compensation models should not be considered, but that the specific design of these
incentive contracts should take into account heterogeneity in individual preferences for incentives
(Goldhaber, Bignell, Farley, Walch, & Cowan, 2016); (Perez, 2011).
                                                                                                      14
       Bibliographic References


Barbosa, A. L., Barbosa-Filho, F. H., & Lima, J. R. (2013). Diferencial de salários e determinantes
        na escolha de trabalho entre os setores público e privado no Brasil. Pesquisa e Planejamento
        Econômico, 89-118.
Barbosa-Filho, F., Pessôa, S., & Afonso, L. (2009). Um estudo sobre os diferenciais de remuneração
        entre os professores das redes pública e privada de ensino. Revista de Estudos Econômicos,
        597-628.
Beauchamp, J. P., Cesarini, D., & Johannesson, M. (2017). The psychometric and empirical
        properties of measures of risk preferences. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 54(3), 203-237.
        Accessed           on        September            29,       2018,         available         at:
        https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%2Fs11166-017-9261-3.pdf
Becker, K. L., & Kassouf, A. L. (2012). Diferença salarial e aposentadoria dos professores do ensino
        fundamental.           Economia          Aplicada,       16(1),        77-104.         Source:
        http://www.scielo.br/pdf/ecoa/v16n1/a04v16n1.pdf
Biasi, B. (2018). The Labor Market for Teachers under different pay schemes. Working Paper, p. 35.
        Accessed in 2018, available at: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2942134
Black, S. E., Devereux, P. J., Lundborg, P., & Majlesi, K. (2015). On the origins of risk-taking. IZA
        Discussion Paper (no. 1978), p. 43. Source: https://www.nber.org/papers/w21332
Bonin, H., Dohmen, T., Falk, A., Huffman, D., Sunde, & Uwe. (2007). Cross-sectional earnings risk
        and occupational sorting: The role of risk attitudes. Labour economics, 14(6), pp. 926-937.
Borjas, G. (2010). Pagamento de incentivos. Em G. Borjas, Economia do Trabalho (pp. 504-543).
        São Paulo, SP: AMGH.
Bowen, D. H., Buck, S., Deck, C., Mills, J. N., & Shuls, J. V. (2015). Risky business: An analysis of
        teacher risk preferences. Education Economics, 23(4), 470-480.
Bowles, S. (2004). Preferences and Behavior. Em S. Bowles, Microeconomics: behavior, institutions
        and evolution (pp. 93-109). Princeton University Press.
Cameron, L., & Shah, M. (2015). Risk-taking behavior in the wake of natural disasters. Journal of
        Human Resources, 50(2), 458-515.
Dixit, A. (2002). Incentives and Organizations in the Public Sector: An interpretative review. Journal
        of Human Resources, pp. 696-727.
Dohmen, T., & Falk, A. (2010, August). You get what you pay: Incentives and Selection in the
        education system . The Economic Journal, pp. F256-F271.
Dohmen, T., Falk, A., Huffman, D., Sunde, U., Schupp, J., & Wagner, G. G. (Setembro de 2005).
        Individual Risk Attitudes: New Evidence from a Large, Representative, Experimentally-
        Validated Survey. Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) Discussion Paper 1730.
Dolton, P. (2006). Teacher supply. Em E. A. Hanushek, & F. (. Welch, Handbook of Economics of
        Education (Vol. 2, pp. 1079-1161).
Findeisen, S. (19 de April de 2013). Risk Attitudes and Occupations: Self-Selection or Adapting
        Preferences? Center for Institutions , Policy and Culture Working Paper Series(420), p. 20.
        Fonte: http://www.econ.uzh.ch/ipcdp/Papers/ipcdp_wp420.pdf
Fouarge, D., Kriechel, B., & Dohmen, T. (2014). Occupational sorting of school graduates: The role
        of economic preferences. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 335-351.
Goldhaber, D., Bignell, W., Farley, A., Walch, J., & Cowan, J. (2016, June). Who chooses
        incentivized pay structures? Exploring the link between performance and preferences for
        compensation reform in the teacher labor market. Educational Evaluation and Policy
        Analysis, 38(2), pp. 245-271. doi:10.3102/0162373715615233



                                                                                                    15
Guiso, L., & Paiella, M. (February de 2005). The role of risk aversion in predicting individual
       behavior. Temi di discussione Banca D'Italia(number 546), p. 38. Source:
       https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=608262
Hanushek, E. A., Kain, J. F., & Rivkin, S. G. (1999). Do higher salaries buy better teachers? National
       Bureau of Economic Research(WP 7082), 52p.
Hernani-Limarino, W. (2005). Are Teachers Well Paid in Latin America and the Caribbean? Relative
       wages and structure of returns of teacher. Em E. (. Vegas, Incentives to improve teaching:
       Lessons from Latin America (pp. 63-150). Washington: World Bank.
Holt, C. A., & Laury, S. K. (Dezembro de 2002). Risk Aversion and Incentive Effects. The American
       Economic Review, 92(5), 1644-1655. Accessed on January 23, 2015, available at:
       http://www.jstor.org/stable/3083270
King, A. G. (Jul de 1974). Occupation choice, risk aversion and wealth. Industrial and Labor
       Relations Review, 27(4), pp. 586-596.
Lazear, E. P. (Dec de 2000). Performance Pay and Productivity. The American Economic Review,
       90(5),     pp.    1346-1361.     Accessed      on     May      28,    2015,     available    at:
       http://www.jstor.org/stable/2677854
Lazear, E. P. (2003). Teacher Incentives. Swedish Economic Policy Review, 10(2), 179-214.
Lazear, E. P., & Rosen, S. (2014). Rank-order tournaments as optimum labor contracts. Em G. J.
       Borjas, The economics of labor: critical concepts in economics (Vol. IV, pp. 235-257).
       Londres: Routledge.
Liang, X. (2000). Teacher pay in 12 Latin American countries: How does teacher pay compare to
       other professions, what determines teacher pay, and who are the teachers? Washington:
       World                                       Bank.                                       Source:
       http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/pt/932251468753280102/pdf/multi0page.pdf
Mas-Collel, W. A., Whinston, M. D., & Green, J. J. (1995). Microeconomic Theory.
Mostafa, T., & Pál, J. (2018). Science teachers' satisfaction: Evidence from the PISA 2015 teacher
       survey. OECD Education Working Papers, 136. doi:10.1787/1ecdb4e3-en
Nicholson, W., & Christopher, S. (2008). Microeconomic Theory (10th ed.). Mason: Thomson Higher
       Education.
Nicholson, W., & Snyder, C. (2008). Uncertainty and Information. Em W. Nicholson, & C. Snyder,
       Microeconomic Theory (pp. 202-235). Canada: Thomson South-Western.
Perez, M. (8 de July de 2011). Inequity Aversion Differences: Experimental evidence among
       prospective teachers and lawyers. p. 34. Source: http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2018697
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1981). The framing of decisions and the psichology of choice. Science,
       211(4481), pp. 453-458. Source: https://www.uzh.ch/cmsssl/suz/dam/jcr:ffffffff-fad3-547b-
       ffff-ffffe54d58af/10.18_kahneman_tversky_81.pdf
Watt, H. M., Richardson, P. W., Klusmann, U., Kunter, M., Beyer, B., Trautwein, U., & Baumert, J.
       (2012). Motivations for choosing teaching as a career: An international comparison using the
       FIT-Choice scale. Teaching and Teacher Education, 28(6), 791-805.
Weiss, Y. (Nov - Dec de 1972). The risk element in occupational and educational choices. Journal of
       Political          Economy,           80(6),          pp.          1203-1213.           Source:
       https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/259965?journalCode=jpe




                                                                                                    16
Appendix

                                            TABLE A

  Comparison of the characteristics of the sample of undergraduate students to become teachers of
                   Basic Education with those who do not wish or have doubts

 Comparison groups:                           Become teacher   Not to become teacher   Difference

 Demographic controls:

 Married (=1)                                    0,29613              0,22664          -0,0695***
                                                  -0,457               -0,419
 Woman (=1)                                      0,73814              0,61916          -0,1190***
                                                   -0,44               -0,486
 Age (in years)                                  28,03176            26,33768          -1,6941***
                                                  -8,213               -6,981
 High School_mother (=1)                         0,41434              0,49246          0,0781***
                                                  -0,493                 -0,5
 High School_father (=1)                         0,35883              0,46183          0,1030***
                                                   -0,48               -0,499
 White (=1)                                      0,43838              0,43126            -0,0071
                                                  -0,496               -0,496
 Per capita wealth index (from 0 to 8)           1,29391              1,37155            0,0776
                                                  -1,037               -1,116
 Bolsa Familia Program (=1)                      0,06591              0,06192            -0,004
                                                  -0,248               -0,241
 Previous teacher experience (=1)                 0,2109              0,15421           -0,0567**
                                                  -0,408               -0,361
 Interior (=1)                                   0,32337              0,30491            -0,0185
                                                  -0,468               -0,461
 Private university (=1)                         0,53866              0,43692          -0,1017***
                                                  -0,499               -0,496
 Education Course                                0,44728              0,35981          -0,0875***
                                                  -0,497                -0,48
 Public High School (=1)                          0,7833              0,65962          -0,1237***
                                                  -0,412               -0,474
 Magisterio (=1)                                 0,50439              0,46846            -0,0359
                                                    -0,5               -0,499
 Proxy University performance (=1 good)          0,43761              0,49409           0,0565*
                                                  -0,496                 -0,5
 Risk Measures
 General Risk – Binary                           0,66784              0,64836            -0,0195
                                                  -0,471               -0,478
 General Risk – Continuous                       6,5536                6,4287
                                                  -2,393               -2,422            -0,1249
 Financial Risk                                  0,69332              0,71028             0,017
                                                  -0,461               -0,454
 Risk Context                                    0,55975              0,63084           0,0711**
                                                                                                    17
                                                              -0,497                    -0,483
  Contract Risk – Individual and Team                          0,853                     0,855         0,002
  Performance
                                                              -0,354                    -0,352
  Observations                                                 1138                      856           1994
Note: Standard errors in parentheses.
***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% e 10% levels, respectively.
Source: Constructed based on survey data described in text.




TABLE B

           Individual Risk attitude and occupational sorting: Probit (MEM) and OLS Models

  Dependent variable: occupation choice of undergraduates

  VARIABLES                                       (1)            (2)            (3)              (4)   (5)
  General Risk Binary                           -0.517
                                                (0.520)
  Financial Risk                                               16.12
                                                              (185.1)
  Risk Context                                                                -3.078
                                                                              (8.096)
  Contract Risk                                                                             -2.351
                                                                                            (3.729)
  General Risk – Continuous                                                                         -0.401***
                                                                                                     (0.0225)
  Woman                                        0.119***         0.849           0.0541    0.144**     0.0941
                                               (0.0290)       (8.442)          (0.146)    (0.0715)    (0.105)
  Age                                          -0.00613       -0.0321          -0.0171    0.00517    -0.0471*
                                               (0.0109)       (0.367)         (0.0560)    (0.0208)   (0.0268)
  Age2                                         0.000129      0.000824         0.000172   -2.94e-05 0.000763**
                                              (0.000153)     (0.00879)       (0.000601) (0.000294) (0.000332)
  White                                         -0.0365        -0.300          0.00871     0.0367     -0.156
                                               (0.0342)       (3.144)          (0.101)     (0.111)   (0.0968)
  High School Father                          -0.0728**         0.166            0.102     0.0415     -0.118
                                               (0.0289)       (2.881)          (0.482)     (0.200)    (0.102)
  High School Mother                             0.0428        -0.850          -0.0737    -0.0439     0.0906
                                               (0.0478)       (9.864)          (0.252)     (0.102)    (0.104)
  Wealth per capita                             -0.0221        -0.251           0.0931   -0.00380    0.0709**
                                               (0.0137)       (2.603)          (0.301)    (0.0472)   (0.0353)
  Married                                      0.000684       0.00983           0.0439    -0.0168     0.0353
                                               (0.0322)       (0.401)          (0.142)    (0.0714)    (0.138)
  Previous work as teacher                       0.0680         1.380           0.0991      0.106      0.108
                                               (0.0438)       (15.46)          (0.177)     (0.128)    (0.106)
  Industry                                     -0.0995*         0.432           -0.302    -0.0396     -0.191
                                               (0.0545)       (5.814)          (0.637)     (0.117)    (0.156)
  Services                                    -0.131***        -0.663           -0.188    -0.0806     -0.177
                                               (0.0500)       (6.744)          (0.315)    (0.0847)    (0.119)
  Public Sector                                 -0.0695      -0.00276           -0.169    -0.0458    -0.302**
                                               (0.0571)       (0.765)          (0.409)     (0.100)    (0.140)
  Education                                     -0.0606        -0.557           -0.264    -0.0984     -0.164
                                               (0.0603)       (6.168)          (0.623)     (0.159)    (0.130)

                                                                                                                18
  Others                                       -0.0536          0.771          -0.217          -0.0409         0.0457
                                               (0.0531)       (9.202)          (0.503)          (0.102)       (0.126)
  Interior                                      0.0170        0.00901          0.0543          -0.0106         0.0162
                                              P(0.0479)       (0.594)          (0.198)          (0.110)       (0.116)
  Private university                           0.0969*          0.613           0.111            0.197       0.396***
                                               (0.0533)       (6.452)          (0.150)          (0.230)      (0.0922)
  Education courses                             0.0283          0.621          0.0517          6.94e-05        0.0272
                                               (0.0397)       (6.799)          (0.101)         (0.0683)      (0.0894)
  Public High School                           0.0775*         -0.416           0.212            0.192        -0.0231
                                               (0.0416)       (5.714)          (0.312)          (0.191)       (0.122)
  Proxy University performance                 -0.0301         -0.463           0.111           0.0834         -0.100
                                               (0.0294)       (4.957)          (0.350)          (0.180)       (0.110)
  Constant                                     0.962**         -10.42           2.279            2.058
                                                (0.409)       (126.7)          (4.705)          (2.428)
  Observations                                   1,677          1,677           1,677            1,674        1,677
Note: Standard errors in parentheses.
***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% e 10% levels, respectively.
Source: Constructed based on survey data described in text.




TABLE C

                         Individual Risk attitude and occupational sorting: IV Model

 Dependent variable: Occupation choice of undergraduates
                                    (1)          (2)                     (3)             (4)                 (5)

 General Risk Binary                     -0.517
                                         (0.520)
 Financial Risk                                         16.12
                                                       (185.1)
 Risk Context                                                         -3.078
                                                                      (8.096)
 Contract Risk                                                                       -2.351
                                                                                     (3.729)
 General Risk Continuous                                                                                   -0.401***
                                                                                                            (0.0225)
 Woman                                  0.119***         0.849         0.0541    0.144**                     0.0941
                                        (0.0290)       (8.442)        (0.146)    (0.0715)                    (0.105)
 Age                                    -0.00613       -0.0321        -0.0171    0.00517                    -0.0471*
                                        (0.0109)       (0.367)       (0.0560)    (0.0208)                   (0.0268)
 Age²                                   0.000129      0.000824       0.000172   -2.94e-05                 0.000763**
                                       (0.000153)     (0.00879)     (0.000601) (0.000294)                 (0.000332)
 White                                   -0.0365        -0.300        0.00871     0.0367                     -0.156
                                        (0.0342)       (3.144)        (0.101)     (0.111)                   (0.0968)
 High School_Father                    -0.0728**         0.166          0.102     0.0415                     -0.118
                                        (0.0289)       (2.881)        (0.482)     (0.200)                    (0.102)
 High School_Mother                       0.0428        -0.850        -0.0737    -0.0439                     0.0906
                                        (0.0478)       (9.864)        (0.252)     (0.102)                    (0.104)
 Wealth per capita                       -0.0221        -0.251         0.0931   -0.00380                    0.0709**
                                        (0.0137)       (2.603)        (0.301)    (0.0472)                   (0.0353)
 Married                                0.000684       0.00983         0.0439    -0.0168                     0.0353
                                        (0.0322)       (0.401)        (0.142)    (0.0714)                    (0.138)
 Previous work as teacher                 0.0680         1.380         0.0991      0.106                      0.108
                                                                                                                        19
                                        (0.0438)        (15.46)       (0.177)    (0.128)    (0.106)
 Industry                               -0.0995*          0.432       -0.302    -0.0396      -0.191
                                        (0.0545)        (5.814)       (0.637)    (0.117)    (0.156)
 Services                              -0.131***         -0.663       -0.188    -0.0806      -0.177
                                        (0.0500)        (6.744)       (0.315)   (0.0847)    (0.119)
 Public Sector                           -0.0695       -0.00276       -0.169    -0.0458    -0.302**
                                        (0.0571)        (0.765)       (0.409)    (0.100)    (0.140)
 Education                               -0.0606         -0.557       -0.264    -0.0984      -0.164
                                        (0.0603)        (6.168)       (0.623)    (0.159)    (0.130)
 Others                                  -0.0536          0.771       -0.217    -0.0409      0.0457
                                        (0.0531)        (9.202)       (0.503)    (0.102)    (0.126)
 Interior                                 0.0170        0.00901       0.0543    -0.0106      0.0162
                                        (0.0479)        (0.594)       (0.198)    (0.110)    (0.116)
 Private university                      0.0969*          0.613        0.111      0.197    0.396***
                                        (0.0533)        (6.452)       (0.150)    (0.230)   (0.0922)
 Education courses                        0.0283          0.621       0.0517    6.94e-05     0.0272
                                        (0.0397)        (6.799)       (0.101)   (0.0683)   (0.0894)
 Public High School                      0.0775*         -0.416        0.212      0.192     -0.0231
                                        (0.0416)        (5.714)       (0.312)    (0.191)    (0.122)
 Proxy University performance            -0.0301         -0.463        0.111     0.0834      -0.100
                                        (0.0294)        (4.957)       (0.350)    (0.180)    (0.110)
 Constant                                0.962**         -10.42        2.279      2.058
                                         (0.409)        (126.7)       (4.705)    (2.428)

 Observations                             1,677         1,677          1,677     1,674      1,677
Note: Standard errors in parentheses.
***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% e 10% levels, respectively.
Source: Constructed based on survey data described in text.




                                                                                                      20
