             Structural analysis of the economic decline and collapse of the Soviet Union*.

                                                  Numa Mazat
                                          Professor Adjunto - IE/UFRJ



                                                       Abstract

After a long period of sustained fast growth of output, the USSR began experiencing in the Mid-1970s an
economic stagnation, which was followed by the dismantlement of the Soviet economic system during
the Perestroika. The attempt of this paper is to study the main causes of the slowing down of growth and
the subsequent economic crisis. The first section of the article deals briefly with some important features
of the Soviet economic system. The second section of the article discusses the reasons of the slowdown of
Soviet economic growth from the 1970s to the Mid-1980s. The third section of the paper provides an
analysis of the consequences of Perestroika and Glasnost reforms (1985-1991) on the Soviet economic
system, ultimately provoking its collapse.
Key Words: USSR, Economic Stagnation, Perestroika, Economic Collapse.



                                                       Resumo

Depois de um longo período de crescimento acelerado e sustentado de sua produção, a URSS começou a
sofrer, a partir de meados dos anos 1970, de uma estagnação econômica que foi seguida pelo
desmantelamento do sistema econômico soviético durante a Perestroika. O objetivo deste artigo é estudar
as principais causas dessa desaceleração do crescimento e da crise econômica que seguiu. A primeira
seção do artigo estuda de forma sucinta algumas características importantes do sistema econômico
soviético. A segunda seção discute as razões pela desaceleração do crescimento econômico soviético da
década de 1970 até meados dos anos 1980. A terceira seção fornece uma análise das consequências das
reformas da Perestroika e da Glasnost (1985-1991) sobre o sistema econômico soviético, levando a seu
colapso.
Palavras-chave: URSS, Estagnação Econômica, Perestroika, Colapso Econômico.


Área 3 - História Econômica


JEL: P20; P21, P26.




*
 The author would like to thank, but by no means implicate, profs. Franklin Serrano (IE;UFRJ), Carlos Medeiros (IE/UFRJ),
Carlos Pinkusfeld (IE/UFRJ) and Ricardo Bielschowsky (IE;UFRJ) for useful discussion about the topic.
                                                                                                                       1
I. Introduction

        Until 1974, a long period of sustained fast growth of output and per capita GDP, thanks to a
regime of extensive accumulation of capital, with increasing rates of investment and a major structural
change could be observed in the USSR. This structural change, with the large transfer of labor from
agriculture to industry, led to a growth in productivity, also due to technical progress incorporated in new
machinery. Agricultural production made a lot of progress during that period, thanks to the colonization
of the "virgin lands", mechanization, and the massive use of fertilizers and chemicals.
        But, the USSR began experiencing in the Mid-1970s an economic stagnation, which was followed
by the dismantlement of the Soviet economic system during the Perestroika. The attempt of this paper is
to study the main causes of the slowing down of growth and the subsequent economic crisis.
        The second section of the article deals briefly with some important features of the Soviet
economic system. The third section of the article discusses the reasons of the slowdown of Soviet
economic growth from the 1970s to the Mid-1980s. The fourth section of the paper provides an analysis
of the consequences of Perestroika and Glasnost reforms (1985-1991) on the Soviet economic system,
ultimately provoking its collapse. Section V offers brief final remarks.

II. Main features of the Soviet economic system

         The USSR was a planned command economy, which operated under conditions of capital scarcity,
with state ownership of the means of production. Production was directed towards use and not towards
sale and profit. Full employment of labor was constitutionally guaranteed. The state had the monopoly of
foreign trade.
         Central planning allocated resources for the entire production process. In the USSR, economic
activity was defined and subordinated to the instructions from above. The plan was imperative. As Stalin
(in ELLMAN, 1979, p. 17) put it: “plans are not forecasts but instructions”. “In both its design and
implementation stages, central planning is based on a hierarchical pattern of national economy, which in
turn presupposes obedience and discipline” (KOWALIK, 1987, p. 390). The central planning organ in the
Soviet Union was the Gosplan (State Planning Commission). The Gosplan was in charge of the
elaboration of the production plans.
         Thus, the pricing system was administered and the Gosplan defined goals of physical production
for the whole economy. As pointed out by Kalecki (1966 [1993]) and Nell (1997), consumption of the
workers was the adjustment variable between aggregate supply and aggregate demand, through forced
savings. The production potential was limited by the stock of fixed capital, and its actual degree of
utilization could be held low by a scarcity of circulating capital inputs or workforce (FEL’DMAN, 1928
[1964]; KALECKI, 1966 [1993], 1970 [1993]). The Soviet economy, as a socialist economy, was
‘resource constrained’, with “utilization parameters of resources determined […] by the supply side”
(KORNAI, 1979). The minimization of the costs and the increase of efficiency were not priorities.
         There was no problem of effective demand in the Soviet Economy, on the contrary to capitalist
economy. As stated by Kalecki (1970 [1993], p. 113), in “socialist economies […] the problem of
effective demand is really solved […]: prices are fixed by planning authorities in relation to wages in such
a way as to achieve full utilization of resources (and this is true not only in the long run but even in a
short period)”.
         The priorities of the Soviet system, at least until the end of the 1960’s, were in order:
         1) Economic growth thanks to investment
         2) Military spending
         3) Level of personal consumption of subsistence (food, clothing, housing)
         4) Public consumption (spending on health, education, other social and cultural services)
         So, diversification of consumption patterns (including consumer durables) was not considered a
top priority before the 1970s.
         As a command economy, USSR was characterized by a resource mobilization towards rapid
industrialization (GROSSMAN, 1987). In the Soviet economic system, a priority was given to the
                                                                                                          2
allocation of investments to producer goods industries rather than consumer goods ones. This strategy
was very clear as far back as the First Five Year Plan (1928-1933). Feldman (1964 [1928], p. 194), one of
the leading Soviet economists of the 1920’s stated that an “increase in the rate of growth of income
demands industrialization, heavy industry, machine building, electrification”.
        The emphasis on heavy industry rather than light industry can be explained by the importance of
the Soviet military-industrial complex. As Clarke (2007, p. 11) argues:
        “the soviet system […] was a system of surplus appropriation and redistribution subordinated to
        the material needs of the state and […] of its military apparatus. […]The development of the
        system was not subordinated to the expansion of the gross or net product in the abstract […] but to
        expanding the production of specific materials and equipment – tanks, guns, aircraft, explosives,
        missiles – and to supporting the huge military machine.”
        The Soviet economy was heavily militarized because the country was constantly confronted with
the hostility of the other foreign powers and especially the United States (and also China after 1960) 1.
This militarization of the economy had strong structural implications. The entire production of key sectors
was controlled by the VPK, the Soviet military-industrial commission. Thus, most technological
innovations and scientific breakthroughs were generally first allocated to military uses. Many industries
were designed to be able to switch from civilian activity to the production of military equipment in a short
notice:
        “Almost any strictly civilian enterprise (although to a widely varying degree) was affected by the
        constraints on product design and plant layout imposed by the requirements of the military.
        Civilian technologies were supposed to be designed in a way guaranteeing easy conversion to
        military manufacturing”. (Kuznetsov, in Gaddy, 1996, p. 41)
        Similarly, many products such as transportation equipment (aircraft, trucks) had to be of dual use
(both military and civilian). The geographic dispersion of industrial complexes was decided for strategic
not economic reasons. The existence of large stocks of inventories was also necessary in this context of a
"permanent war economy" (Gaddy, 1996).
        There was collective ownership and management of the land in the USSR since the
collectivization process in the 1930s2. The collective farms were divided in two major categories: the
kolkhozes and the sovkhozes. The kolkhozes were cooperatives and the sovkhozes were state farms.
“Grain […] was a strategic raw material indispensable to the process of running the State and of
industrializing it” (LEWIN, 1985, p.142). The collectivization was a way to ensure the supply of
agricultural produce to the increasing industrial workers class. It facilitated the transfer of a significant
part of agricultural surplus to the capital accumulation in the industrial sector (PREOBRAZHENSKY,
1926 [1964]; ALLEN, 2003). Thus, Gerschenkron (1962, p.146) noted that:
        “Once the peasantry had been successfully forced into the machinery of collective farms, once it
        became possible to extract a large share of agricultural output in the form of ‘compulsory
        deliveries’ without bothering much about the quid pro quo in the form of industrial consumers’
        goods”.

III. The period of economic stagnation (1974-1984)

        From 1975 to 1984, Soviet economic growth slowed down markedly, leading to a period of
relative economic stagnation in the USSR. The average per Capita GDP growth was less than 1% (see
table 1)3 during this period.

1
  In Gerschenkron’s words: “there is very little doubt that […] Russian industrialization in the Soviet
period was a function of country’s foreign and military policies” (GERSCHENKRON, 1962, p. 148).
2
  Private agricultural production also existed in the USSR. It covered household plots and privately
owned livestock. Private agricultural output was negligible in grain and industrial crops but significant in
the livestock sector and the production of fruits and vegetables (NOVE, 1977, p. 26-27).
3
  It is worthy to observe that most of the capitalist industrialized countries also registered low growth
economic rates in the late 1970’s and in the 1980’s.
                                                                                                           3
Table 1: Average annual per Capita GDP growth rate in USSR (1950-1991)4

Period                                      Average per Capita GDP growth (%)

High economic growth (1950-1973)                                3,6

Stagnation (1974-1984)                                          0,93

Perestroika (1985-1991)                                         -1,3

Source: Maddison (2006, p. 478-479).

        In the traditional extensive Soviet model5, economic growth was limited by capital and also
depended on the availability of labor force and of cheap circulating capital inputs (raw materials). But,
since the end of the 1960’s, the USSR was suffering both of labor scarcity and of the depletion of natural
resources at a low cost that existed during the earlier phase.
        The labor scarcity was due to the depletion of the large reserves of underemployed rural
workforce. The solution was to go on rising productivity in agriculture, by increasing investment in the
agricultural sector, which had been done in the late 1950’s and in the 1960’s (see figure 1). But, this
strategy was not working anymore because of low returns in agricultural investment. The intense
chemicalization depleted soil mineral content, disabling the agricultural use of land in various areas.
Moreover, despite huge investments in irrigation, virgin lands were region of weather extremes, where
harvests were much less reliable and depended more on favorable climatic conditions than in the
traditional agricultural zone of the Western and Southern USSR (BELLINGER & DRONIN, 2005, p.193-
206).

Figure 1: Share of capital expenditures in agriculture (1946-1990).




4
  The reliability of official Soviet data has been the object of an intense controversy among scholars.
Soviet statisticians were accused of manipulation for propaganda purposes by some Western specialists
(mainly American). These accusations were generally rooted in ideological imperatives and “few indeed
are those who believe that Soviet output statistics are invented. The consensus is that they represent the
data which planners and statisticians themselves use” (NOVE, 1977, p.351). Other issue was the
comparability of Soviet growth statistics with the Western ones. Soviet statisticians used the concept of
‘Net Material Product’ to measure the economic growth. ‘Net Material Product’ differed from ‘Growth
National Product’ because it only took into account the activity of material production sectors, including
only the services communication and information services supporting directly related the physical goods
production, like freight transport, communication and information services,… (LAVIGNE, 1979, p.226-
228; NOVE, 1977; ELLMAN, 1980). Reconstructions of Soviet growth statistics on Western lines have
been made by many scholars and are very heterogeneous in terms of level of the average growth rate. But,
they all show the same trend for the pattern of Soviet economic growth from 1950 to 1991 (KOTZ, 2007,
p. 35).
5
  See a detailed analysis in Mazat & Serrano (2013).
                                                                                                        4
Source : Narkhoz em Gaidar (2007, p. 87).

        Likewise, the excessive irrigation in some areas of the Soviet territory caused the exhaustion of
hydrographic reserves. The most famous example of this phenomenon is the Aral Sea, used to supply
with water the irrigation canals for cotton crop. The failure of Soviet agricultural strategy is demonstrated
by the fact that state production of grain remained almost unchanged from the late 1960s to the late
1980s, despite the considerable investments in the sector during the period (GAIDAR, 2007). The Soviet
agriculture Soviet yields were lower than Western countries yields for almost all agricultural products
(COOK, 1992, p.199). Throughout its history neither Russia nor Soviet Union, under different social
systems and patterns of organization of production and investment in agriculture never managed to
overcome the formidable difficulties of improving productivity in very cold weather agriculture
(BELLINGER & DRONIN, 2005)
        Other factors explaining the chronic labor scarcity were the high level of women participation in
gainful employment in the 1970’s6. So there was no ‘reservoir’ of labor anymore. On the top of that, the
demographic transition phenomenon7 had been amplifying, since the late 1960’s, reflecting the rising
urbanization of the population, the growing female activity rate, the improvement in educational and the
problem of housing shortage (BROWN et al., 1994, p. 25).
        On the other hand, the traditional extensive Soviet growth model was also threatened by the
depletion of natural resources at a low cost that existed during the earlier phase. The depletion of low cost
mining districts and oil fields in the traditional areas of Western USSR led to a shift of investment from
these regions to Siberia, where extraction was much more difficult and expensive, because of extreme
atmospheric conditions and geographic remoteness (GADDY & ICKES, 2006).
        In this situation of labor scarcity and depletion of natural resources at a low cost, the traditional
Soviet extensive growth model could no longer be successful. By the 1970s Soviet leadership identified
the problem already and tried to move to a regime of intensive accumulation, with minimization of the
costs and increase of ‘efficiency’ (Hewett, 1988; CIA, 1986). But, the attempt to change the composition
of the investment and to raise the productivity into improving the ‘efficiency’ failed (see Table 2). This
failure was due to the inability to change the attitude toward retirement and replacement of the installed
fixed capital, the difficulty in the incorporation of technological innovation in civilian industry, the
militarization of the economy, the deterioration of the ‘discipline’ of Soviet workers and the high cost of
the industrialization in Siberia, as it will be shown below.




6
 51% of the Soviet workforce in 1973 were women (NOVE, 1977, p. 216).
7
 The birth rate massive decreasing - from 4,4% in 1926 to 1,59% in 1975 – was not compensated by the
drop of death rate - from 2,37% in 1926 to 0,86% in 1975 (MARCHAND, 2008, p. 258).
                                                                                                           5
Table 2: Rates of change of real Gross Product, Factor Inputs and Productivities in the USSR
(average annual percentage).

Period       Real       Factor inputs                   Factor productivities
             Gross      Total Labor          Fixed      Total Labor          Fixed
             Product                         Capital                         Capital
1961-73           5,0      4,3         1,8        8,1       0,7         3,1      -2,9
1974-78           3,4      3,8         1,4        7,4      -0,3         2,0      -3,7
1979-85           2,1      3,1         0,8        6,4      -1,0         1,2      -4,1
Fonte: CIA (1986).
        The ageing of installed fixed capital has been a permanent problem of the Soviet system. Thus, the
service life of fixed capital in the USSR was very high if compared with capitalist countries (CIA, 1986;
POPOV, 2002). It is explained by a very low retirement rate due to the focus on capital expansion 8, rather
than the improvement of installed machinery and equipment. Popov (2002) provides a convincing
explanation for that phenomenon:
        “The reason for massive investment in the expansion of capital stock at the expense of investment
        to replace retirement was the permanent concern of Soviet planners about expanding output and
        meeting production quotas. Replacing worn out aged machinery and equipment usually required
        technical reconstruction and was associated with temporary work stoppage and reduction in
        output. Even if the replacement could have been carried out instantly, the resulting increase in
        output (because of greater productivity of new equipment) was smaller than in case of the
        construction of new capacities or the expansion of existing capacities: in the latter case there was a
        hope that the new capacities would have been added to the existing ones that will somehow
        manage to operate several more years”.
        So, even with the USSR leadership’s attempt to move to an intensive regime of accumulation, the
policies toward an acceleration of the retirement and the replacement of fixed capital failed. So, the age of
the capital stock rose (see table 3) and the fixed capital productivity decreased sharply (see table 2).

Table 3: Age characteristics of equipment in Soviet industry.
Years                                                1970 1980             1985     1989
Share of equipment with an age of:
- less than 5 years                                  41,1    36,0          33,7     31,6
- 6-10 years                                         29,9    28,9          28,5     28,6
- 11-20 years                                        20,9    24,8          25,5     26,2
- over 20 years                                      7,8     10,3          12,3     13,7
Average age of equipment, years                      8,3     9,3           9,9      10,3
Average service life, years                          24      26,9          27,9     26,2
Accumulated depreciation as a % of gross             26      36            41       45
(initial) value of capital stock
Source: Narodnoye Khozyaistvo SSSR (Narkhoz) in Popov (2010).

       Another factor explaining the acceleration of the decrease of fixed capital productivity was the fall
of capacity utilization fell, mainly because of labor scarcity.


8
  By the 1980s, “while in the U.S. manufacturing 50-60% of all investment was replacing retirement, and
only 40-50% contributed to the expansion of capital stock, in Soviet industry the proportion was
reversed: replacing the retirement required about 30% of gross investment, while over 70% contributed
to the expansion of capital stock or to the unfinished construction” (POPOV, 2002).

                                                                                                            6
        The limited incorporation of technological innovation in civilian industry was another problem of
the Soviet system and an obstacle to the transition toward an intensive regime of accumulation. Scientific
research was at a very advanced level in the USSR, but the scientific innovations were only partially
incorporated to the production process, except in the military-industrial complex. This situation can be
explained by the confiscation of innovations by the military industry, these innovations being ‘released’
for civilian purpose only after MANY years. There was not the ‘spillover’ that can be observed in the
United States between military and civilian industries (MEDEIROS, 2004). Most advanced research was
done in scientific institute instead of the universities and many general scientific breakthroughs were, if
considered as potentially having any military application immediately considered classified and kept
within the military industrial complex. This helps to explains why Soviet technology in civilian sectors
usually lagged behind that of the West and why this technological gap used to widen during the period
(AMANN & COOPER, 1982).
        Beyond its negative effect on the diffusion of the technological innovations, the militarization of
the economy was a burden in terms of investment. The détente and the Ostpolitik of the 1970s seemed to
signal a relaxation of the Cold War tension but the situation worsened at the end of the decade after the
Afghanistan conflict and the coming to power of Reagan in the United States. So, the expansion and the
diversification of investment in the civilian sector were considerably limited by the irreducible share of
the surplus invested in the military industrial complex (MEDEIROS, 2011, p. 17).
        Another major obstacle to the adoption of a regime of intensive was the so-called ‘relaxation of
discipline’. As it has been shown by Kalecki (1943 [1990]), a situation of full employment in a capitalist
economy would create the conditions of a wage explosion, which happened in the West, contributing to
the end of the Golden Age. In the USSR, the full employment and the progressively more open political
system had negative effects on both the discipline and the economic mobilization. As the threat of
unemployment had never existed in the USSR, the pressure of punishment was playing this role.
However, the ‘relaxation of discipline’, which begun with the de-Stalinization9 process under Krushev,
intensified all along the ‘Brejnev Era’ since State coercion was becoming weaker and weaker. At the
same time the situation of actual scarcity of labor from the mid seventies strengthened the bargaining
position of workers relative to the managers of state firms. Garegnani et al. (2002) offer a good analysis
of this process:
        “The question of insufficient labour productivity resides ultimately in the entirely new problems
        that the Soviet system has raised for labour discipline. That discipline had, in fact, originally
        appeared together with the capitalist system and, we believe, capitalism was able to achieve it
        essentially through two means: labour unemployment and the social competition that compels an
        individual to earn up to his neighbour and beyond, and distributes social respect accordingly.
        Now, by its own nature, the Soviet system had renounced just those two basic means of enforcing
        discipline, which that far, had characterised industrialised production. […] at the root of the
        difficulties of labour productivity in the Soviet system there ultimately was the crisis of those two
        traditional methods of enforcing the discipline of industrialised labour. And such a crisis was
        bound to become decisive as extensive growth had to give way to a mainly intensive one where
        the increases in product per head had to come from an already industrialized production and not
        simply by shifting labour from traditional to modern methods. The disappearance of these two
        basic means of coercion left to workers so inclined, the possibility to do little, and carelessly,
        where work is repetitive or fragmented, or more generally ‘unpleasant’, as is the case for a large,
        though hopefully decreasing, part of the work of an industrialised society. And this was bound to
        favour the “free rider”, who cannot be easily repressed in such an environment, and may on the
        contrary, tend to become a model”.
        The deterioration of discipline meant a minor adherence to commands such as output targets,
technological rules and regulations. Enterprises manager faced more and more difficulties into controlling
their employees (FILTZER, 1992; ELLMAN & KANTOROVICH, 1992).


9
    The ideological adhesion to the regime was also weakened by the de-Stalinization process.
                                                                                                           7
        At this stage, there were several attempts to improve the Soviet Welfare State, reorder priorities
and reform the planning system to enable to increase the quantity and the quality of consumer goods. But,
even if Soviet Welfare State did really improve during the period, it was not sufficient. Furthermore, the
attempts to produce a broader range of products and enhance their quality were not successful and it was
necessary to increase dramatically the imports of consumer goods, as it will be shown below.
        The industrialization of Siberia also represented a significant economic burden for the USSR,
hindering the intensification of the Soviet regime of accumulation. By the 1960s and the 1970s, giant
civilian and military industrial projects were launched in the Siberia. The Soviet leadership intended to
deepen the geographic dispersion of the industrial complexes in case of war10. But, the attempts were also
to exploit the abundant natural resources in Siberia and to settle a scarcely occupied territory. The
extreme climatic conditions in Siberia and particularly the cold 11 represented a huge loss in terms of labor
and fixed capital productivity compared to the situation in temperate climate regions. The machines and
equipment had to be adapted to resist to the extreme cold. Despite these efforts, the cost of repairs and
maintenance of installed fixed capital was much larger in Siberia than in Western USSR. Soviet
authorities had also to offer higher wages and expensive amenities to convince the workers to migrate to
these inhospitable and remote regions. The remoteness of Siberia was also responsible for huge
investments in transport infrastructure.
The industrialization of Siberia was really a heavy burden since:
        “In the late 1960s, the extreme cold regions claimed 30 percent of all Soviet trucks, 37 percent of
        the bulldozers, 35 percent of the excavators, 33 percent of the tower cranes, 62 percent of the
        drilling equipment, and 64 percent of the tracked prime-movers. […] Siberia claimed far more of
        its share of Soviet construction machinery than even its high rates of development would
        warrant”. (GADDY & HILL, 2003, p. 50).
        The switch from oil to gas in the Soviet in the Soviet industry into increasing the oil export
capacity also, phenomenon which be explained later. It represented also a huge cost for the USSR,
‘consuming’ a lot of investment without increasing the industrial production. On the contrary, it
contributed to lower even more the fixed capital productivity (SAGERS & TRETYAKOVA, 1986).
        Furthermore, central economic planning was increasingly complex and difficult to be directed,
because of the proliferation of the large number and varieties of new products to be administered.
        The attempt of Soviet leadership to move to an intensive regime of accumulation failed but, at the
same time, life standards were increasing in the USSR with the urbanization of the population. Soviet
demand for food and especially meat was rising much faster than the local supply, because of low
agricultural productivity and stagnation in the production of grain. Despite rising income and increasingly
costly agricultural production, food prices, controlled by the State, remained almost unchanged, at low
level, which required larger and larger financial assistance for the agriculture and explains the rising
demand (COOK, 1992, p.199). On the top of that, many cattle farms were created in the 1970s to attend
the growing demand for meat. That meant a huge increase in the need for grain as livestock feed
(GAIDAR, 2007, p.119). The only solution was to import these agricultural goods and it drove the USSR
to become the largest importer of cereals in the world in the 1970s (GAIDAR, 2003). Besides, the balance
of trade for grain and agricultural products worsened dramatically at the beginning of the 1970’s (see
figure 2).

Figure 2: USSR balance of trade for grain and agricultural products (1961-1990).


10
   During the Second World War, the Western part of the USSR, where a considerable share of the
productive potential of the country was concentrated, was occupied by the German troupes. It had
dramatic consequences on the Soviet war effort and the USSR almost lost the war. As a consequence, the
industrialization of Siberia was intensified.
11
   The average January temperatures in Siberia range from –15 to –45 degrees Celsius (GADDY & HILL,
2003, p. 50).

                                                                                                           8
Source : FAO (2012) & COOK (1992, p. 196).
        The Soviet population also wanted more consumption goods and consumer durables of better
quality. But the cold war continued to require massive expenditure of resources in the military sector. At
this stage several attempts to reorder priorities and reform the planning system to enable to increase the
quantity and the quality of consumer goods, but they all failed. As local production was unable to fulfill
entirely this demand, imports of these categories of product were necessary, especially from the West.
        The Soviet Union had also to import technology and capital goods in the sectors of information
technology, electronics and fine chemicals from the advanced industrial Western economies. Buying
Western goods was also considered useful to break production bottlenecks and eliminate shortages of
specific products (HANSON, 1981, p.135). Technological transfers were aimed at accelerating the
creation of new industries, the modernization of old ones and the increasing of productivity. Moreover,
they were an attempt to solve the problem of the lagging Soviet technological progress in the civilian
industry analyzed above. So, the USSR had to rely increasingly on the imports of capital goods from the
West into limiting the widening of the technological gap (see figure 3).

Figure 3: USSR balance of Trade in Machinery and Equipment with Developed Capitalist
Countries (1961–85).




Source : GAIDAR (2007, p. 99).



                                                                                                        9
         Because of the necessity to import agricultural products (mainly grain), consumer goods,
technology and capital goods, the pattern of external trade of the USSR had to change drastically during
the 1970’s. However, USSR problem was to find a way of financing the rising imports in hard currencies
needed by the country. The 1973 oil crisis provided this op3sportunity, allowing a boom of Soviet foreign
trade
         Soviet foreign trade experienced a boom after the 1973 oil crisis, driven by exports of oil and gas,
whose price were unprecedented high. A massive switching from oil to gas in internal Soviet energy
supply (see figure 4) enabled to raise dramatically the volume of oil available for export (SAGERS, M. J.
& TRETYAKOVA, 1986). The construction of gas pipeline mostly financed by foreign investment 12 was
also a way to export gas and obtain more hard currencies from Western European countries 13. Soviet
weapons exports also benefited from the large amount of petrodollars in the hands of OPEC countries.
Consequently, Soviet foreign trade averaged almost 20% of Soviet GDP in 1980. It means that USSR, a
still autarkic country in 1950, had reached a level of trade openness almost equal to that of the United
States at the end of the 1980’s.

Figure 4: Evolution of Soviet oil and gas production (1976-1986).




Source: Joint Economic Committee (1987).

        As a consequence of all this process, the profile of foreign trade partners also evolved. The annual
Soviet trade with the OECD members jumped from less than 20 percent of USSR total trade in the 1960s,
to 31 percent in the 1970s (JOINT ECONOMIC COMMITTEE, 1979, p. 52). Soviet exports to Western
economies increased at an annual growth rate of 26 percent from 1970 to 1980 (SMITH, 1993). Soviet
imports from the West also increased at a fast pace during the 1970s and the USSR incurred major trade
deficits with its hard-currency trading partners. Theses deficits could be easily financed by foreign loans
thanks to the context of abundance of liquidity (petrodollars) in the 1970s.



12
  The first agreement was signed with Germany in 1970.
13
  Western European country were eager for Soviet gas because the explosion of oil international price.
All along the 1970’s and the 1980’s, they realized a gas for oil substitution (SAGERS, M. J. &
TRETYAKOVA, 1986).

                                                                                                          10
       Another consequence was a deep change in the structure of Soviet foreign trade. The share of raw
materials in the total exports of the USSR increased a lot, rising from 26% in 1970 to more than 50% in
1980 (see figure 5). So, the share of manufactured and capital goods was decreasing.

Figure 5: Evolution of the share of raw materials in the total exports of the USSR (1960-1987).




Source: Federal State Statistics Service – Russia (2012).


         The new trend in the Soviet foreign trade created a situation of structural external vulnerability.
First of all, the share of raw materials (mainly oil and gas) in the Soviet balance of trade was becoming
higher and higher. This specialization in raw materials was a factor of vulnerability because the value of
Soviet exports was depending more and more on the evolution of international prices, specially of energy
(oil and gas), which are very volatile.
         The structural external vulnerability was also reinforce by the vital and growing dependence of the
USSR on the imports of such important goods that agricultural products, machines, equipments and
technology. This situation was even more unusual and worrying if considering the fact that USSR was
one the two Superpowers of the world at the time.
         Besides, when, after the peak of 1979, international oil prices began to decrease, the value of
Soviet exports dropped. The international abundance of liquidity had finished after Paul Volker’s decision
to raise brutally the interest rates of the American Federal Reserve in 1979. So, Soviet imports from
capitalist developed countries had also to be diminished in the beginning of the 1980s (see figure 6),
which deepened shortages of meat and consumer goods. On the top of that, the United States and some of
its allies decided to forbid the exportation to the USSR of many goods in retaliation of the Soviet
intervention in Afghanistan14. It was part of a global strategy of the United States to weaken the USSR in
the 1980s, using Soviet external dependency. Some analysts also consider that the drastic fall of
international oil price in the MID 1980S , caused by a sudden massive increase in the exports of Saudi
Arabia was part of this strategy (SCHWEIZER, 1994).

Figure 6: Soviet trade with capitalist developed countries 1980-1989 (billion 2000 dolars).




14
  The number of goods which export to the USSR was forbidden raised from 125 in 1979 to 800 in 1982
(FERNANDES, 1992).
                                                                                                         11
Source: GAIDAR (2007, p. 123).

       From the 1970s, the structural external vulnerability became a permanent feature of the USSR,
and the very low price of oil from the mid 1980s had an important impact on the final collapse of the
Soviet system in the following decade.

IV. The Perestroika: the dismantlement of the Soviet economic system (1985-1991)

        The next phase, from 1985 to 1991, corresponds to a period of economic recession. The average
per Capita GDP growth was -1,3 % (see table 1).
        The accession of Mikhail Gorbachev in 1985 marked the beginning of the Perestroika
(reconstruction in Russian) period. The economic reforms implemented were intended to deeply change
the Soviet system. According to Gorbachev, the two main goals of the Perestroika reforms were to stop
the slowdown trend of Soviet economy and to raise the life standards of the population. Soviet reformers
considered that these two interconnected objectives could be achieved through the resolution of the
problem of the ‘relaxation of discipline’ and a change in the means of coordination of the economic
system. They thought that the rigid central economic planning must be softened, with a certain degree of
decentralization was required and a direct participation of the workers to the management of the
enterprises. But, the most radical change in the mode of functioning of the Soviet economy intended by
the Perestroika was the creation of a private sector and the introduction of market mechanisms. Thus,
Nuti (1990) wrote about the Perestroika in 1990 that:
        “In the last five years the Soviet Union has introduced many measures of economic policy and
        radical reform intended to reduce the scope of central planning and to activate market
        mechanisms, in order to mobilize resources, increase their productivity directly and through
        greater integration of the Soviet economy into world trade, so as to resume and accelerate
        economic growth”.
        A spate of laws and decrees was passed to implement the reform program. The Law on State
Enterprise, which granted substantial autonomy to state enterprises, was adopted in 1987. The Law on
State Enterprise defined that central plans were becoming indicative and not obligatory any more.
Enterprises were given target for the value of their output by the central planning but detailed plans of
inputs-outputs for each company were abandoned. Government contracts were substituting state orders
and only a part of the production of enterprises was bought by the State. The remainder of enterprise
output should be sold through wholesale trade directly between the companies. Thus, Soviet enterprises
were free to determine the nature of part their output. The pricing system was not any more entirely
controlled by the Gosplan. A growing number of prices could be set freely, even if the price of basic and
strategic goods (energy, raw materials, health sector...) remained under State control.

                                                                                                      12
        Moreover, Soviet enterprises became free to choose the buyers of the remainder products. The
self-financing of the enterprises, through retained earnings and bank loans, was also adopted
(GOLDMAN, 1992).
        The introduction of workers self-management in the Soviet enterprises, inspired by Yugoslavian
experience, was intended to create a motivational system so as to solve the problem of the ‘relaxation of
discipline’, even though quite the contrary happened. Labor Councils, elected by the employees in each
enterprise15, were responsible for the discipline, the determination of the level of wages and for the
distribution of profits between investment and incentive funds for employees (Kotz, 2007, p. 76-77).
        The autonomy of the state enterprises had many negative consequences on the operation of the
Soviet economic system. It disorganized the coordination of the economy previously ensured by the
Gosplan, which was losing progressively its control over the Soviet Economy. It created bottlenecks and
deepened the shortages (DI LEO, 1991). The Labor Councils took also advantage of the autonomy by
increasing the share of profits going to the incentive funds at the expense of investment (see table 4).
Thus, the share of profits retained by the enterprises going to incentive funds represented 82% in 1988
and almost 95% in 1989 (see table 5). Most of the increase in incentive funds was used to raise wages.
Thanks to the Glasnost16, strikes became allowed. It resulted in a wave of workers strikes which led to
other wage increases (COOK L.J., 1992). Soviet system was more and more behaving like a capitalist
economy. These words of Kalecki (1943 [1990], p. 351), quoted from the same text used in section IV
show it clearly and happened to be premonitory:
        “Under a regime of permanent full employment, the ‘sack’ would cease to play its role as a
        disciplinary measure. The position of the boss would be undermined and the self-assurance […] of
        the working class would grow. Strikes for wage increases and improvements in conditions of work
        would create political tension”.
        The accelerated increase of real wages, in a context of growing shortages, worsened the problem
of excess demand in the USSR. It also contributed to the growing inflation in the country.

Table 4: Distribution of enterprise profit in the USSR, before and after the 1987 reform (billion
roubles).

                                              1986          1987         1988         1989
Total profit of state enterprises              198           206          237          265
Profit paid to State budget                    101            95           92           95
       Share of the Total profit              0,51          0,46         0,39         0,36
       paid to State budget
Profit retained by enterprises,           91            97               119          138
Of which: paid into enterprise            34            33                97          130
incentive funds
Source: Narkhoz in Ellman & Kantorovich (1992, p. 115).

        Before the Law of 1987, the Soviet State had had a total control over the enterprises, obtaining
from them whatever revenues were required for the central budget. But, the situation totally changed with
the adoption of the enterprise autonomy since the State could not collect any more whatever tax it need.
Thus, the rising size of the incentive funds also meant that the share of profit paid to state budget was
lowering (see table 4). It aggravated the increasing state deficit.
        The freedom to determinate the prices of products out of the state contract disorganized the
pricing system. The consumer goods enterprises, which had become profit-seeking because of their newly
acquired autonomy, shifted their production from basic goods to ‘new products’, which embodied minor
alterations to existing items and were more profitable. After all, these ‘new goods’, for which State
controlled prices did not exist, were higher-priced and carried a larger markup. The effect of this

15
     The management of the enterprise, including the director, was also elected by the workers.
16
     The Glasnost (‘openness’ in Russian) established freedom of individual expression and opinion.
                                                                                                      13
enterprises strategy was a rising shortage of basic consumer goods. The activity of the illegal secondary
markets was also growing fast, with ‘backdoor channels’ for people able to pay above fixed retail prices
of basic goods (SMITH, 1993, p. 107-109; KOTZ, 2007, p. 79). So, many goods had, at the same time, a
state price, a free-market price (for some very closed variant of the good) and a black market price. As
State statistics did not take into account the ‘new goods’ and the products sold on the black market, they
did not captured the hidden inflation and official records did not show the inflationary process in progress
(SMITH, 1993, p.109). The prices depended also sharply on the place of residence (ELLMAN, 1990).
         The Law on Individual Labor Activity, approved in 1986, had been a first step in the direction of
the creation of a private sector in the USSR but its scope was very limited. However, the Soviet Law on
Cooperatives, approved in 1988, represented the real birth of Soviet private sector. According to this law,
the cooperatives could function as private enterprises and do not obey to the plan. Multiple memberships
of production cooperatives by a single person were also allowed, which means the opportunity to create a
new class of businessmen with activities in multiple sectors of the Soviet economy. Cooperatives had the
right to engage in credit activities, i.e. they constituted the embryo of a system of private financial
institutions. Cooperatives had access to foreign trade and they could retain part of their export earnings
supposedly to finance their imports necessities. They also could participate in joint ventures. A
cooperative could hire employees who were not members of the cooperative. It meant that private
employment was introduced in the Soviet system. The size of earnings was not limited. Cooperatives can
sell or lend their means of production. The markup was supposed to be controlled by central authorities.
Actually, cooperatives were free to set their prices (NUTI, 1989).
         The cooperatives were intended to be small-scale businesses providing goods and services which
were not offered by big State enterprises. But, cooperatives had all kinds of activities and many of them
became big companies and operated in trade and finance. So, the Law on Cooperatives gave birth to a lot
of capitalist firms. The cooperative model was so successful that, by July 1989, barely one year after the
approval of the law, almost three million people were working in cooperatives (JONES & MOSKOFF,
1989). At the end of 1991, they were more than 6,2 million (NOVE, 1992, p. 403). Many cooperatives
were created by the managers and employees of the state companies. They usually bought goods
produced by their own enterprise at state controlled prices, processed them in the cooperative, usually
without any significant alteration, and sold them at much higher free prices. These practices contributed
to increase even more the shortage of consumer goods in the USSR. Furthermore, many State enterprise
managers became real capitalists and accumulated huge wealth thanks to their ‘cooperative activity’.
         This accumulation of wealth in the hands of State managers increased dramatically thanks to the
decentralization of foreign trade, established by the decree “On the Foreign Trade Activity of State,
Cooperative, and other Enterprises” in December 1988. This decree removed State controls over foreign
trade. So, many cooperatives bought good (specially raw materials, metals, oil,…) at the low State
domestic prices and sold them abroad for hard currency (GUSTAFSON, 1999, p. 27). It was very
lucrative and some managers enriched themselves a lot, forming a group of wealthy capitalists for whom
“proceeding to capitalism was essential to the survival of their new businesses” (KOTZ, 2007, p. 90).
They played a central role in the collapse of the USSR by financing the pro-capitalist coalition and
deepening the Soviet economy imbalances.
         The partial freedom of State enterprises to set prices and the total one of Cooperatives disrupted
the Soviet distribution system. State enterprises and cooperatives took advantage of the free price-setting
to increase prices, which allowed higher profits. So, thanks to the increase in profitability and their
autonomy, cooperatives and State enterprises could raise their employees’ wages. The consequence was a
differentiation in wages in State enterprises depending on the extent of their free price-setting17. Though,
cooperatives, which had an entirely autonomous price-fixing, could offer the highest wages. Besides,
average wages were 2,5 higher in cooperatives than in State enterprises. All this process had been
identified by Kalecki almost 40 years before Perestroika in a paper about ‘central price determination’.
He wrote:

17
  Typically, the bigger was the share of production for which the enterprise was free to set the prices (i.e.
the smaller was price-controlled production), the higher were profits and wage rises.
                                                                                                          14
        “Under the system of [autonomous] price-setting, enterprises may, despite everything, exploit
        various opportunities for unjustified price increases and thereby raise their profits. […]
        A further problem arising out of autonomous price-fixing by enterprises should be pointed out.
        This is the possibility that unwarranted differences in income between workers in different
        enterprises may arise, which may cause dissatisfaction” (KALECKI, 1958 [1992], p. 119).
        The structural external vulnerability described in Section IV worsened during the Perestroika.
World oil prices fell sharply in 1986 and remained very low so that Soviet current balance of payment
deteriorated during the Perestroika. The situation became all the more unsustainable that the Soviet oil
production began to fall in 1989 (see figure 7) because of the overuse of the most productive deposits
(GAIDAR, 2007, p. 166). As a consequence, official18 oil exports dropped19 (see figure 7), increasing the
problems with hard currency. The deficit in the current account of the balance of payments also worsened
because of the increasing domestic needs for consumer and agricultural goods due to the shortages.
Finally, the exports dropped by 33% and the exports fell by 44% in value in 1991 compared to 1990
figures (SMITH, 1993, p. 174).

Figure 7: Soviet oil production and foreign trade 1985–90 (million tonnes)




Source: SMITH (1993, p. 141).
        Moreover, the end of communism in Central and Eastern Europe marked the end of the Comecon,
which had a very negative impact on Soviet foreign trade.
        A consequence of the deterioration of the current balance of payments and of the internal
economic difficulties was the fast degradation of the conditions of foreign financing. Thus, the terms of
Western banks loan worsened with rising rates and shorter deadlines. As a result, foreign net debt rose
from 14,9 billion dollars in 1985 to 45,4 billion dollars in 1991 (SMITH, 1993, p. 159). The USSR had to
use its gold and hard currency reserves but they were insufficient to finance the long-term deficit of the
balance of payments. Western private banks totally cut credit lines at the beginning of 1991. The USSR
tried unsuccessfully to obtain loans from foreign governments from 1989 to 1991, promising political and
diplomatic compromises in order to get them. The Soviet gold and hard currency reserves finally
exhausted at the end of 1991 (ELLMAN & KONTOROVICH, 1992; GAIDAR, 2007).
        Thus, in 1991, the USSR was in a dramatic economic situation. Unable to attend domestic needs
for consumer and agricultural goods, central Soviet institutions had no more authority on the economic

18
   Major quantities of oil, embezzled from the State enterprises by cooperatives, were negotiated abroad
from 1988. These operations were generally illegal and did not appear in official records since hard
currency payments were usually kept abroad.
19
   Official oil exports fell by almost 50% from 1989 to 1991 (NOVE, 1992, p. 413).
                                                                                                       15
and political system. GDP per capita, which fell by 3,1% in 1990, dropped by 6,8% in 1991 (see figure
1). Inflation could not be kept under control. The price system was totally disorganized. The birth of a
capitalist market had enabled the accumulation of a huge wealth by privileged groups of State managers.
The Soviet distribution system had become very unequal. The aim of most of the political leaders was to
realize the ‘transition to a market economy’. The Perestroika had destroyed the Soviet system because
“Gorbachev never had a coherent reform program. Perestroika was reactive and fragmented, each reform
responding to pressures created by the previous stage of reform” (CLARKE, 2007, p.15).
        Because of secessionist movements and the affirmation of local political leaders in the Republics,
like Eltsin in Russia, the USSR had become increasingly ungovernable. The partial paralysis of inter-
republican trade deteriorated even more the economic situation, multiplying the bottlenecks. The fast
process of political and economical disintegration ended in 25 December of 1991 when the USSR
officially disappeared.

VI. Conclusion

        The success of the Soviet extensive growth model in the 1950s and 1960s was undeniable. But,
the depletion of the large reserves of underemployed rural work force and low cost natural resources were
responsible for the exhaustion of this model. A phase of economic stagnation began in the 1970s. The
attempt to move to a new regime of intensive accumulation with high productivity growth to overcome
these new constraints failed. The deterioration of labor discipline, the militarization of the economy both
in what regards large expenditures because of the cold war and the problems the industrial structure and
diffusion of technical progress and the great difficulties with cold weather agriculture were all partly
responsible. Given these difficulties the strategy was changed to a pattern of external trade based on
commodities exports and the dependence on basic goods imports which created a situation of great
external economic (and political) vulnerability. The attempt of Perestroika to build a ‘market socialism’
totally failed. Gorbachev’s reforms disrupted the system of planning and distribution and provoked a
large increase both in the chronic excess of domestic demand and in the needs for imports. The
interaction of economic collapse and political crisis led to the end of the USSR.
        It is interesting to observe how structural characteristics of the USSR economy influenced post-
Soviet Russia. Thus, the predatory practices which begun thanks to the Perestroika reforms, became
generalized during the period of ‘transition’ to capitalism in the 1990s. The wealth acquired by Soviet
State managers during the Perestroika allowed them to take advantage of the Shock Therapy reforms in
the 1990s. They are now known as Russian oligarchs. The current Russian economy is also characterized
by a low productivity agriculture, growing dependence on raw materials and energy exports, a structural
external vulnerability inherited from the Soviet times, to which virtually free short term capital mobility
has been added.

Bibliography:

ALLEN, R. C. (2003) Farm to Factory. A Reinterpretation of the Soviet Industrial Revolution. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
AMANN, R. & COOPER, J. (Orgs.) (1982) Industrial Innovation in the Soviet Union. New Haven: Yale
University Press.
BELLINGER, E.G. & DRONIN, M (2005) Dependence and Food Problems in Russia 1900–1990. The
Interaction of Climate and Agricultural Policy and Their Effect on Food Problems. Budapest: Central
European University Press.
BROWN, A ; KASER, M. e SMITH, G. S. (Eds.) (1994) Cambridge Encyclopedia of Russia and the
Soviet Union. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
CIA (1986) Soviet intensive economic development in perspective. Langley.
CLARKE, S. (2007) The Development of Capitalism in Russia. London & New York: Routledge.
COOK, E.C. (1992) Agriculture’s Role in the Soviet Economic Crisis. In: ELLMAN, M. &
KONTOROVICH (eds) (1992) The Disintegration of the Soviet Economic System. London: Routledge.
                                                                                                        16
COOK, L.J. (1992) ‘Brezhnev’s “social contract” and Gorbachev’s reforms’. Soviet Studies, vol. 44: 1:
p. 37–56.
DI LEO, R. (1991) The Soviet Union 1985-1990: After Comunist Rule the Deluge? Soviet Studies,
Glasgow, vol. 43, n°3.
DOBB, M. (1978) Soviet Economic Development since 1917. London: Routledge.
ELLMAN, M. (1979) Socialist Planning. Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press.
ELLMAN, M. (1990) A note on the distribution of income in the USSR under Gorbachev. Soviet Studies,
vol. 42:1, p. 147-148.
ELLMAN, M. & KONTOROVICH (eds) (1992) The Disintegration of the Soviet Economic System.
London: Routledge.
FEJTÖ, F. (2000) Histoire des Démocraties Populaires. Vol. 1 : L’Ère de Staline. Paris : Editions du
Seuil.
FEL’DMAN, G.A. (1928) [1964] On the Theory of Growth Rates of National Income. In: SPULBER, N.
Foundations of Soviet Strategy for Economic Growth. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, pp. 174-
202 & pp. 304-331.
FERNANDES, L. (1992) URSS, Ascensão e Queda. A Economia Política das Relações da União
Soviética com o Mundo Capitalista. São Paulo: Editora Anita Garibaldi.
FILTZER, D. (1992) Soviet workers and de-stalinization. The consolidation of the modern system of
Soviet production relations, 1953-1964. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
GADDY, C. G. (1996) The Price of the Past : Russia's Struggle With the Legacy of a Militarized
Economy. Washington: Brookings Institution.
GADDY, C.G. & HILL, F. (2003) Siberian Curse. How Communist Planners Left Russia Out in the Cold.
Washington D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.
GADDY, C. & ICKES, B. W. (2006) Addiction and Withdrawal: Resource Rents and the Colapse of the
Soviet Economy. Draft. Pennsylvania State University.
GAIDAR, Y. (2003) The Soviet Collapse : Grain and Oil. Washington: American Enterprise for Public
Policy Research.
GAIDAR, Y. (2007) Collapse of an Empire. Lessons for Modern Russia. Waschington D.C. : Brookings
Institution Press.
GERSCHENKRON, A. (1962), Economic backwardness in historical perspective, a book of essays.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
GOLDMAN, M. I. (1992) What Went Wrong with Perestroika? New York : Norton & Company.
GROSSMAN, G. (1987) Command Economy. In: Eatwell J.; Milgate M. and Newman P. (eds) The New
Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. London: Macmillan. Vol. I, pp; 494-495.
GUSTAFSON, T. (1999) Capitalism Russian-Style. Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press.
HANSON, P. (1981) Trade and Technology in Soviet - Western Relations. New York, NY: Columbia
University Press.
HEWETT, E.A. (1988) Reforming the Soviet Union: Equality versus Efficiency. Washington : The
Brookings Institution.
JOINT ECONOMIC COMMITTEE, US CONGRESS. (1979) Issues in East-West Economic Relations: A
Compendium of Papers. 95th Congress, 2nd session. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
JOINT ECONOMIC COMMITTEE - CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES (1982) USSR: Measures
of Economic Growth and Development, 1950-1980. Washington: US Government Printing Office.
JOINT ECONOMIC COMMITTEE. CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES. (1987) Gorbatchev’s
Economic Plans. Washington : U.S. Government Printing Office.
JONES, A & MOSKOFF, W. (1989) New Cooperatives in the USSR. Problems of Communism, Vol. 38,
n°6, pp. 27-39.
KALECKI, M. (1943) [1990] Political Aspects of Full Employment. In: Kalecki, M. Collected Works of
Michal Kalecki. Vol. I Oxford: Clarendon Press.
KALECKI, M. (1958) [1992] Central Price Determination. In: Kalecki, M. Collected Works of Michal
Kalecki. Vol. III Oxford: Clarendon Press.

                                                                                                  17
KALECKI, M. (1966) [1993] Introduction to the Theory of Growth in a Socialist Economy. In: Kalecki,
M. Collected Works of Michal Kalecki. Vol. III Oxford: Clarendon Press.
KALECKI, M. (1970) [1993] Theories of Growth in Different Social Systems. In: Kalecki, M. Collected
Works of Michal Kalecki. Vol. III Oxford: Clarendon Press.
KORNAI, J. (1979) Resource-Constrained versus Demand-Constrained Systems. Econometrica, Vol. 47,
No. 4 (Jul., 1979), pp. 801-819.
KOWALIK, T. (1987) Central Planning. In: Eatwell J.; Milgate M. and Newman P. (eds) The New
Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. London: Macmillan. Vol. I, pp; 389-392.
KOTZ, D. M. & WEIR, F. (2007) Revolution from above, the Demise of the Soviet System. London :
Routledge.
LAVIGNE, M. (1979) Les Economies Socialistes Soviétiques et Européennes. Paris : Armand Colin.
LEWIN, M. (1985) “Taking Grain”: Soviet Policies of Agricultural Procurements before the War. In:
LEWIN, M. The Making of the Soviet System: Essays in the Social History of Interwar Russia. London:
Routledge.
MARCHAND, P. (2008) Géopolitique de la Russie. Paris : Ellipses.
MAZAT, N. & SERRANO, F. (2013) A Potência Vulnerável : Padrões de Investimento e Mudança
Estrutural da União Soviética à Federação Russa. In : Bielchowsky, R. (ed.) Padrões de Desenvolvimento
Econômico (1950-2008). América Latina, Ásia e Rússia. Brasília : CGEE.
MEDEIROS, C.A. (2004) O desenvolvimento tecnológico americano no pós-guerra como um
empreendimento militar. In: FIORI, J.L. (Org.) O poder americano. Petrópolis: Editora Vozes.
MEDEIROS, C.A. (2008) Desenvolvimento econômico e ascenção nacional: rupturas e transições na
Rússia e na China. In: Fiori, J.L. ; Medeiros, C. ; Serrano, F. O Mito do Colapso do Poder Americano.
Rio de Janeiro: Editora Record.
NELL, E. J. (1997) Understanding Effective Demand: Capitalism versus Socialism. In Essays in honour
of Geoff Harcourt, Vol. 2. Markets, unemployment and economic policy. London and New York:
Routledge, pp. 178-94.
NOVE, A. (1970) [1970] Economic Reforms in USSR and Hungary, a Study in Contrasts. In: Nove, A. ;
Nuti, D. M. (eds) Socialist Economics. Harmondsworth, England : Penguin Books.
NOVE, A. (1977) The Soviet Economic System. London : George Allen & Unwin Ltd.
NOVE, A. (1992) An Economic History of the USSR, 1917-1991. Harmondsworth, England : Penguin
Books.
NUTI, D. M. (1989) The New Soviet Cooperatives: Advances and Limitations. Economic and Industrial
Democracy, 10.
NUTI, D. M. (1990) Stabilisation and Reform Sequencing in the Soviet. Recherches Économiques de
Louvain / Louvain Economic Review, Vol. 56, No. 2.
OFER, G. (1987) Soviet Economic Growth: 1928-1985. Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 25, No. 4
(Dec., 1987), pp. 1767-1833.
Popov V. (2010) Life cycle of the centrally planned economy: why soviet growth rates peaked in the
1950’s. CEFIR / NES Working Paper series. Working Paper No 152. Available in:
http://www.cefir.ru/papers/WP152.pdf
PREOBRAZHENSKY, E. (1926) [1964] On Primary Socialist Accumulation. In: SPULBER, N.
Foundations of Soviet Strategy for Economic Growth. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, pp. 174-
202 & pp. 230-257.
SAGERS, M. J. & TRETYAKOVA, A. (1986) Constraints in Gas for Oil Substitution in the USSR : the
Oil Refining Industry and Gas Storage. Soviet Economy, Silver Spring, Maryland, vol. 2, n°1.
SCHWEIZER, P. (1994) Victory. The Reagan’s Administration Secret Strategy that Hastened the
Collapse of the Soviet Union. New York: The Atlantic Monthly Press.
SPULBER, N. (1964) Foundations of Soviet Strategy for Economic Growth. Bloomington : Indiana
University Press.
SPULBER, N. (2003) Russia’s Economic Transition: From Late Tsarism to the New Millennium. New
York : Cambridge University Press.

                                                                                                   18
STALIN, J. (1951) [1972] Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR. Peking: Foreign Languages
Press.
VOLIN, L. (1970) A Century of Russian Agriculture. From Alexander II to Kruschev. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
ZALESKI, E. (1980) Stalinist Planning for Economic Growth, 1932-1952. Chapel Hill: The University of
North Carolina Press.

Statistics sources:

FAO (Food an Agricultural Organization of the United Nations) (2012) FAOSTAT. Geneva: Statistic
Division of the FAO.
FEDERAL STATE STATISTICS SERVICE (2012) Russia in Figures. Moscow. Available in :
<http://www.gks.ru>
MADDISON, A. (1998) Measuring the Performance of Communist Command Economy: an Assessment
of the CIA Estimates for the USSR. Review of Income and Wealth.
MADDISON, A. (2006) The World Economy. Volume 2: Historical Statistics. Paris: Development Centre
Studies – OECD.
SLAVIC RESEARCH CENTER (2012) Soviet Economic Statistical Series. Hokkaido: University of
Hokkaido. Available in :
<http://src-h.slav.hokudai.ac.jp/database/SESS.html#USSR-S7>
UNSTAT-UNITED NATIONS STATISTICS DIVISION (2012) National Accounts Main Aggregates
Database. New York. Available in :
<http://unstats.un.org/unsd/snaama/selbasicFast.asp>




                                                                                                 19
