   Weather Shocks and Labor Allocation: Evidence from
                  Northeastern Brazil∗
                             Danyelle Branco                  Jose Feres
                                           July 21, 2017


                                               Abstract
      This paper analyzes whether rural households uses labor allocation to mitigate the effect
      of drought shocks in the Northeaster Brazilian context. We first document that water
      scarcity leads to lower income derived from farm work as main, and higher income from
      secondary jobs. We then examine the extent to which extreme droughts affect time labor
      allocation. Our results indicate that an additional drought shock per year is associated
      with greater likelihood of have more than one job, lower share of farm activities in the
      total hours worked, and higher share of secondary job. The effects are higher for poorer
      municipalities. These findings are consistent with a mitigation response to reduced agri-
      cultural profitability due to water scarcity.

      Keywords: Drought shocks; rural households; labor allocation; Northeastern Brazil.


                                                Resumo
      Este artigo analisa se as famı́lias rurais usam a alocação de trabalho para mitigar o efeito
      de um choque de seca no Nordeste do Brasil. Primeiramente, fornecemos evidência de que
      a escassez de água está associada a uma menor renda derivada do trabalho principal, sendo
      este agrı́cola ou não, e positivamente relacionada a maior renda de empregos secundários.
      Em seguida, achamos que choques negativos de chuva estão fortemente correlacionados
      com as decisões de alocação de mão de obra. Um choque de seca a mais por ano está asso-
      ciado a maior probabilidade de ter mais de um emprego, menor participação do trabalho
      agrı́cola no total de horas trabalhadas e maior participação do trabalho secundário. Os
      efeitos são maiores para os municı́pios mais pobres. Esses resultados são consistentes com
      uma resposta de mitigação à rentabilidade agrı́cola reduzida devido à escassez de água.

      Palavras chaves: Choques de seca; famı́lias rurais; alocação de trabalho; Nordeste do
      Brasil.
      Classificação JEL: O13, O15, Q1, Q54

      Área ANPEC: Economia Agrı́cola e do Meio Ambiente

  ∗
   Support for this research was provided by the Latin American and Caribbean Environmental Economics
Program. We thank Claudio Araujo, and Bladimir Carrillo for helpful comments and discussions. Contact:
danyelle.branco@ufv.br, address: DER, UFV; jose.feres@ipea.gov.br, address: IPEA, Rio de Janeiro.
1       Introduction
A consolidated body of research suggests that the incidence of extreme weather events, such
as droughts and floods, will rise in the coming century as a result of increased global average
temperature (Coates et al., 2014; IPCC, 2013). The economic costs of these climate-related
extreme events may be substantial and far-reaching. Much of the discussion in literature has
focused on the direct impacts of extreme weather events on health, agriculture, and income.1
However, increasing attention is being paid to the mechanisms underlying these relationships.
One intriguing question is whether families adopt income mitigation strategies in response to
extreme weather events. While previous studies provide strong evidence that droughts and
floods can have an immediate effect on rural income, the extent to which families adjust labor
supply to mitigate these effects has been very little investigated.2 Documenting the quantitative
importance of these labor supply and other behavioral household responses is crucial for guiding
the targeting of policies intended to mitigate the adverse consequences of climate change.
    Extreme weather events can have in particular important effects on time allocation of la-
bor. In context where irrigation and genetically improved seed are unavailable, rainfall shocks
are likely to negatively affect agricultural productivity, most notably causing lower yields of
subsistence crops and reduce income from cash crops. As a result, engaging in agricultural
activities become less attractive and household should rise the supply of non-agricultural work
to hedge against declining agricultural profitability and smoothing consumption. Therefore,
off-farm income plays a significant role in rural households by reducing income volatility.
    Understanding the labor supply responses to weather shocks is particularly relevant in de-
veloping countries. Since these countries are located in areas that are warmer, they are expected
to experience a disproportionate share of extreme weather events in the future due to climate
change. Moreover, these countries have limited social safety nets and weak institutions, so
households do not have access to the portfolio of adaptation strategies or avoidance behaviors
often available in more developed countries.
    In this paper, we provide empirical evidence on the relationship between rainfall shocks
and household’s labor allocation in the Northeast Brazilian context. We believe that focus
on Northeastern Brazil provides a compelling setting to investigate this question. First, it
is the driest Brazilian region and it has long been subject to harsh climatic conditions, with
recurrent events of drought and rising temperatures, leading to further enhance evaporation and
reduce water availability (Ab’Sáber, 1999; Marengo, 2009). Second, one of the most populated
semi-arid area of the world is localized in Brazilian Northeast, where more than 10 million
inhabitants are located in rural areas. For a huge fraction of this population collecting water
for consumption, hygiene, and agricultural production is a daily task that demands energy
and resources. Lack of adequate access to water also increases the susceptibility to climatic
shocks associated with fluctuations in rainfall (Ab’Sáber, 1999; Cirilo, 2008; Insa/MCTI, 2014;
Rocha and Soares, 2015). Furthermore, half of all Brazilian rural dwellers and family farming
establishments are in Northeast. Almost all of the total area sown in the region is rainfed.
Only 2 percent of net area is irrigated.3 Therefore, we would expect rainfall to be an important
driver of agricultural productivity and household income.
    We make use of high frequency gridded information on precipitation and temperature to
    1
     See Barreca (2012), Barrios et al. (2008), Blakeslee and Fishman (2017), Deschênes and Greenstone (2007),
Jayachandran (2006), Rocha and Soares (2015), and Zander et al. (2015).
   2
     See Jessoe et al. (2017) and Rose (2001).
   3
     These information are based on the Brazilian Agricultural Census 2006.



                                                      1
construct a municipality-by-year weather dataset which then is combined with household mi-
crodata by using place and survey month. Our identification strategy exploits variation in
rainfall records over time within municipalities, and relies on the assumption that weather
shocks, conditional on municipality and year fixed-effects, are not correlated with other latent
determinants of labor supply. This identifying assumption is plausible insofar as households
are unlikely to anticipate precisely a rainfall shock at a given moment in time and place.
    We begin our analysis by providing evidence that negative rainfall shocks affect household
income in our setting. Although income registries are likely to be subject to considerable
measurement error in household surveys, we still observe that drought shocks are significantly
associated with lower income derived from the main job. This is especially true when we
consider income derived from agricultural activities. Moreover, higher incidence of drought
shocks are significantly associated with increased income from secondary jobs. These results
give us confidence that rainfall shocks are in fact an income shifter in our setting.
    We then explore the extent to which drought shocks affect labor time allocation. We find
that negative rainfall shocks are associated with greater likelihood of being employed in more
than one job, lower share of farm activities, and higher share of secondary job. We also assess
whether these effects vary heterogeneously according with municipality’s level of development.
The results indicate stronger effects among families residing municipalities with lower per capita
income. Taken in their entirety, these results are consistent with a mitigation response to
reduced agricultural profits due to water scarcity.
    A potential identification issue pervading our analysis is migration. What if families migrate
away from areas affected by extreme droughts? Empirically this would be problematic only if
families that migrate in response to a negative rainfall shock are different from those who do
not. To explore this issue, we estimate the main regressions considering only families that live
for at least five years in the current municipality. The results are broadly similar compared
to our benchmark specification. In addition, when we explore whether rainfall shocks are
associated with predetermined individual or household characteristics, we find no evidence that
this happen. Thus, selective migration is unlikely to be a major problem. This is consistent
with recent work in rural Pakistan that finds no effect of rainfall on the mobility of men or
women (Mueller et al., 2014).
    A small number of papers, focused mostly on reallocation of main job, have examined the
relationship between weather and labor allocation. As part of a larger analysis, Jessoe et al.
(2017) evaluate the effects of annual fluctuations in weather on employment in rural Mexico.
They find no effect of rainfall or temperature shocks on agricultural sector, but show that
non-agricultural labor decreases with increases in extreme temperature. Rose (2001) looks at
rural Indian farm households to test labor supply responses to rainfall shock. She finds that
the probability of participating in the labor market is significantly greater when unexpectedly
low levels of precipitation are faced. To our knowledge, there has been no study of drought
shocks on labor allocation as mitigation strategy in Brazil. In this paper, we use more detailed
information of the individual’s work. We know the number of works the person is employed,
whether the individual is employed in agricultural sector or not for each job, and the hours
worked in both main and secondary job. The fact we know the hours worked supply and not
just whether the person participates or not in the labor market, allow us to look at farm and
non-farm work as complementary rather than as substitutes only.
    We start in the next section with our motivating model of the joint rural household decision
regarding farm and off-farm labor supply. Section 3 describes our data and empirical strategy.
Section 4 presents our findings and robustness checks. Section 5 concludes.


                                                2
2       A model of rural household labor
We developed a simple model of the joint rural household decision regarding farm and off-farm
labor supply. The household decides to allocate the time T among three activities: leisure
(lz ), farm labor (lf arm ) and off-farm labor (lof f ), such that T = lz + lf arm + lof f . Let c be
consumption. The rural household utility function U (c, lz ) is concave and twice differentiable.
The total utility function of the rural household is:

                                            U (c, lz ) = u(c) + αlz                                        (1)
    Let w denote the off-farm wage and, since the agricultural household is a price-taker in all
markets (Singh, Squire and Strauss, 1986), we assume that w is determined exogenously. So,
household will be paid wlof f for time spent working in off-farm labor. Let π be the revenue from
agriculture, which is given by agricultural production. Agricultural production is determined by
the amount of farm labor, weather shocks, and fixed capital and land. It may be represented
by the production function q(lf arm , R, K), where lf arm is the quantity of labor allocated to
farm activities, R the weather shock, and K is capital and land.4 R is a random variable
that affects farm profits, a higher value of R indicates better weather. It could be defined as
the deviation between the total rainfall in given moment of time and the historical average
rainfall.5 Literature shows that rural Northeastern Brazil turns positive rainfall shocks into
                                                                 ∂q
unequivocally beneficial events, enabling us to assume that ∂R      > 0.6 Total rural household
income is given by the sum of farm revenue and off-farm income, and it may be represented by
I = P q(lf arm , R, K) + wlof f . Thus, consumption will be

                                                    c=I                                                    (2)

                                        c = P q(lf arm , R, K) + wlof f                                    (3)
    The time allocated to leisure is expressed by lz = T − lf arm − lof f . Thus, we can substitute
this into the maximization problem to get

                          max U P q(lf arm , R, K) + wlof f , T − lf arm − lof f
                                                                                
                                                                                                           (4)
                        lf arm ,lof f

    We consider the case where rural households allocate time for both farm and off-farm ac-
tivities. In this case, the first order conditions of the optimization problem (4) are given by
                                                     
                                        0        ∂q
                                      u (c) P f arm − α = 0                                    (5)
                                               ∂l
                                               u0 (c)w − α = 0                                             (6)
   where u0 (c) is the marginal utility of the consume and α is the marginal utility of leisure.
From conditions (5) and (6), one may verify that
                                                 
                                              ∂q
                                          P f arm = w                                        (7)
                                            ∂l
                                               2                 2
    4
      In general, we assume that ∂lf∂q           ∂ q                  ∂ q
                                     arm > 0, ∂ 2 lf arm < 0, and ∂lf arm ∂R > 0
    5
      Rainfall deviations below the historical average characterizes a negative shock, whereas deviations above
the historical average settles a positive shock.
    6
      See Rocha and Soares (2015).


                                                       3
   Condition (7) indicates that, on optimum, the farm wage is equal to the wage paid by off-
farm activities. To ensure a globally concave objective function, and thus, a unique optimum,
we assume that:
            "                2                 #                               2
                                         2
                                                                   
               00       ∂q             ∂   q 0     00    2      00         ∂q
              u (c) P f arm + P 2 f arm u (c) u (c)w > u (c)w P f arm                      (8)
                      ∂l             ∂ l                                 ∂l
   We are interested in the effect that weather shocks have on the optimal level of both farm
and off-farm labor. That is, how would we expect an adverse weather shock to affect the rural
household labor decision? They would use off-farm labor as a mitigation strategy to weather
shocks? These questions lead us to our two testable hypothesis:

     Proposition 1. Negative rainfall shocks decrease household farm labor supply.

Proof. It follows from the first order condition:
                                                      (+)
                                         z             }|           {
                              ∂lf arm ∼                     ∂l f arm
                                      = −u00 (c)w2 u0 (c)P                                   (9)
                               ∂R                            ∂R

                                                                                               
   Farm work has a positive relationship with R. In other words, an increase (reduction) in R
implies in increasing (decreasing) farm labor. In this model, there is only one way that weather
shocks affect the choice of farm work. When a drought is faced, the marginal productivity of
agricultural labor will reduce, which implies a diminishing in the return of farm labor. Thereby,
agricultural activities become less attractive. Household will allocate less time to farm labor,
thus reducing lf arm . However, positive rainfall shocks increase the benefit to farm working,
agricultural wage rises and household will increase farm labor supply.

     Proposition 2. Negative rainfall shocks increase household non-agricultural labor supply.

Proof. From the first order condition, we can derivate the effect of weather shocks on the
optimal choice of off-farm working:
                                                     (−)
                         z                            }|                            {
                                                  2                            2
                ∂lof f ∼           ∂q           ∂   q                        ∂   q
                       = −u00 (c)P    wu0 (c)P 2 f arm + u00 (c)w2 u0 (c)P f arm            (10)
                 ∂R                ∂R         ∂ l                         ∂l      ∂R
                                                                                               
    Weather shock has two effects on the optimal level of off-farm labor. First, a drought
decreases both farmland productivity and the value of agricultural work, which affect the benefit
of time spent in farm labor. Thus, off-farm labor becomes more attractive, and household will
increase lof f . Second, droughts decreases the value of marginal productivity of farm labor.
Since the marginal return associated to off-farm activities is higher, the household could choose
off-farm labor above the optimal level, leading to rising the total income, and mitigating the
shocks effect.



                                                 4
3       Data and Empirical Strategy
3.1     Household data
Our basic source for labor market outcomes in the rural Northeast is from the Brazilian House-
hold Survey (PNAD). Every year since 1967, the Brazilian Bureau of Statistics (IBGE) has
implemented the PNAD throughout Brazil during the month of September.7 It is nationally
and regionally representative, and contains detailed information on socio-economic and demo-
graphic characteristics. Since its implementation, PNAD passed through many methodological
alterations along the years. Thus, we restrict our analysis to the period between 2001 and 2014,
for which questionnaires and consistent sampling methodologies were maintained.
    Importantly for our study, the PNAD asks whether respondents work with agriculture, are
self-employed, wage-employee, employers, or whether they grow for their own consumption. In
addition, respondents are asked to provide information about the number of jobs they have,
and the amount of hours usually spent in each job per week. This allows us to calculate the
participation of each job in the total of hours worked. The rural sample is comprised of 145,425
individuals from 40,519 households in 150 municipalities. Employment data are available for
92,006 individuals, among which 47,295 are the head of household.8
    We restrict the sample to those living outside of urban areas because our causal factor
of interest, rainfall, should mainly have an effect in rural areas. We also restrict the sample
to individuals aged 10 to 70. The householder’s characteristics, just as gender, age, years of
schooling, and family size, are also collected from the PNAD. Our main outcomes of interest
include probability of have more than one job, ratio of farm work in the total worked, share of
secondary job in the total of hours worked, and likelihood of at least one family member being
employed in nonagricultural work (off-farm likelihood). Table 1 presents summary statistics of
these variables. In rural Northeastern, more than 70% of individuals report agriculture as their
principal economic activity. Most of them are self-employed, while 25% help another member
of the household and do not receive any salary. On average, only seven percent of individuals
are employed in more than one job, and the share of time spent on these secondary occupations
of the total hours worked is 2,82%.

3.2     Climate data
Weather data are based on a reanalysis model, ERA-Interim. The ERA-Interim database
provides daily temperature and precipitation information with horizontal resolution of 12 Km
and covers the period from 1 January 1979 onwards. We use a geo-spatial software to aggregate
the data to the municipality level and calculate an average of the points located inside the
    7
      Except in the Brazilian Censuses years, that is conducted of each ten years.
    8
      The basic idea underlying our empirical approach is to compare householders who experienced different
climatic conditions in a given moment in time. Using different rounds of the PNAD, we can compare fami-
lies (individuals) in different moments in time and place, so that there is a great amount of variation across
municipalities and years in weather conditions and our dependent variables. PNAD is not longitudinal, so we
are unable to observe the same individuals in different years. However, this does not jeopardize our empirical
approach. As we discuss below in more detail, our identifying assumption is that, conditional on municipality
and year fixed effects, weather shocks are orthogonal to other determinants of the variables of interest. This
plausible assumption is sufficient to estimate the impact of weather shocks on our labor outcomes. Thereby, the
relevant source of variation in our study is at the municipality-level.




                                                      5
municipality limits.9 We make use of this daily data in order to construct drought shock
measures.
    To analyze the effect of weather on rural labor allocation, we construct several measures
of drought shocks. Our first measure is the Standardized Precipitation Index (SPI).10 The
SPI calculation is based on the long-term precipitation record for a desired period. This long
term-record is fitted to a probability distribution, which is then transformed into a normal
distribution (Mckee et al., 1993). Its probabilistic nature gives it historical context, and since
it is spatially consistent, it allows for comparisons between different locations, both are well
suited for decision-making. Negatives SPI values indicate less than median precipitation and
characterizes a drought. The drought intensity depends which value SPI reaches. Whether
it reaches until -0.99 is within the “mild dryness” category, from -1 to -1.49 is “moderate
dryness”, if it is between -1.50 and -1.99 “severe dryness” and from -2 onwards is “extreme
dryness” category. Any value above zero is not considered an negative rainfall event. Figure 1
presents the yearly averages for SPI.
    To calculate the SPI index, we first aggregate weather data to the municipality-by-month-
by-year level. These collapsed data contain total precipitation and average temperature for
each municipality in a given month and year. We then define drought as equal to 1 if SPI is
below -1 and 0 otherwise for a given month in each municipality. This definition is similar to
the one employed by Kaur (2013), Rocha and Soares (2015) and Shah and Steinberg (2017).
Having defined a drought month, our final measure of exposure to droughts is computed as the
number of months that each municipality faced a drought shock over the 12 months prior to
PNAD survey month. Figure 2 reports the time series for the drought variable, indicating the
percentage of municipalities with SPI below -1. One can see that there are periods with no
municipality facing a drought, and others with drought heating 90 percent of the municipalities.
This shows how the intensity of negative shocks varies geographically within a given month.
    Our second measure of drought shock is the longest consecutive dry days (CDD). Consecu-
tive dry days is the greatest number of consecutive days for the period over the twelve months
prior the survey, with daily precipitation amount below 1 mm. Figure 3 portrays the CDD in
1979 and 2016, respectively, for entire Northeastern Brazil. It shows that drought shocks at
a point in time are not homogenous throughout the Northeastern region. Some areas may be
suffering harsh rainfall conditions, spending more than three hundred days without rain, while
others may not be.

3.3     Empirical strategy
To identify the impacts of weather shocks on rural household labor allocation, we estimate the
following model:

                           Hijt = α + β1 Djt + β2 Xijt + ωTjt + θj + ϕt + ξijt                               (11)
   where Hijt is the labor outcome of interest for individual i, in municipality j and year t.
The labor outcomes in this study are the number of jobs, ratio of farm work in the total worked
and share of secondary job in the total of hours worked. We also consider these outcomes at
the family level, since literature suggests that time allocation is a household decision-making
    9
      Considering the small grid used, almost all municipalities (1,485 out of 1,794) have had points inside their
limits. For those that have had not, we use the four closest points on the grid to the center of the municipality,
using the linear distances from the municipality’s centroid to each node as weights.
   10
      See Mckee et al. (1993) for more details.


                                                        6
process rather than an individual one.11 In particular, we consider a dummy indicating whether
at least one household member is mainly employed in the off-farm market. Djt is a drought
shock measure (either the longest consecutive dry days in the 12 months prior to survey or
the number of drought months in the same period) in year t and municipality j, which is our
regressor of interest. We also control for householder’s characteristics, just as gender, age, race
and family size, by including the vector Xijt . Tjt is the average temperature in the municipality
j, on year t.12
    The model includes municipality fixed effects (θj ), which absorb any unobservable time
invariant factors, including initial conditions and persistent municipality characteristics such
as geography. Year fixed effects (ϕt ) capture aggregate shocks impacting all Northeast region,
including aggregated demand shocks, and regional policies and programs. Standard errors
are clustered at the municipality level to account for serial correlation (Bertrand et al., 2004;
Wooldridge, 2003).13
    The parameter of interest β1 measures the relationship between rainfall shocks and labor
market outcomes. The identifying assumption underlying this statistical approach is that, con-
ditional on municipality and year fixed effects, there are not determinants omitted of labor mar-
ket outcomes correlated with the incidence of weather shocks. This seems plausible, given that
the occurrence of extreme weather event at a given moment in time and place is unpredictable.
Thus, our approach exploits arguably random fluctuations in rainfall from municipality-specific
deviations in long-term rainfall after controlling for all seasonal factors and common shocks to
all municipalities.
    Although much of the variation in rainfall shocks over time within municipalities appears
to be idiosyncratic, an identification issue could arise when following this specification. In
particular, one may be concerned whether rural families respond migrating away from areas
affected by extreme droughts. This would be problematic only if families that migrate in
response to an extreme rainfall shock are different to families who do not. We address this
issue in two way. First, we estimate the main regressions considering only families that live for
at least five years in the current municipality. If regression results are similar to the ones derived
from the baseline, we would be more confident that selective migration is unlikely to be a major
issue. Second, we explore whether rainfall shocks are associated with predetermined individual
or household characteristics. If different families are more likely to respond to rainfall shocks
by migrating, one would expect to see significant effects of rainfall shocks on predetermined
characteristics. As we shown below, there is very little evidence that this is the case. Perhaps,
this is not very surprisingly, given we are exploiting temporary deviations in rainfall from the
historical norm. Migration is likely to be a more salient issue in the case of prolonged and
permanent changes in rainfall.
  11
      See, for example,Démurger et al. (2010), Ellis (2000), Janvry and Sadoulet (2001), Jonasson and Helfand
(2010), Mishra and Goodwin (1997), and Vergara et al. (2004).
   12
      We also control for bins of temperature in order to capture its nonlinear impacts. The results were the
same, with temperature presenting no statistical significance.
   13
      We also compute standard errors clustered at micro and macro-region level. Statistical significance is the
same.




                                                       7
4        Results
4.1      Effects of Drought Shocks on Rural Labor Allocation
We begin by examining the effects of drought shocks on income. Table 2 presents the results
from estimating equation (11) for the primary and secondary income. All regressions results
are based on a specification that adjust for municipality fixed effects, year fixed effects, a set
of demographic characteristics of the household head. Sample sizes and R-squared’s of the
regressions are shown at the bottom of the table.
    Column (1) explores the effects of extreme negative rainfall shocks on income derived from
the main job. The results indicate that negative rainfall shocks are significantly associated
with lower income derived from the main job, especially for those engaged with farm activities
(column 2). This is what one would expect given that a considerable fraction of population in
this region depends on farming and related agricultural activities for living. The fact that we
observe significant reductions in income associated to extreme droughts is reassuring given that
data on income are generally measured with substantial error in household surveys.
    Column (3) investigates the effects on income derived from secondary jobs. The point
estimate of the coefficient of interest is 0.0251 (standard error =0.0119), which statistically
different from zero at the 5 percent level of significance. This estimate suggests that drought
shocks are associated with higher income from secondary jobs. An increase of one drought per
year implies an increase of 5.45 percent in the dependent variable. We interpret this result as
preliminary evidence that rural families respond to negative rainfall shocks by increasing the
supply of secondary jobs. In particular, this evidence is consistent with a mitigation response
to reduced income from cash crops due to water scarcity.
    Having established that drought shocks affect rural household income, we turn to the anal-
ysis of labor supply responses. We present estimates of equation (11) for a series of labor
outcomes in Table 3.14 Panel A presents the results from using drought shocks based on Stan-
dardized Precipitation Index (SPI) as our key independent variable. Instead, Panel B considers
the longest consecutive dry days (CDD) as the rainfall shock measure. The first three columns
show results for outcomes measures for the head of household, while the last three consider labor
allocation outcomes measures at household level, which assume that labor allocation is a col-
lective decision rather than an individual one. We present results with sampling weights, which
ensure that our final follow-up database is representative of the entire initial study population,
although the results are very similar when ignoring sampling weights.
    Panel A, column (1) shows that there is a positive and statistically significant relationship
between drought and the number of jobs. One more drought shock per year increases by 5.63
percent the likelihood of being employed in more than one work. Column (2) looks at the
share of farm job as main source of income in the total hours worked. The results suggest that
there is a statistically significant negative effect of drought on the supply of farm work. The
coefficient on ratio of agricultural activities in the total work is -0.567. Relative to the mean of
69, this suggests an small decrease of 0.82 percent. But note that the estimate in column (3)
implies an effect that is an increase of 6.6 percent in the share of hours worked in secondary
job, relative to mean of 4.7. These results may indicate that they offer more hours to off-farm
activities not trough a large decrease of farm labor supply but increasing the total amount of
    14
    We also estimate regressions with the Terrestrial Air Temperature and Terrestrial Precipitation: 1900-2010
Gridded Monthly Time Series data base. The results are similar to ones find with ERA-Interim data base.
Results available upon request, not shown here due to space limitation.



                                                      8
worked hours. This way they can compensate the loss of farm income, and mitigate the shock.
    Columns (4) to (6) explore the effects of drought shocks on the outcomes measures at the
family level. In columns (4) and (5), the results are qualitatively similar to the ones observed
at the head of household level. In column (6) we find a statistically insignificant relationship
between drought shocks and the likelihood of at least one family member chooses off-farm
as main occupation. In addition, the estimated coefficient are very small in magnitude. For
instance, the estimated coefficient of interest is -0.0004, which means that, one more drought
month implies an effect that is 0,10% of the average and 0,0005% of the standard deviation in our
dependent variable. In Panel B, we present analogous results using CDD as the independent
variable. The qualitative patterns are similar - indicating in this case that droughts shocks
are associated with rural households labor allocation, although the quantitative patterns are
smaller. In light of the results from Table 3, we concentrate from now on on the sum of drought
months based on SPI as our preferred independent variable.
    To assess potential heterogeneities of the effects of negative rainfall shocks we stratify the
sample according to level of municipality GDP per capita. Exploring GDP is of special interest
since it is a reasonable proxy for local development. It seems to reasonable to expect smaller
impacts of extreme droughts on income and thus on time labor allocation in more developed
areas where there are often higher access to credit markets, more formal social safety net
programs, and where the capacity of adaptation is higher. Figure 4 portrays the coefficients,
90 and 95 percent confidence intervals from estimating equation (11) for both municipalities
with low and high GDP per capita separately. If the municipality is characterized by GDP per
capita at the 50th percentile of the Northeast GDP distribution it is considered a low GDP
municipality, otherwise it is a high GDP one.
    In Panel A, we regress labor outcomes of the head of household on drought shocks. One
can see how the effect of negative rainfall shocks changes with income per capita. Lower
income seems to be associated with higher impacts of rainfall variation. When we compare the
likelihood of being employed in more than one work, one can observe a positive significant effect
of drought shocks in municipalities with low GDP per capita and a statistically insignificant
effect in those with high GDP. Individuals faced a drought shock in the previous year are 0.67
percentage point more likely to report having more than one job in the survey month, this is an
increase of 5.58 percent from a mean of 0.12. While one more drought shock is not statistically
significant to impact the share of farm work in high GDP municipalities, for those whom live
with low income the point estimate of the coefficient of interest is -0.74 (standard error =0.29),
which statistically different from zero at the 5 percent level of significance. The effect is larger
in the share of secondary employment, increasing 7.5 per cent relative to a mean of 4.82. Panel
B plots our baseline model for dependent variables at the family level. The qualitative and
quantitative patterns are similar to ones find in Panel A. The results show that individuals with
lower income are more vulnerable to weather shocks, and confirm the importance of adjustments
in labor allocation to protect income due to decreasing in agricultural productivity.
    The Northeastern presents vast variation in precipitation within year and between munici-
palities. One might expect there to be significant heterogeneity according to prevailing rainfall
patterns. So we asses if drought shocks will have the same impacts on labor outcomes where
rainfall levels are bellow 50th percentile of historical average (low rainfall patterns) as they
would in areas that are above the median (high rainfall patterns). In Table 4, we regress labor
outcomes on weather shock, as well as their interaction with a dummy indicating whether the
municipality is low or high rainfall pattern. The interaction term indicates whether the effect of
the drought shock depends on more general climate conditions. This is similar to the strategy


                                                 9
employed in Blakeslee and Fishman (2017). The drought variable shows similar coefficients to
those found before, and the drought shock interaction term are small and not significant. Thus,
there is no evidence that the effect of negative rainfall shocks is mitigated by higher median
rainfall levels.

4.2    Further Results and Robustness Checks
We assess the robustness of our estimates to alternative specifications and sample selection
criteria. As mentioned before, we expect that much of the variation in rainfall shocks over
time within municipalities is idiosyncratic, but an identification issue could arise whether rural
families respond to rainfall shocks by migrating away from areas affected by extreme droughts.
We assess on this issue in two way. First, in Appendix Table A1 we replicate the baseline
specification using only the rural households that live for at least five years in the current
municipality. As can be seen from the table, the results are very similar to the baseline. We
obtain the same order of magnitude for all estimated coefficients, as well as for standard errors.
The only exception is share of hours spent in agricultural main job in the total, where the
estimated coefficients of interest are not significant. However, this result may be due to low
statistical power given the reduced sample size. Point estimates are in fact very similar to the
baselines and we cannot reject the null hypothesis that both estimates are the same.
     Second, as discussed above, if different families are more likely to respond to rainfall shocks
by migrating, one would expect to see significant effects of rainfall shocks on predetermined
characteristics. To explore this issue, Table A2 estimates whether rainfall shocks are associated
with any individual or household characteristics for all economically active population in our
sample. All regressions results are based on a specification that adjust for municipality fixed
effects, year fixed effects and are clustered at the municipality level. Columns (1) to (3) assess
estimates of the effect of rainfall negative shocks on the head of household characteristics such as
age, gender and education. Column (4) shows estimates for family size as dependent variable.
Out of four estimated coefficients of interest, none is statistically significant. Thus, there is
little evidence that our baseline results are in fact driven by migration.
     Rainfall variation across space and time should generate corresponding variation in agricul-
tural output and thus should mainly have a bigger effect in rural areas rather than urban. To
assess if this occur in Northeastern Brazil, we examine the effect of drought shocks on labor
outcomes of urban households. Table A3 presents the estimates for this subsample. As can
be seen from the table, there is no significant effect of negative rainfall shocks on urban labor
outcomes; most effects are concentrated in rural areas.


5     Conclusion
It is already well documented in the literature the acute vulnerability of developing countries
to extreme weather events. Water scarcity is a major problem for a large fraction of the rural
population in these countries. Climate change is likely to make it an even more recurrent phe-
nomenon in the coming decades. Considering the economic situation of most rural households
in developing countries, adaptation will play a limited role in mitigating the impacts of climate
change on agricultural production. Thus, this paper investigates the effects of drought shocks
on rural household non-agricultural labor supply.
    Reducing the variability of agricultural income streams is of paramount importance to im-
prove welfare of rural dwellers. Given the constraints faced in the insurance and credit markets

                                                10
by most rural families in developing countries, labor reallocation can be one of the main chan-
nels by which poor rural households mitigate negative rainfall shocks. Engaging in off-farm
labor market might help households to smooth income.
    The strategy outlined here presents evidence of a relationship between negative rainfall
events and labor time reallocation. We find that drought shocks are significantly associated
with lower income derived from the main job. This is especially true when we consider income
derived from farm activities. Moreover, higher incidence of drought shocks are significantly
associated with increased income from secondary jobs. Our results show that droughts affect
negatively hours spent on farm work, whereas lead to increased supply of non-agricultural
job. One can also observe stronger effects among families residing in municipalities with lower
per capita income. Taken together, our findings suggest that families adjust labor supply to
mitigate the income effects of water scarcity.


References
Aziz Nacib Ab’Sáber. Sertões e sertanejos: uma geografia humana sofrida. Estudos Avançados,
  13(36):5–59, 1999.

Alan I. Barreca. Climate change, humidity, and mortality in the United States. Journal of
  Environmental Economics and Management, 63(1):19–34, 2012.

Salvador Barrios, Ouattara Bazoumana, and Eric Strobl. The impact of climatic change on
  agricultural production: Is it different for Africa? Food Policy, 33(4):287–298, 2008.

Marianne Bertrand, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. How Much Should We Trust
 Differences-in-Differences Estimates ? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1):249–275,
 2004.

David S Blakeslee and Ram Fishman. Weather Shocks , Agriculture , and Crime : Evidence
  from India. 2017.

José Almir Cirilo. Polı́ticas públicas de recursos hı́dricos para o semi-árido. Estudos Avançados,
  22(63):61–82, 2008.

Lucinda Coates, Katharine Haynes, James O’Brien, John McAneney, and Felipe Dimer De
  Oliveira. Exploring 167 years of vulnerability: An examination of extreme heat events in
  Australia 1844-2010. Environmental Science and Policy, 42:33–44, 2014.

Sylvie Démurger, Martin Fournier, and Weiyong Yang. Rural households ’ decisions towards
  income diversi fi cation : Evidence from a township in northern China. China Economic
  Review, 21:S32–S44, 2010.

Olivier Deschênes and Michael Greenstone. The economic impacts of climate change: Evidence
  from agricultural output and random fuctuations in weather. American Economic Review,
  97(1):354–385, 2007.

Frank Ellis. The Determinants of Rural Livelihood Diversification in Developing Countries.
  Journal of Agricultural Economics, 51(2):289–302, 2000.

Insa/MCTI. População do Semiárido brasileiro ultrapassa 23,5 milhões de habitantes, 2014.

                                                 11
IPCC. Intergovernamental Panel on Climate Change. Climate Change. 2013.
Alain D E Janvry and Elisabeth Sadoulet. Income Strategies Among Rural Households in
  Mexico : The Role of Off-farm Activities. World Development, 29(3):467–480, 2001.
Seema Jayachandran. Selling Labor Low: Wage Responses to Productivity Shocks in Developing
  Countries. Journal of Political Economy, 114(3):538–575, 2006.
Katrina Jessoe, Dale T. Manning, and J. Edward Taylor. Climate Change and Labour Alloca-
 tion in Rural Mexico: Evidence from Annual Fluctuations in Weather. Economic Journal,
 (2014):1–32, 2017.
Erik Jonasson and Steven Helfand. How Important are Locational Characteristics for Rural
  Non-agricultural Employment ? Lessons from Brazil. World Development, 38(5):727–741,
  2010.
Supreet Kaur. Nominal wage rigidity in village labor markets. 2013.
José Marengo. Mudanças climáticas e eventos extremos no Brasil. Technical report, Fundação
  Brasileira para o Desenvolvimento Sustentável, 2009.
Thomas B Mckee, Nolan J Doesken, and John Kleist. The relationship of drought frequency and
 duration to time scales. AMS 8th Conference on Applied Climatology, (January):179–184,
 1993.
Ashok K Mishra and Barry K Goodwin. Farm Income Variability and the Supply of Off-Farm
  Labor. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 79(August):880–887, 1997.
V Mueller, C Gray, and K Kosec. Heat stress increases long-term human migration in rural
  Pakistan. Nature Climate Change, 4:182–185, 2014.
Rudi Rocha and Rodrigo R Soares. Water scarcity and birth outcomes in the Brazilian semiarid
 . Journal of Development Economics, 112:72–91, 2015.
Elaina Rose. Ex ante and ex post labor supply response to risk in a low-income area. 64:
  371–388, 2001.
Manisha Shah and Bryce Millett Steinberg. Drought of Opportunities: Contemporaneous and
 Long-Term Impacts of Rainfall Shocks on Human Capital. Journal of Political Economy, 125
 (2):527–561, 2017.
Oscar Vergara, Keith Coble, George F Patrick, Thomas O Knight, and Alan Baquet. Farm
  Income Variability and the Supply of Off- Farm Labor by Limited-Resource Farmers Fac-
  ulty Publications : Agricultural Economics Farm Income Variability and the Supply of Off-
  Farm Labor by Limited-Resource Farmers. Journal of Agricultural and Apllied Economics,
  (August):467–479, 2004.
Jeffrey M Wooldridge. Cluster-Sample Methods in Applied Econometrics. The American Eco-
  nomic Review, 93(2):133–138, 2003.
Kerstin K. Zander, Wouter J. W. Botzen, Elspeth Oppermann, Tord Kjellstrom, and Stephen T.
  Garnett. Heat stress causes substantial labour productivity loss in Australia. Nature Climate
  Change, 5(May):1–6, 2015.

                                              12
             Figure 1: Standardized Precipitation Index (SPI) yearly average




                                                                 4
                       Strandardized Precipitation Index (SPI)
                                                                 2
                                                                 0
                                                                 −2




                                                                      1980m1     1990m1        2000m1   2010m1   2016m1


Notes. Municipality averages. Author’s calculation based on data from ERA-Interim, 1979-2016.




                                                                         Figure 2: Drought (SPI) time series
                                                                 .8
                       % of Municipalities with SPI below −1
                                                                 .6
                                                                 .4
                                                                 .2
                                                                 0




                                                                      1980m1     1990m1        2000m1   2010m1   2016m1


Notes. Author’s calculation based on data from ERA-Interim, 1979-2016.




                                                                                          13
                Figure 3: Consecutive Dry Days, Northeastern Brazil - 1979 and 2016




 Consecutive Dry Days                                 Consecutive Dry Days
    (200,365]                                           (200,365]
    (100,200]                                           (100,200]
    (50,100]                                            (50,100]
    [0,50]                                              [0,50]



                        (a) 1979                                             (b) 2016

Notes. Author’s calculation based on the ERA-Interim database.




                                                14
     Figure 4: Effects of drought shocks on labor outcomes by GDP per capita level

                                                           Number of Jobs                         Share of Farm Employment




                               Drought (SPI)




                                                  0           .005         .01        .015 −1.5      −1        −.5        0   .5

                                                 Share of Secondary Employment




                               Drought (SPI)




                                                 0            .2          .4          .6

                                                                     Low GDP            High GDP



                                                                   (a) Individual level


                                                      Share of Farm Employment                Share of Secondary Employment




                               Drought (SPI)




                                               −1.5      −1         −.5        0      .5      0           .2         .4       .6

                                                        Off−farm Employment




                               Drought (SPI)




                                               −.01     −.005        0         .005     .01

                                                                     Low GDP            High GDP



                                                                     (b) Family level

Notes. This is an event-study created by regressing labor outcomes on drought shocks and on a set of
controls. The controls include municipality and year fixed effects, individual and household characteristics
such as gender, age, race and family size. Temperature control include the average temperature at
municipality level. Robust standard errors (reported in brackets) are clustered at the municipality level.




                                                                                   15
                        Table 1: Summary statistics
                                              Mean        Std.    Min       Max         N
                                                        deviation

       Demographic characteristics:
       Gender                                  0.52        0.5         0      1     145,425
       Age                                     33.9       18.37       10     70     145,425
       Education years                         4.81       3.62        1      17     145,425
       Number of household members             4.46       2.08         1     17     145,425

       Employment characteristics:
       More than one job                      0.07        0.25        0      1       92,006
       Farm work as main                       0.73        0.44       0      1       92,006
       Share of farm job                      70.43       44.38       0     100      92,006
       Share of secondary job                  2.82         11        0    97.82     92,006
       Off-farm (likelihood)                   0.42        0.49       0      1       92,006
       Agriculture wage job                   0.22        0.41        0      1       65,790
       Agriculture self-employed               0.28        0.45       0      1       65,790
       Agriculture employer                   0.02        0.13        0      1       65,790
       Agriculture unpaid                     0.25        0.43        0      1       65,790
       Agriculture own consumption             0.24        0.42       0      1       65,790
       Off-farm wage job                       0.63        0.48       0      1       26,216
       Off-farm self-employed                  0.27        0.44       0      1       26,216
       Off-farm employer                       0.01        0.12       0      1       26,216
       Off-farm unpaid                         0.05        0.23       0      1       26,216
      Notes. This table shows summary statistics from the PNAD.




Table 2: Effect of droughts on rural household income


                                Main Income           Main Income Agr.        Secondary Income
                                   (log)                    (log)                   (log)

                                      (1)                   (2)                       (3)


  Drought (SPI)                    -0.0141                 -0.0193                   0.0251
                                  [0.0081]*              [0.0097]**                [0.0119]**

  Mean of dep. variable              5.4                    5.17                     0.46
  Basic controls                     Yes                    Yes                      Yes
  Temperature control                Yes                    Yes                      Yes
  Year FE                            Yes                    Yes                      Yes
  Municipality FE                    Yes                    Yes                      Yes

  N                                 39720                  21937                     39720
  R-sq                              0.303                  0.304                     0.111
Notes. All outcomes are measured in log. Each coefficient is from a different regression. All regres-
sions control for municipality and year fixed effects. We exclude observations in the top percentile
of total income. Basic controls include gender, age, race and family size. Temperature control in-
cludes the average temperature at municipality level. The number of observations differs in column
(2) because it only considers households with agricultural job as main source of income. Robust
standard errors (reported in brackets) are clustered at the municipality level. Significance: * p <
0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                16
             Table 3: Effect of droughts on rural household labor outcomes

                            Number         Share of        Share of    Share of               Share of  Off-farm
                            of Jobs         farm          secondary household farm           household employment
                                         employement     employment  employment              secondary
                                                                                            employment

                               (1)            (2)             (3)               (4)              (5)             (6)


   Panel A
   Drought (SPI)             0.0062         -0.5673          0.284           -0.4492           0.2152         -0.0004
                            [0.0031]*     [0.2570]**      [0.1248]**        [0.2709]*        [0.0990]**       [0.0029]

   Panel B
   CDD                       0.0003        -0.0267            0.01           -0.0291            0.009          0.0002
                            [0.0001]*      [0.0179]        [0.0057]*         [0.0184]         [0.0046]*       [0.0002]

   Mean of dep. var.          0.11           69.5            4.37              65.9              3.47           0.37
   Basic controls             Yes            Yes             Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes
   Temperature control        Yes            Yes             Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes
   Municipality FE            Yes            Yes             Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes
   Year FE                    Yes            Yes             Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes

   N                         40006          40006           40006             42952             42952           47295
   R-sq                      0.129          0.177           0.121             0.182             0.122           0.116
 Notes. Each coefficient is from a different regression. Each panel corresponds to a different independent variable. All
 regressions control for municipality and year fixed effects. Each dependent variable in columns (2) to (5) refers to the
 share of the mentioned work in the total of hours worked. Basic controls include gender, age, race and family size. Tem-
 perature control includes the average temperature at municipality level. Robust standard errors (reported in brackets)
 are clustered at the municipality level. Significance: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




Table 4: Effect of droughts on rural household labor outcomes by rainfall level

                             Number         Share of         Share of    Share of               Share of       Off-farm
                             of Jobs         farm           secondary household farm           household      employment
                                          employement      employment  employment              secondary
                                                                                              employment

                                (1)            (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)             (6)


 Drought (SPI)                0.0075          -0.546          0.3448           -0.5214           0.2698         -0.0004
                            [0.0038]**      [0.3033]*       [0.1536]**         [0.3263]        [0.1276]**       [0.0033]

 Drought × low rainfall        -0.003        -0.0465         -0.1331            0.1569          -0.1185         -0.0001
                              [0.0031]       [0.2889]        [0.1353]          [0.3074]         [0.1025]        [0.0031]

 Mean of dep. var.              0.11           69.5            4.37              65.9             3.47            0.37
 Basic controls                 Yes            Yes             Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes
 Temperature control            Yes            Yes             Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes
 Year FE                        Yes            Yes             Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes
 Municipality FE                Yes            Yes             Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes

 N                             40006          40006           40006             42952             42952          47295
 R-sq                          0.129          0.177           0.121             0.182             0.122          0.116
Notes. Each coefficient is from a different regression. All regressions control for municipality and year fixed effects. Each
dependent variable in columns (2) to (5) refers to the share of the mentioned work in the total of hours worked. Basic
controls include gender, age, race and family size. Temperature control includes the average temperature at municipality
level. Robust standard errors (reported in brackets) are clustered at the municipality level. Significance: * p < 0.10, ** p
< 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                            17
A        Appendix

Table A.1: Effect of droughts on labor outcomes for rural household living at least five
years in currently municipality

                              Number           Share of           Share of           Share of             Share of         Off-farm
                              of Jobs           farm             secondary        household farm         household        employment
                                             employement        employment         employment            secondary
                                                                                                        employment

                                 (1)              (2)                (3)                 (4)                 (5)               (6)


  Drought (SPI)                0.0068           -0.2467            0.2926              -0.294              0.2254           -0.0029
                             [0.0031]**         [0.3763]         [0.1189]**           [0.4557]           [0.0921]**         [0.0046]

  Mean of dep. var.             0.11              65.4              4.55                61.67               3.62              0.41
  Basic controls                Yes               Yes               Yes                  Yes                Yes               Yes
  Temperature control           Yes               Yes               Yes                  Yes                Yes               Yes
  Municipality FE               Yes               Yes               Yes                  Yes                Yes               Yes
  Year FE                       Yes               Yes               Yes                  Yes                Yes               Yes

  N                             11048            11048              11048              12012               12012              13166
  R-sq                          0.146            0.248              0.136              0.251               0.137              0.158
Notes. Each coefficient is from a different regression. All regressions control for municipality and year fixed effects. Each dependent
variable in columns (2) to (5) refers to the share of the mentioned work in the total of hours worked. Basic controls include gender, age,
race and family size. Temperature control includes the average temperature at municipality level. Robust standard errors (reported in
brackets) are clustered at the municipality level. Significance: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                   Table A.2: Effect of droughts on predetermined characteristics

                                                    Age               Gender             Education             Family
                                                                                           Years                Size

                                                     (1)                (2)                    (3)                 (4)


                 Drought (SPI)                    -0.0227             -0.0024             -0.0032              -0.0164
                                                  [0.0488]            [0.0029]            [0.0155]             [0.0135]

                 Temperature control                 Yes                Yes                    Yes                 Yes
                 Municipality FE                     Yes                Yes                    Yes                 Yes
                 Year FE                             Yes                Yes                    Yes                 Yes

                 N                                 92006               92006               92006                92006
                 R-sq                              0.017               0.008               0.084                0.061
            Notes. Each coefficient is from a different regression. All regressions control for municipality and year fixed
            effects. Temperature control includes the average temperature at municipality level. Robust standard errors
            (reported in brackets) are clustered at the municipality level. Significance: * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p <
            0.01.




                                                                  18
               Table A.3: Effect of drought shocks on urban households

                          Number       Share of         Share of    Share of               Share of       Off-farm
                          of Jobs       farm           secondary household farm           household      employment
                                     employement      employment  employment              secondary
                                                                                         employment

                             (1)           (2)             (3)               (4)              (5)             (6)


 Drought (SPI)             0.001         -0.043          0.0318           -0.0258            0.0242         0.0016
                          [0.0009]      [0.1839]        [0.0372]          [0.1675]          [0.0285]       [0.0015]

 Mean of dep. var.          0.06          8.29            2.31              6.92              2.06           0.81
 Basic controls             Yes           Yes             Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes
 Temperature control        Yes           Yes             Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes
 Municipality FE            Yes           Yes             Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes
 Year FE                    Yes           Yes             Yes               Yes               Yes            Yes

 N                        123292         123292          123292           145416            145416          170024
 R-sq                      0.023          0.149           0.02             0.123             0.02            0.122
Notes. Each coefficient is from a different regression. All regressions control for municipality and year fixed effects.
Each dependent variable in columns (2) to (5) refers to the share of the mentioned work in the total of hours worked.
Basic controls include gender, age, race and family size. Temperature control includes the average temperature at mu-
nicipality level. Robust standard errors (reported in brackets) are clustered at the municipality level. Significance: *
p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                          19
