               Labor Market Equilibrium Effects of Cash Transfers
                     Evidence from a Structural Model and a Randomized Experiment


                                            M. Christian Lehmann‡


                                                  July 16, 2014




                              ANPEC: Área 13 - Economia do Trabalho


Abstract: Critics argue that cash transfers (e.g. Bolsa Familia) to poor households would discourage work
incentives. The few existing studies on the subject are far from conclusive: some do find a negative, others a
positive, and again others no effect of cash transfers on labor supply. Important questions remain unanswered:
In which context have cash transfers which effect on labor supply? What is the relationship between the size of
the transfer and labor supply? I address these questions using a structural model and data from a large cash
transfer program in Mexico. Perhaps surprisingly, I find that large cash transfers have a stimulating effect on
labor supply, while small transfers provide disincentives to work.
Keywords: Poverty, Cash Transfers, Labor Supply

Resumo: Crı́ticos dizem que programas de transferência de renda (como Bolsa Famı́lia por exemplo) diminuem
os incentivos dos beneficiários de trabalhar. Os poucos estudos existentes sobre este tema não são conclusivos:
alguns estudos encontram um efeito negativo, outros um efeito positivo, e outros nenhum efeito das trans-
ferências sobre a oferta de trabalho. Questões importantes permanecem sem resposta: em que contexto as
transferências tem qual efeito sobre a oferta de trabalho? O que é a relação entre o tamanho da transferência e
oferta de trabalho? Este artigo busca respostas a estes perguntas através de um modelo estrutural e dados de
um programa de transferência de renda no México. Talvez surpreendentemente, meus resultados sugerem que
transferências maiores estimulam oferta de trabalho, enquanto transferências pequenas geram desincentivos ao
trabalho.
Palavras-chave: Pobreza, transferência de renda, oferta de trabalho

JEL Classification: C81, D31, H23, I38, O12.




   ‡
       Assistant Professor, Department of Economics, University of Brasilia (christianlehmann0@gmail.com)


                                                         1
1       Introduction
Cash transfer programs, such as Bolsa Familia in Brazil or Progresa in Mexico, are increasingly
being implemented by governments to reduce poverty and inequality in rural areas.1 . Such pro-
grams, however, also have a significant number of critics. One of their main arguments is that
such transfers would discourage work incentives of recipients. The existing empirical evidence
is far from conclusive: some studies find no effects on labor supply (Parker and Skoufias, 2000;
Foguel and de Barros, 2008) while others find positive effects (Ribas and Soares, 2011; Alzúa
et al., 2012), while again others find negative effects (Tavarez, 2010).

The inconclusiveness of existing empirical findings calls for more theoretical work on the rela-
tionship between cash transfers and labor supply. In this paper we use data from a cash transfer
program in Mexico to estimate and a structural labor supply model. Comparative statics show
how not only the magnitude but even the direction of the labor supply effect depends on
parameters that describe the program and the environment in which it is implemented.


2       The Model
2.1     A simple two-household-two-commodities model
Consider a village populated by a poor household (henceforth P) and a rich household (hence-
forth R). Each household is composed of a male (henceforth Mi ) and a female member (hence-
forth Fi ) where i ∈ {P, R}. Mi has the opportunity to go out of village to work at exogenous
wage p̄M
       L . This captures the fact that the often only source of wage labor is seasonal work on
some large commercial farm or seasonal construction work in some large city.
Fi cannot work abroad because she has obligations inside the village such as for example child
and/or livestock care. Fi , however, can work in the household’s family business which oper-
ates inside the village (typically petty trade activities, i.e. buy commodities in a nearby town
and resell with a mark-up inside the village).2 We assume that a household cannot hire in
non-household members to work for the family business (because of, for example, prohibitively
high monitoring costs). Consequently, female labor supply is a function of the endogenous
household specific female shadow wage pF,i L . The latter is determined in the household internal
labor market equilibrium where demand for female labor must equal supply.
There are two commodities in the village economy: A staple (henceforth q) which may be pro-
duced by one or both of the two households using their respective land endowments and the
available supply of female labor.
The second good in the economy is a (composite) manufactured commodity (henceforth y) that
is produced outside the village and hence has to be imported by the two households (typically
items such as soap, cooking oil, recharge cards for cell phones, batteries, etc.).
    1
    see Lindert et al. (2006) and Fizbein and Schady (2009) for a comprehensive overview.
    2
    Of course, in reality such labor market segregation by gender will not always be perfect. For example, a
female without child care obligations may have the opportunity to do out-of-village wage labor work. Accom-
modating the possibility of a not perfectly segregated labor market would add complexity to the model that is
disproportional to the little additional amount of information that we gain from doing so. In this paper we’ll
be using data from rural Mexico to estimate and validate2 the model. Descriptive statistics (see table 1) show
that share of females in out-of village wage labor activities is only 10.5 percent. With a male share of roughly
50 percent the within-village service labor market is not as gender segregated as the out-of-village wage labor
market.
Each household is assumed to maximize a utility function

                            ui : f (qi ; yi ; li,M ; li,F ) → <        i ∈ {P, R}                  (1)

where u0i (·) > 0 and u00i (·) < 0 and where qi , yi , li,M , li,F being household i’s consumption of
the staple, imported (composite) manufactured commodity, male leisure, and female leisure,
respectively. For males, leisure is defined as li,M = L̄net                           net
                                                                 i,M − Li,M , where L̄i,M is the male’s
net time endowment and LM denoting his labor supply. Similarly, female leisure is defined as
li,F = L̄net
         i,F − Li,F .
Each household maximizes (1) subject to it’s full budget constraint:

                          Ii ≡ pqi × qi + py × yi + pF,i          M,i
                                                     L × li,F + p̄L × li,M                         (2)

where Ii is a household’s (full) income, pqi denotes household specific shadow price of the staple,
and py is the village price of the imported manufactured composite commodity. Maximizing
(1) with respect to (2) yields the demand function for the manufactured imported commodity

                                           yi : f (Ii ; py ; Ω) → <                                (3)

for the staple
                                           qi : f (Ii ; piq ; Ω) → <                               (4)
and leisure, so labor supply is given by

                                        Li,M : f (Ii ; p̄LM ; Ω) → <                               (5)

Equivalently, labor supply of the female is given by:

                                         Li,F : f (Ii ; pLF ; Ω) → <                               (6)

where Ω is a vector of preference parameters.

(i.) Transaction Costs
An important characteristic of the model is the presence of transactions costs in consumption
and production. Many items that form part of the consumption basket of villagers these days
are not produced by the village, but have to be imported from the next market (e.g. some
big town). Such items include soap, cooking oil, medicine, etc. Thus the effective price that a
villager pays for the imported composite manufactured commodity is

                                            py = p̄z + m̄y × ps                                    (7)

where p̄z is the (exogenous) price of one unit of y at the next market from which it is imported.
But then in order for this one unit to reach the village m̄y units of an ’import service’ with
price ps are required.



                                                       3
Also, if a household sells one unit of its staple production, mq units of export service are required
for the one unit of staple to get from the household’s plot to the market where it is sold.3 The
selling price is consequently psq = p̄q − mq × ps . Similarly, if a household wishes to buy one unit
of staple, mq units of import service are required. The purchase price of staple is consequently
ppq = p̄q + mq × ps .
If a household is selling, buying or stays self sufficient is determined by the household specific
shadow price for the staple. If the shadow price is lower (higher) than the selling (purchase)
price, then utility maximization requires the household to sell (buy) the staple. If the shadow
price falls in between the selling and purchase price, the household should stay self sufficient
(i.e. neither sell nor buy). The household shadow price is determined in the household internal
staple equilibrium
                                            qix + qip ≡ qi + qis                                  (8)
where qix is household i0 s staple production, qip and qis is the purchased and sold quantity re-
spectively, and qi is consumption.

(ii.) Service production
Above we described how both consumption of y as well as purchases and sales of q require some
amount of export/import ’service’ for these commodities to get from the village to the market
and/or vice versa. Technically, we assume that the household acts as a firm which ’produces’
this import/export ’service’ according to the production function s : f (LF,s,i , Ks,i , Θ) → <,
where LF,s,i denotes female labor, Ks,i is capital, and Θ a vector of technology parameters
where s0L (·) > 0 and s00L (·) < 0, as well as s0K (·) > 0 and s00K (·) < 0. We think of capital as
cash (e.g. money needed to by commodities in bulk in order to resell with a mark-up inside
the village.). We assume that capital is a share µ̄i of the household’s cash income:

                                      Ks,i = µ̄i (Li,M × p̄LM + qis + Ti )                                   (9)

Profit is thus given by

                            πs,i = ps × f (LF,s,i , Ks,i , Θ) − pLF × LF,s,i − Ks,i                         (10)

Profit maximizing labor demand for service production is arg maxLF,s,i πs,i :

                                       LD                F
                                        F,s,i : f (ps , pL , Ks , Θ) → <                                    (11)

(iii.) Agricultural Production
The staple production function maps female labor (LF,q,i ), a household’s land endowment (Āi )
   3
    The assumption here is that there is no farm gate selling. That farmgate selling is rather the exception that
the rule has stated in (?;(?);(?)). Furthermore, we assume that there are no sunk costs that would arise from
a household transporting staple to the market without being able to sell it (and hence would have to transport
it back to the village after the market day)




                                                       4
and a vector of agricultural technology parameters (Ξ) onto the output space qix :

                                           qix : f (LF,q,i , Āi , Ξ) → <                    (12)

We assume land to be fixed endowment, and there is no land land market. Profit maximizing
labor demand for agricultural labor is arg maxLF,q,i πi,q = piq × qix − pLF × LF,q,i :

                                        LD           i    L
                                         F,q,i : f (pq , pF , K̄i , Ξ) → <                   (13)

(iv.) Household Internal Labor Market Equilibrium
The female shadow wage pFL is then determined in the household internal labor market equilib-
rium where demand for female labor must equal supply

                                                LD        D
                                                 F,s,i + LF,q,i ≡ Li,F                       (14)

(v.) Poverty
In our model poverty manifests itself in two ways. Firstly, R possesses a larger land endowment
than P
                                           ĀP < ĀR .                                      (15)
Secondly, we assume that P has less effective labor endowment. The negative relationship
between poverty and labor productivity is well documented in the literature (?, ?, ?). For
example, malnourished individual’s concentration and capacity to do heavy physical work is
limited. Furthermore, limited access to health care (e.g. medicine) translates into more sick
days, hence less potential days of labor supply (?, ?, ?).
In our model we’ll assume that the labor endowment of a household member is discounted by
the degree of household poverty ψi , such that the net labor endowment is L̄/(1 + ψi ), where ψi
is zero if i ∈ R and strictly positive otherwise. For example if L̄ =365 days and ψP,F = 1/3,
then this would imply a net labor endowment of the rich female of 365 days while that of
the poor female would only be 275 days. Lastly, the government implements a redistributive
transfer to aid the poor household. That is, P receives monetary support (a “cash transfer’)
by the government while R does not.4

(vi.) Household Income
Consequently, household full income is defined as

                      Ii = L̄/(1 + ψ̄i,F ) × pLi,F + L̄/(1 + ψ̄i,M ) × p̄LM + πq + πs + Ti   (16)

The first and second term denote the value of M’s and F’s net labor endowment. The third
and fourth term denote profits made from staple and service production. The last term denotes
a cash transfer by the government, whereby TR = 0 and TP > 0.

(vii.) Equilibrium of the village economy
  4
      We ignore how the transfer is financed.


                                                          5
In equilibrium, the village’s staple market is characterized by the identity

                                           qP + qR + qex ≡ qRx + qPx                               (17)

where the first two terms on the left hand side correspond to the staple demanded by the
two households, respectively. The right hand side corresponds to staple production of the two
households. Equation (17) determines the equilibrium trade balance qex . The village exports
staple if qex > 0 and imports staple if qex < 0.

Secondly, in equilibrium the service market must clear

                          (yP + yR )m̄y + (qPp + qRp )mpq + (qPs + qRs )msq ≡ sP + sR              (18)

where the right hand side is the service supplied by P and R. The left hand side represents the
demand for service. The first term on the left hand side is the service demand for importing
the manufactured commodity, and the second (third) term being the service demand to import
(export) staple. Equation (18) determines the equilibrium price of the service ps .

2.2       Model Solution
The model can be written as an n × n system of (non-linear) equations. The world market
price of the imported manufactured good p̄z is the numeraire of the system. The non-convexity
exhibited by the ’switching’ staple shadow price makes it that there is no closed form solution.
We thus turn to a numerical approach to obtain a solution to the model. This requires functional
form assumptions for (a) the utility function and the production function of (b) the service and
(c) the staple. In the following we’ll therefore assume a Stone-Geary utility function of the
form
                                                         L̄F                         L̄M
                                                                                                
 ui = ᾱi log(qi − q̄i )+ β̄i log(yi − ȳi )+γ̄F log             − Li,F +γ̄M log             − Li,M (19)
                                                       1 + ψ̄i,F                   1 + ψ̄i,M

where q̄i and ȳi are subsistence thresholds. For the service we assume a simple constant returns
to scale production function of the form

                                             Si = σ̄i × Lη̄F,s,i
                                                            i     1−η̄i
                                                                 Ks,i                              (20)

where σ̄i is a scale parameter. We further assume that staple production is Leontief:

                                             qix = inf{Ā/āi , Li /b̄i }                          (21)

where āi and b̄i are the Leontief input share parameters. Since the land distribution is exoge-
nous in this model, this functional form assumption implies that the labor demand for staple
production is fix.5
  5
      In the appendix we present results for alternative functional form specifications


                                                          6
3       Parameter estimation and within-sample fit
In order to solve the model numerically we need values for its parameters. The model parameters
are obtained from data collected on the control group of a randomized control trial (RCT)
conducted in Mexico, which we henceforth refer to simply as the Progresa experiment. The
next subsection briefly describes the Progresa experiment.6

3.1     The Progresa Experiment
In 1997, the Mexican government started the so called Progresa program with the aim of re-
ducing rural poverty and inequality (Schultz, 2004). The program provides monetary grants
to the lower tail of the village welfare distribution, i.e. the poorest households of a village. In
order to identify the latter, the Mexican government used a multidimensional poverty index.7
Progresa monetary grants are of substantial size, amounting to about 20 percent of average
household monetary income in rural Mexico.

For the purpose of impact evaluation and feasibility of program implementation, the program
was initially not implemented simultaneously in all villages. In 1997, the Mexican government
determined all eligible households. Then, a set of villages where the program ought to be im-
plemented first was chosen randomly. Households classified as ‘poor’ in these villages would
receive the first Progresa transfer payment in early 1998. The remaining villages would only be
incorporated into the program two years later. Households classified as ‘poor’ in these villages
would receive the first Progresa transfer only in early 2000. The latter, therefore, serve as a
control group for the years 1998 and 1999. In some 320 villages where the program would be
implemented first (henceforth referred to as ‘treatment villages’) and in another 186 villages
where the program would start two years later (henceforth referred to as ‘control villages’)
the Mexican government conducted a comprehensive baseline, and a three follow-up surveys
between and 1998 and 1999. These surveys are village censuses, i.e. data on all residents of
these 506 villages was collected. We thus have a panel of the entire village welfare cumulative
distribution function, consisting of program-eligible households at the lower tail and program-
ineligible households at the upper tail, in each of the 320 treatment and 186 control villages.

Prior to the start of the program these 506 villages have characteristics that would describe
many village economies across the globe. The average village size is 45 households, 95 percent
of which report agriculture to be their main source of livelihood. One year after the start of
the program, on average 60 percent of residents in treatment villages receive the government
    6
     Progresa stands for Progama de escolarisacion salud y alimentation which is Spanish for ’program for
schooling, health, and nutrition’. For more details on the Progresa program we refer the reader to Hoddinott
and Skoufias (2004)
   7
     see Skoufias et al. (2001) for a description of the method.


                                                     7
                    Table 1: Characteristics of the control group sample


                                                                     Eligible Households          Ineligible Households

                                                                            Mean                         Mean
                                                                          [Std.Dev.]                   [Std.Dev.]
Household and Community Characteristics
 Gini Index for agricultural land ownership                                                0.71
                                                                            [120.7]                      [124.9]
 Pre-program household poverty score                                         701.6                        882.5
                                                                            [120.7]                      [124.9]
 Monthly Food consumption (per capita, peso value)                           182.5                        198.4
                                                                            [163.6]                      [153.2]
 Monthly Food expenditure (per capita, peso value)                           137.3                        169.6
                                                                            [130.1]                      [145.4]
 Monthly non-purchased food consumption (per capita, peso value)             38.85                       27.86
                                                                            [591.9]                      [48.1]
 Monthly household disposable income (in peso)                               662.1                       795.3
                                                                            [362.6]                     [2129.8]
 Cultivated area (in hectare)                                                0.46                         0.75
                                                                            [2.77]                       [2.31]
 Hourly wage rate                                                             5.27                         6.97
                                                                            [36.14]                      [25.12]
 Livestock holding index                                                    -0.21                         0.06
                                                                            [2.41]                       [3.63]
 Household size                                                              5.44                         4.82
                                                                            [2.60]                       [2.53]
 Indigenous household head                                                   0.36                         0.17
                                                                            [0.48]                       [0.37]
 Education of head
 no                                                                          32.55                       26.35
 primary                                                                     62.03                       64.52
 secondary                                                                    4.92                        6.95
 tertiary                                                                     0.51                        2.19
N                                                                             6857                       1949
Notes: standard deviations are reported in parenthesis. Livestock index calculated using principal component analysis




                                                          8
transfer. Table 1 shows descriptive statistics of households classified eligible (i.e. ‘poor’) and
households classified ineligible (i.e. ‘non-poor’) by the government.8 The table suggests that
the program was effective in targeting the lower tail of the village welfare distribution, i.e. the
poorest households of a village. Program-eligible households have, on average lower food con-
sumption, income and education levels, as well as lower land and livestock holdings, compared
to program-ineligible households. These differences are all statistically significant.



3.2     Obtaining values for the model parameters
In this section, we estimate the parameters of the model exploiting the data available from the
control group of the Progresa experiment. The vector of parameters writes:

          Γ = {Āi , p̄z , p̄q , p̄LM , L̄i,F , L̄i,M , ψ̄i,F , ψ̄i,M , ᾱ, β̄, γ̄M , γ̄F , m̄pq , m̄sq , m̄y , η̄i , σ̄i , āi , b̄i }   (22)

that is land endowment (Āi ); the world world market price of the staple p̄q ; the out-of-
village wage p̄LM . The net yearly labor endowment of male and female respectively L̄i,F /(1 +
ψ̄i,F ), L̄i,M /(1 + ψ̄i,M ); the price of the imported composite manufactured commodity p̄z ; as well
as the preferences for staple (ᾱ), imported manufactured commodity (β̄), and male and female9
leisure (γ̄M and γ̄F ); the amount of service needed to import one unit of the imported manu-
factured commodity (m̄y ); the amount of service needed to import or export one unit of the
staple (m̄pq and m̄sq ), the labor intensity and scale parameters of the service production function
(η̄i and σ̄i ), as well as the Leontief share parameters b̄i and āi for agricultural production.

Values for a subset of Γ can be observed directly from the data available on the control group.
Denote C and T the set of households in the experimental data that live in control and treatment
villages, respectively. Also, let P denote the set of households in the experimental data that
are eligible for the Progresa transfer, and R those that are not. For the poor household of
our model, we can then obtain an estimate for some model parameter κP ∈ Γ by taking the
sample average of the observed value of this parameter across program eligible households in
the control group:                                  X exp
                                           −1
                                     P = ni∈{C∩P}
                                    κc                   κi                                 (23)
                                                                           i∈{C∩P}

where κexp
       i   denotes the observed value for household i in the experimental data. In an analog
manner, for the rich household of our model, we do obtain an estimate for some model parameter
κR ∈ Γ by taking the sample average across program ineligible households in the control group
   8
      We present descriptive statistics of the control group, one year after the start of the program. Ideally, we
would present characteristics of all sample households in both treatment and control villages prior to the start
of the program. Unfortunately, key variables such as food consumption and income plus value of consumed own
agricultural production are not available in the baseline survey.
    9
      Due to the assumption of a constant returns to scale utility function, we have that γ̄F = 1 − ᾱ − β̄ − γ̄M




                                                                       9
of the experimental data:                                    X
                                            κc    −1
                                             R = ni∈C∩R              κexp
                                                                      i                                       (24)
                                                             i∈C∩R

For example, an estimate of the parameters ĀP and ĀR (land endowment of P and R, respec-
tively) is obtained by taking the average land endowment of program eligible and ineligible
households in the control group, respectively. We are thus following a representative household
approach in our numerical simulations.
Furthermore, respondents in the control group were asked for the daily wage that an agricul-
tural worker can earn, and we take the average of these answers across the control group to
obtain and estimate for p̄M
                          L .
The market price of the staple p̄q can be obtained from administrative records of the Mexican
Ministry of Agriculture. We then assume a gross labor endowment L̄ of 365 days for each F
and M, respectively. As the numeraire of the system we set the world market price of the
imported manufactured composite commodity (p̄z ) to one. The Leontief production function
was calibrated using data from a household survey10 representative for rural Mexico which was
conducted around the same time as the Progresa control group data collection took place. This
survey gives us information about the amount of labor days needed to cultivated one hectare
of corn.

However, there is a vector Λ ∈ Γ of model parameters that can neither be observed directly
from the data nor obtained from administrative records. This vector writes Λ = {ᾱ, β̄, γ̄M ,
m̄y , m̄pq , m̄sq , η̄i , σ̄i , µi , ψM,i , ψF,i }. In order to obtain values for these parameters we do exploit
the fact that we do observe from the control group data a couple of in the model endogenous
variables, such as the average yearly quantity of consumed staple per household qiexp , as well
as the average yearly out-of-village labor supply of men Lexp                      i,M , and lastly women’s average
                                                                exp 11
yearly labor supply to service activities Li,s,F . The superscript exp is used to indicate that
these values are obtained directly from the experimental data (we will denote from the model
predicted values with the superscript sim).
Define the vector YCexp = {qiexp , Lexp                   exp
                                                   i,M , Li,s,F }. And denote Y
                                                                                sim
                                                                                    (Λ) the vector of from the model
obtained values of these variables. We then select Λ so as to minimize the standardized squared
distance between YCexp and Ysim (Λ)
                                                                     2
                                        YCexp − Ysim (Λ, X(Λ))
                                    
                         min E =                                            s.t. X = g(Λ)                     (25)
                           Λ                     YCexp
  10
    Encuesta nacional de hogares rurales
  11
    actually, we observe weekly values for these variables that we then aggregate to yearly variables. The
potential pitfalls of this kind of aggregation are discussed below.




                                                        10
The full Lagrangian writes12 :
                                                                                ¯ ×p̄L −l¯F ×pL
                                                                   Ii −ȳ×(py )−lM
                                                                                                     2
                                     X       qiexp − (q̄ + ᾱ                     pqi
                                                                                      M        F,i

                 min E =                 
                                                                       qiexp
                                                                                                     
                  Λ
                                 i=P,R
                                                                        Ii −q̄×pqi −ȳ×py −l¯F ×pL
                                                                                                        2
                                    exp
                                             −         L̄         ¯
                                                               − lM − γ̄M                          F,i
                                  Li,M              1+ψ̄i,M                           p̄L
                                                                                         M
                          + 
                                                                                                         
                                                                     exp
                                                                    Li,M
                                                                                                         

                                                                                  q       ¯ ×p̄    L
                                                                                                           2
                                                                          I −q̄×pi −ȳ×py −lM
                                  Lexp     −           L̄
                                                               − l¯F − γ̄F i           L
                                                                                                 M
                                  i,F               1+ψ̄i,F                         p    F,i
                          +                                                                                     (26)
                                                                                                           
                                                                      Lexp
                                                                                                           
                                                                       i,F




                                       ∀ i ∈ {P, R} s.t.
                               pqi   = (p̄z − m̄sq × ps )                                                        (27)
                               py    = p̄z + m̄y × ps                                                            (28)
                                                                                            η̄i
                                                                       −1+η̄i
                                                                                        ! (−1+η̄
                                           1−η̄i                    Ks,i      × pLF,i           i)

                               Si = σ̄i × Ks,i   ×                                                               (29)
                                                                    (η̄i × ps × σ̄i )


                                      Ks,i = µ(Li,M × p̄LM + qis + Ti )                                          (30)
                                                  −1+η̄i
                                                                 ! 1
                                               Ki,s      × pLF,i (−1+η̄i )
                                     LD,s,i =                                                                    (31)
                                               (η̄i × ps × σ̄i )
                                         πq,i = pqi × qix − pLF,i × LD,q,i                                       (32)
                                         πs,i = ps × Si −              pLF,i   × LD,s,i                          (33)


                                          L̄                   L̄
                         Ii =                     × p̄M
                                                      L +              × pLF,i + πs,i + πq,i + Ti                (34)
                                     1 + ψ̄i,M              1 + ψ̄i,F
                                                              ¯ × p̄M − l¯F × p̄F
                                             Ii − q̄ × pqi − lM       L           L
                         yi =        ȳ + β̄                                                                     (35)
                                                               py
                   qix + qip    =      exp
                                     qi + qi    s
                                                                                                                 (36)
                       Lexp
                        i,F     =    LD,s,i + LD,q,i                                                             (37)
                   x
                  qP + qRx      =    qP + qR + ROW                                                               (38)
                 SP + SR        =    (yP + yR )m̄y + (qPp + qRp )m̄pq + (qis + qis )m̄sq                         (39)
  12
   For the purpose of readability, we omit henceforth the subscript C, which applies to all variables of the
Lagrangian.


                                                                 11
                                         Table 2: Parameter values


                                                           Poor Household (P )   Rich Household (R)
       land endowment (Āi ) in ha.                              [0.528]               [1.227]
       price of the staple p̄q in USD/kg                          [.276]               [.276]
       out-of-village wage   p̄LM   in USD/day                    [3.5]                [3.5]
       labor endowment of M (L̄i,M ) in days/year                 [365]                [365]
       labor endowment of F (L̄i,F ) in days/year                 [365]                [365]
       labor productivity discount factor of M (ψ̄i,M )           [.056]                [0]
       labor productivity F (ψ̄i,F )                              [.321]                [0]
       price manufactured commodity p̄z = 1                       [1.0]                [1.0]
       preference staple (ᾱ)                                    [ 0.056]             [ 0.056]
       preference manufactured commodity (β̄)                    [0.502]              [0.502]
       preference leisure of M (γ̄M )                            [0.123]              [0.123]
       preference leisure of F (γ̄F )                             [.32]                [.32]
       service per import of manuf. cmdity (m̄y );                [.027]               [.027]
       service per import staple (m̄pq );                         [.010]               [.010]
       labor intensity in service production (η̄i )               [.10]                [.10]
       technology in service production and (σ̄i )                [8.64]               [1.33]
       capitalization share of family business (µ)               [0.087]               [0.43]




Table 2 shows the parameters obtained from this exercise, as well as all other parameter values
of the model.

3.3    Within-sample fit
The first row in each panel of table 3 compares the actual from the control group observed value
                                  exp
of some endogenous variable, YC∩P     , with the from the model simulated value, YPsim (Γ). We’ll
refer to the difference between the latter two as the ’within-sample goodness of fit’. We call it
’within-sample’ because the parameters underlying the simulation were obtained partly from
the control group, i.e. from the same sample that we are comparing the simulated values to.
Table 3 reveals that the within sample fit is perfect, i.e. the from the model simulated value re-
produces exactly the actual from the control group observed value of some endogenous variable.

A good within-sample fit is an important starting point to ensure the benchmark model can
replicate behavior observed in the data. However, this provides no direct evidence on how
reliable the model predictions are under changes to the policy environment. In the next section

                                                      12
 Table 3: Results: Within-sample & out-of-sample validation (program-eligible households)


                                                   Male                                   Female

                                        simulated          actual               simulated        actual
    annual labor supply (in days)
       control                            228.0           228.0                    17.3           17.3
       treatment                         191.53           215.8                   19.10           29.8
       ATE (se)                          -36.492      -10.58(7.97)                 1.71       12.41 (8.41)
       Ln ATE                             -0.160      -.155 (.109)                0.098        .151(.112)
     Notes: The values in parenthesis in the third row of each panel are the standard errors of the regression
     coefficient obtained from OLS regression in equation (41)



we’ll analyze the model’s performance in out-of-sample tests, where we’ll see if the model is
able to reproduce the outcomes of the Progresa treatment group sample. Recall that we did
not use the latter sample during the calibration of the model (we have exploited exclusively
information on the control group). Therefore the label ’out-of-sample validation’.



4      Model (Out-of-Sample) Validation
4.1      Method
Now we add a cash transfer to the income of P in our model, and then solve the model to
obtain the predicted outcomes of the treatment group. As a measure of the performance of the
model, we compare the latter to the actual from the experimental data observed outcomes of
the treatment group.

Formally, we compute the simulated treatment effect for some outcome Yj as the difference
between simulated control group and simulated treatment group:
                                              sim
                                     θ̄sim = YP,T P >0
                                                              sim
                                                       (Γ) − YP,T P =0
                                                                       (Γ)                                (40)

We then compare θsim to the experimental benchmark θ̄exp , an estimate of which is obtained
from the OLS regression
                                          exp × D + βX + u
                             Yj,i = α0 + θd                                            (41)
                                                 i    i     i

where Di is a dummy that takes the value one if some program-eligible household i resides in
a treatment village, and zero if in a control village. Xi is a vector of controls.




                                                      13
4.2    Cautionary note
Differences in levels between simulated and actual experimental data are very likely to be due
to the simplified nature of our model which may not capture the entire set of mechanisms
underlying household behavior. Additionally, however, there a couple of other factors one has
to take into consideration. Comparing simulated treatment and actual treatment effect as a
source of model validation relies on the assumption that θbexp = θexp , i.e that the experimental
benchmark is correctly identified. In the case of the Progresa experiment, there are a couple
of sources of bias which pose a threat to identification (in the following, we’ll just mention the
most important)
(i.) Randomization bias
Random treatment assignment shall ensure that the treatment group is similar both in terms of
observable and unobservable characteristics to the control group. As documented in Behrman
and Todd (1999), due to village level rather than individual randomization, household charac-
teristics in treatment vs. control group are not entirely balanced in the Progresa experimental
data. In the OLS regression (41) we are controlling for some of these unbalanced variables.
The presence of such pre-program differences between treatment and control group, however,
suggests that there may be other unobserved variables (that consequently cannot be control for)
which may confound the identification of θexp . We do not expect that the lingering differences
are large enough to bias the sign, but it may well affect the level of θbexp .

(ii.) Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption
Another serious concern for the identification of θexp is that control villages are ’contaminated’
by treatment villages (violation the Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption (SUTVA)). If
households in control villages are indirectly affected by the program, then θbexp is either upward
or downward biased, depending on the sign of the externality on households in control villages.
Externalities exhibited by a cash transfer program across villages have not received much at-
tention yet in the literature. Very recent evidence by Bobba and Gignoux (2011), however,
suggest that these externalities do exist. Again, we do not expect that such externalities are
large enough to bias the sign of the estimate, but it may well affect the level of θbexp .

(iii.) Measurement Error
The experimental data is probably measured with some non-zero degree of error. Sources of
measurement error include under/over reporting (e.g. individuals have an incentive to underre-
port wealth related variables such as labor supply or consumption in order to seem ’poor’ and
hence eligible for Progresa), recall bias (respondents don’t remember exactly how much they
consumed), enumerator bias (respondents answer are affected by the presence of a stranger)
etc. Since the model does not explicitly account for measurement error, any difference in levels
of variables and treatment effects between simulated and experimental treatment group may be
in part due to the measurement error in the data. Rather than comparing the levels of variables
and treatment effects of simulated vs. actual treatment group as a source of model validation,
it seems more appropriate to just focus on the sign of simulated vs. actual treatment effect.
The latter is more robust to measurement error.

                                               14
The conclusion of this subsection is that, due to the presence of sources of bias which pose
a threat to the identification of the experimental treatment effect, comparing the levels of
simulated vs. actual treatment group as a source of model validation may not be appropriate.
It seems therefore more adequate to focus on the sign of simulated vs. actual treatment effect,
which is much more more robust to these sources of bias.

4.3    Results (Out-of-Sample) Validation
Table 3 compares simulated to experimental treatment group. The first row in each panel shows
again the simulated level of the P’s annual labor supply under a zero cash transfer, vis-a-vis
average labor supply of eligible households in the control group, which we’ve seen and discussed
already above in the ’within-sample fit’ section.

Now, the second row in each panel contrasts the level of labor supply of the simulated treat-
ment group to the experimental benchmark. The third row then compares the simulated
treatment effect, θsim (left column), to the experimental treatment effect, θbexp (right column).
The left column in the fourth row expresses the simulated treatment effect in relative terms:
   sim            sim            sim
[YP,T P >0
           (Γ) − YP,T P =0
                           (Γ)]/YP,T P =0
                                          (Γ). The experimental equivalent (fourth row right column)
is obtained by replacing the level of the dependent variable in OLS regression (41) by its natural
logarithm.

The model predicts a decrease in male labor supply from 228.0 to 191.5 days per year, i.e.
an annual decrease of 36.5 days (-16 percent). In the model this is because the cash transfer
constitutes a positive income effect. The latter leads to an increased demand for leisure and,
consequently, a decrease in labor supply. This compares to an actual from the experimental
data observed treatment effect of -10.58 days (-15.9 percent). Thus, the model correctly pre-
dicts the direction and relative magnitude of the effect.

For females the model predicts an increase in labor supply from 17.3 to 19.1 days per year, i.e.
an annual increase of 1.71 days (+9.8 percent). Why is it that female labor supply increases
while male labor supply decreases? In our model, this is because the cash transfer generates a
positive income effect which, ceteris paribus, increases demand for leisure (i.e. decreases labor
supply). Contrary to the male case, however, there is a substitution effect in the female case:
the cash transfer, via the household internal labor market equilibrium, increases the female
wage which, ceteris paribus, increases female labor supply. Since the male wage is assumed to
be exogenous, the substitution effect for the male is zero. In our model, the income effect for
females is smaller than the substitution effect and, consequently, female labor supply increases.
The simulated treatment effect compares to an actual from the experimental data observed
treatment effect of 15.1 percent. Thus, the model correctly predicts the direction of the effect,
but somewhat underestimates both the absolute and relative magnitude of the experimental
treatment effect.


                                                15
                                                Figure 1: role of cash transfer amount
                              0.3
                              0.2
                              0.1
           ATE (in percent)
                              0.0
                              −0.1




                                            ATE Labor Supply P (male)

                                            ATE Labor Supply R (male)
                              −0.2




                                            ATE Labor Supply P (female)

                                            ATE Labor Supply R (female)
                              −0.3




                                     0.00     0.05            0.10             0.15             0.20     0.25   0.30
                                                             share of cash transfer on baseline income




5    The Role of the Cash Transfer Amount
In section 4 we have used the actual Progresa transfer amount (which is roughly 20 percent
of an eligible household’s baseline income) in order to validate our simple model. Using this
particular cash transfer amount, the model predicts a decrease in male labor supply from 228.0
to 191.5 days per year, i.e. an annual decrease of 36.5 days (-16 percent). In the model this is
because the cash transfer induced positive income effect leads an increased demand for leisure
and, consequently, a decrease in labor supply.

An exogenous male wage impedes the presence of any substitution effect. It is, consequently,
only the income effect that affects male labor supply. It is thus straight forward to conclude
that an increase (decrease) in the cash transfer amount will further decrease (increase) male
labor supply.

Not as straight forward is to see the the sign of the second order derivative of the treatment
effect. The latter tells us whether the marginal treatment effect is decreasing, increasing, or
constant in TP . Figure 1 shows the from the model predicted relationship between male labor
supply and cash transfer amount. The figure reveals that the marginal treatment effect is in-
creasing. At a first glance this result may seem counterintuitive. Because one would expect
a concave relationship due to the decreasing marginal utility of consumption of leisure. The

                                                                             16
reason for this at a first glance puzzling result will become clear when we look at the second
order derivative of the female labor supply treatment effect.

In section 4 we saw that, applying the Progresa cash transfer amount, the model predicts an
increase in female labor supply from 17.3 to 19.1 days per year. In the model this is because the
positive income effect generated by the transfer is smaller than the substitution effect generated
by an increase in the female shadow wage. Consequently, female labor supply increases.
The important question that arises is if the substitution effect is always greater than the income
effect along the entire interval of possible cash transfer amounts? Figure 1 shows that the answer
to this question is no. For small cash transfer amounts, the substitution effect is smaller than
the income effect. There exists some cash transfer amount T ∗ for which the substitution effect
equals the income effect. This leads to three possible scenarios. First, if TP = T ∗ , income
and substitution effect offset each other and, consequently, the female labor supply treatment
effect is zero. Second, if TP < T ∗ , then the income effect is greater than the substitution effect
and female labor supply, consequently, decreases. Lastly, if TP > T ∗ , then the income effect
is smaller than the substitution effect and the female labor supply treatment effect becomes
positive:                                    
                                              < 0 if TP < T ∗
                                      ∂LP,F  
                                               = 0 if TP = T ∗
                                        TP 
                                               > 0 if TP > T ∗
                                             

Since the village’s female labor endowment is assumed to be exogenous (i.e. no immigra-
tion/emigration), the female wage increases exponentially in TP . This explains why the second
order derivative of the female labor supply treatment effect is positive, i.e. the marginal treat-
ment effect is increasing. And the latter, in turn, explains the prima facie puzzling positive
second order derivative of the male labor supply treatment effect. The higher the cash transfer
the more proportionally female labor supply increases, hence the more ’income’ she adds to the
household and, consequently, the proportionally higher the income effect for the male.



6     Conclusion
In the past two decades, redistributive transfer programs have been proliferating in develop-
ing countries. Opponents of such such transfers frequently argue that such transfers would
discourage work incentives of recipients. The few existing (and exclusively empirical) studies
on the subject are far from conclusive: some do find a negative, others a positive, and again
others no effect at all on labor supply. The heterogeneity of existing empirical findings calls for
a theoretical framework that allows to draw more general conclusions on when (i.e. in which
setting) and why (i.e. through which mechanisms) cash transfers affect labor market outcomes.

In this paper we use data from an RCT to estimate and validate a two-household-two-commodity
model. Comparative statics show how not only the magnitude but even the direction of the

                                                17
labor supply effect depends on parameters that describe the program and the environment in
which it is implemented. Opposite to the common intuition, we find that large cash transfers
can have a stimulating effect on labor supply, while lower cash transfer provide disincentives.



References
Alzúa, M. L., G. Cruces, and L. Ripani (2012). Welfare programs and labor supply in developing
  countries: experimental evidence from latin america. Journal of Population Economics, 1–30.

Behrman, J. and P. Todd (1999). Randomness in the Experimental Samples of PROGRESA.
  International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC.

Fizbein, A. and N. Schady (2009). Conditional Cash Transfers: Reducing Present and Future
  Poverty. World Bank, Washington DC.

Foguel, M. and R. de Barros (2008). The Effects of Conditional Cash Transfer Pro-
  grammes on Adult Labour Supply: An Empirical Analysis Using a Time-Series-Cross-
  Section. Working Paper . ANPEC 2008, http://www.anpec.org.br/encontro2008/
  artigos/200807211655420-.pdf (23.07.2009).

Hoddinott, J. and E. Skoufias (2004). The Impact of PROGRESA on Food Consumption.
 Economic Development and Cultural Change 53 (1), 37–61.

Lindert, K., W. Skoufias, and J. Shapiro (2006). Redistributing Income to the Poor and the
  Rich: Public Transfers in Latin America and the Carribean. Discussion Paper No. 36966;
  The World Bank, Washington DC .

Parker, S. and E. Skoufias (2000). The Impact of PROGRESA on Work, Leisure and Time
  Allocation. Working Pager . International Food Policy Research Institute.

Ribas, R. and F. Soares (2011). Is the effect of conditional transfers on labor supply negligible
  everywhere? Working paper . IZA.

Schultz, P. (2004, June). School subsidies for the poor: evaluating the mexican progresa poverty
  program. Journal of Development Economics 74 (1), 199–250.

Skoufias, E., B. Davis, and S. De La Vega (2001). Targeting the Poor in Mexico: An Evaluation
  of the Selection of Households into PROGRESA. World Development 29 (10), 1769–1784.

Tavarez, P. (2010). Efeito do programa bolsa famı́lia sobre a oferta de trabalho das maes.
  Economia e Sociedade, Campinas 19 (3).




                                               18
