                          YOUTH LABOR MARKET IN BRAZIL
                      THROUGH THE LENS OF THE FLOW APPROACH
                               Carlos Henrique Corseuil (IPEA)
                                    Miguel Foguel (IPEA)
                                Gustavo Gonzaga (PUC-Rio)
                               Eduardo Pontual Ribeiro (UFRJ)


Abstract In this paper, we use RAIS (Relação Anual de Informações Sociais), a very large
longitudinal matched employer-employee data, to study the attachment of young workers to the
(formal) labor market in Brazil. We employ the flow approach to draw a comparative picture of
the patterns of transitions in the labor market of the young and adult populations from 1996 to
2010. We estimate an econometric model that attempts to isolate the contribution of workers’
age on employment duration. Our results show that youths experience very high rates of labor
market turnover, a phenomenon that comes from very large rates of hiring and separation from
jobs. The estimates from the model show that the age of workers does contribute to decrease
employment duration, with or without the inclusion of firm-specific fixed effects. The high
separation rate prevailing for young workers can in part be explained by an allocation problem,
since young workers are relatively more likely to be hired by high-turnover firms.

    1. Introduction

One of the most worrisome and widespread stylized facts in Labor Economics is the observation
of very low employment rates for young workers, usually resulting in very high unemployment
rates. For instance, ILO estimates the youth global unemployment rate at 12.6% in 2011 (ILO
2012). But in some countries the figures are much higher as indicated by the OECD-average
youth unemployment rate of 18.5% in the third quarter of 2010 (OECD 2010). Brazil is no
exception. According to a nation-wide household survey (PNAD/IBGE) the unemployment rate
for 15-24 year olds was 16.3% in 2011, while the rates observed for ages 25-49 and 50+, were
5.7% and 2.8%, respectively, in the same year.
The main goal of this paper is to provide a more complete picture of labor market integration of
young workers in Brazil. We use the flow approach as advocated by Blanchard and Diamond
(1992) as the ideal setting to analyze labor market dynamics. The implementation of this
approach is based on worker flow measures such as hiring, separations and turnover computed
both for young and adult workers.
The flow approach is usually hindered by lack of appropriate data. We overcome this difficulty
exploring a very rich dataset (RAIS) that records firm hirings and separations (either fires or
quits), with detailed information from the hired or separated worker, with a long term view over
the 1996 to 2010 period.
The collection of results on new dimensions of youth labor market contributes to a more
accurate diagnostic of the youth labor market problem in Brazil. Before describing briefly our
results it is worth mentioning two methodological contributions of this paper. The first one is a
measurement procedure that identifies how much of young workers separation is due to adult
workers crowding-in. The second one is the strategy used here to identify the age effect on
employment duration, which is based on a hazard model with establishment fixed effects.
Our first results confirm larger flows for young workers than for adult workers. Perhaps the
most striking result is the average turnover rate which amounts to 1.65 for youth workers, twice
as large as the adults’ figure. Also important is the fact that hiring rates are relatively higher
than separation rates for young workers.
In general, low employment rates for young workers can occur either because of a low entry
flow into employment or from a high exit flow from employment. Our results are consistent
with the latter: a high exit flow (separations) from employment resulting from large turnover
rates is probably the main determinant of high unemployment rates for young workers in Brazil
(as in Flori, 2004).
The pattern of separations for young workers reveals two interesting findings. The first is that
most replacements of jobs held by young workers are filled by other youths. Indeed, on average,
less than 10% of all replacements of young workers are substitutions for adult workers. Similar
results are observed in the other direction, i.e. the replacement of adults by young workers. The
second interesting finding is the difference between youths and adults as reason for separation
from a job. While layoffs account for a higher share for adults, voluntary quits and the
expiration of temporary contracts are relatively more important for younger workers. This is
probably due to a combination of a more unstable labor supply behavior of youths and more
frequent use of time-limited contracts to hire them.
Regarding the other component of turnover, the hiring rate, we investigate whether the high
separation rate observed for youths could be attributed to attachment to high turnover jobs. We
calculate the relative share of hirings for temporary contracts and for jobs at cooperatives, the
latter typically considered quite unstable. Though we confirm that the use of temporary
contracts is relatively more important for youths than adults, the difference does not seem to
explain the higher separation rate for young workers. Jobs at cooperatives represent a negligible
fraction of hirings, so it cannot explain the magnitudes observed for the separation rate.
Other job dimensions may be relevant to explain high flow rates for younger workers. In the last
part of the paper, we address whether the high flows computed for young workers (in particular
the high turnover rate) are an intrinsic characteristic of the lower age of these workers or, rather,
whether it is a spurious relation due to other turnover determinants which may also be correlated
with age. We take particular attention to establishment characteristics as we present evidence
that young workers tend to be allocated to high turnover jobs. We use two complementary
methods: a variance decomposition based on firm and worker characteristic and an econometric
hazard model. The estimation of a hazard model including firms fixed effect as well as firms’
and individuals’ observable characteristics suggest that a lower age increases the hazard of
separation even taking into account firm and worker controls.
The paper contains six sections. In the second section, we present the related literature and some
labor market trends for youths based on stock measures. The third section describes the data and
set out the basic flow measures used in the paper. In the fourth section, we check whether the
higher separation rate observed for youngsters could be due to an allocation in which they start
off from high turnover jobs. Section five contains a deeper look at differences in the pattern of
separations between the groups. In section six, we use statistic and econometric models as an
attempt to better measure the role played by workers’ age in explaining the patterns of the job
flow measures analyzed in the previous sections. The last section concludes.


2. Preliminaries
2.1. Related literature
The bulk of the literature on youth labor market relies on the analysis of stock variables
computed from household surveys. Typically, the unemployment rate is the main indicator used
in such analyses. We start this section by summarizing the stylized facts unveiled by the
analysis of stock variables.
Freeman and Wise (1982) is recognized as an influent piece of work for understanding the
underlying forces behind the youth labor market problem. Based on the collection of results in
the volume the editors conclude that “Aggregate economic activity was the major determinant
of the level of youth jobless in the United States”. Another important conclusion was that
“severe employment problems were concentrated among a small proportion of youths with
distinctive characteristics”. The volume by Blanchflower and Freeman (2000) validates both
conclusions for a more recent period (the 1990s) and a broader set of developed countries. The
results were further extrapolated by O’Higgins (2003), who analyses the labor market for youths
in developing and as well as transition economies. The qualitative results are broadly in
agreement with those found for developed countries.
An important stylized fact specific to developing countries is the overrepresentation of young
workers in the informal sector. See for instance Saavedra and Chong (1999). This is also studied
in Maloney (1999), who associates this pattern to the finding that the informal sector tends to be
the entry door for young workers in the labor market.
A somewhat related trend of using non-standard jobs as an entry door for young workers has
been documented recently for EU countries with respect to temporary contracts. Evidence on
this can be found either in O’Higgins (2012) or in OECD (2012). Both studies mention that the
use of such contracts to hire youths increased in the last decade and carried on into the recent
economic downturn.
The recent economic downturn also motivated novel contributions claiming that young workers
are relatively more sensible to negative economic shocks. See for instance Bell and
Blanchflower (2011) and O’Higgins (2012).
Another branch of the literature proposes a different track to analyze the youth labor market
problem. This track set the stage for the flow approach. Leighton and Mincer (1982) can be
considered the turning-point contribution that inaugurates this new track. The authors
decompose the unemployment rate by age group in unemployment incidence and duration. They
show that the difference in unemployment rates between the groups is mostly due to differences
in unemployment incidence. Leighton and Mincer (1982) also emphasize labor turnover as the
most important dimension for analyzing the relationship between age and unemployment.
Following the same track O’Higgins (2001) focuses on unemployment duration. The author
claims that short unemployment spells tend not to be harmful for young workers’ prospects in
labor market, but long term unemployment is.1
As higher unemployment duration can be a consequence of either a burst in separations or a
drop in hirings, the flow approach arises as a natural direction to understand the youth labor
market problem. This is the direction that we pursue in this paper.


2.2. Youth Labor Market Trends based on stock measures
Before presenting our flow analysis based on Brazilian matched employer-employee data, we
will briefly report in this section some evidence that the Brazilian labor market does not depart
from the general trend summarized above. In particular we want to see if the trend of higher
unemployment and higher informality for youths appear in the Brazilian household surveys.
Throughout the paper, youths are all workers younger than 24 years old (inclusive) and adults
are all workers above that threshold age.
In this section we rely on the main Brazilian household survey (Pesquisa Nacional de Amostra
por Domicílios - PNAD) to measure unemployment and informality rates. The unemployment
rate is computed following the standard ILO definition, while informality rate is defined as the
share of employed workers in one of the following categories: i) informal salaried worker, ii)
self-employed, iii) non-salaried worker. We use data from 1996 to 2011, a period which
comprises two distinct phases of the Brazilian labor market. Before 2003 both unemployment
and informality showed either upward trends or stagnation at a relatively high level. Later there
is a sharp declining trend on both indicators.




1
  O’Higgins (2001) also argues that analyses based on unemployment are particularly problematic for
early ages due to the ambiguous attachment of youths to the education system.
                                                                              inform
Youth labor market indicators differ sharply from the adult ones regarding informality      and
unemployment. Figure 1 below shows that: that while the unemployment rate for adult workers
fluctuated between 5% and 7% over the fifteen years we cover, the unemployment rate for
young workers was 2 to 3 times higher, ranging from 13% to 21%. The informality rate is also
much higher for the youth.. The share of informal workers peaked in 2002 at 34% 3     for adult
workers and at 52% for the young workers. Both age groups benefited from the formality trend
                          2000’ But the lowest informality rate of 37% over the period for
of the second part of the 2000’s.
young workers, in 2011, was still well above the 26% observed for adult workers in that year.
                                                                         1996
          Figure 1 – Unemployment and informality rates for age groups – 1996-2011




           uthors´ estimates based on PNAD/IBGE
Source: Authors´                             IBGE data. The nationally representative survey is
not carried out in Census years (2000 and 2010).


3. Worker flows: the contrast between young and adult workers
3.1. Basic Measures and Data
                       come from RAIS (Relação
Our main data source comes                                                     Sociais a very
                                              Relação Anual de Informações Sociais),
detailed and comprehensive Brazilian administrative database which is maintained by the
                        mployment and Labor (Ministério
Brazilian Ministry of Employment                 (Ministério do Trabalho e Emprego – MTE).
                                 employee employer dataset covering by law the universe of
RAIS is a longitudinal matched employee–employer
                                                              tax egistered firms have to report
formally employed workers, including public employees. All tax-registered
every worker formally employed at some point during the previous calendar year.2 The main
purpose of RAIS is to administer a federal wage supplement (Abono Salarial) to formal
employees. There are thus incentives for truthful reporting.
                                    worker establishment pair in a given year. It includes
Every observation in RAIS is a worker–establishment
information on wage, tenure, age, gender, education, sector of activity, establishment size and
                                                          separation. Because every worker is
location, hiring and separation dates, and reason for separation.
uniquely identified over time, we observe all spells in formal employment and between formal
                                                   employer employee longitudinal data similar
jobs for each individual. RAIS provides matched employer-employee
to those available in developed countries. We use data from 1996 to 2010. There were more
than 41 million formal employees at the end of 2010.



2
                                                                     (Abono Salarial)
 The main purpose of RAIS is to administer a federal wage supplement (Abono Salarial to formal
employees. There are thus incentives for truthful reporting.
Our results rely on information on hirings and separations to compute traditional measures of
worker flows, adapted to the context of age specific groups. We calculate the hiring and
separation rates for age group a in year t as: Hat= Σi hiat/Xat and Sat=Σi siat/Xat, respectively,
where i represents establishments, hiat is the number of hires of workers of age group a over the
course of the year t, siat is the number of separations for age group a over the year t at
establishment i, and Xat is the aggregate average (between 31/12/t and 31/12/t-1) employment
level of the group of workers under consideration.
These two rates can be combined to provide evidence on turnover. First, we aggregate the
overall amount of worker flows using the worker turnover rate: Tat= Hat + Sat. The more
heterogeneous is the workers’ flow profile within firm × age cell, the higher is the distance
between turnover and any of its components. Following this insight, another interesting measure
is the churning rate, which is defined as CHat= Tat – |NETat|, where NET stands for net
employment growth.
The context of age specific groups matter to the way labor flow measures are computed. In the
traditional analysis at the firm level, NET could be either computed as:3
NETt= Ht – St,                                        (1)
or as:
NETt=Σi ∆nit/Xt.
However when dealing with age specific groups, the two measures differ from each other due to
individuals crossing the threshold that divides adjacent age groups while continuously employed
in the same business unit i. These individuals do contribute to age group specific employment
stock variation (∆n), but do not contribute neither to hiring (H) nor separation (S) rates. Hence
we will rely on the first procedure and compute NET as in expression (1).
3.2 Youth Labor Market Trends based on flow measures
The striking differences between flows measures of young and adult workers are summarized in
a single graph (Figure 2), where we plot H (vertical axis) and S (horizontal axis), elaborating on
Burgess et al. (2001). There are large difference in these flow measures between the two groups,
with both hiring and separations rates higher for youths. This implies that the turnover rate for
young workers overtakes that for adult workers.
Figure 2 also shows a higher net employment rate for young workers. Points along the 45o line
corresponds to NET=0, as H=S. The scatter points for adult workers are either around or a little
above the 45o line, a pattern which evinces a small, positive average net employment growth for
this group in the period of analysis. Net employment growth increases northwest with respect to
the 45o line. ‘IsoNET’ lines are also plotted in Figure 2, indicating the different combinations of
H and S that yield 10, 20, and 30% net employment growth rates. Differently from the adults’
pattern, the net growth rates for young workers tend be spread along the 20% IsoNet line. This
shows that, on average, youths experience a much higher employment growth rate than adults in
the formal labor market in Brazil. Figure 3 confirms that and shows that the growth rates have
exhibited a slight increasing trend for both groups over the period of analysis.4




3
    Abstracting from inconsistencies in information provided by firms on stocks and flows.
4
  It is interesting to note that this pattern of formal-sector employment growth based on RAIS is
consistent with the patterns for the unemployment rate based on PNAD and described in section 2.2.
                                                             1996
        Figure 2:: Hiring and separation rates by age group, 1996-2010




        Source: Authors’ calculations based on RAIS/MTE data.
   ble 1 summarizes the time series of each
Table                                      e                                  able initially reports the
                                                 group flow indicators. The table
                                    (
average value for the hiring rate (H),                          ), and the turnover rates (T
                                          the separation rate (S),                          ( and CH)
                                      1996
for both age groups for the period 1996-2010.       From Figure 2 we know   w that both the hiring and
separation rates were higher for younger workers. Table 1 brings the magnitude of such
difference. The first striking result is that the average hiring rate for youths (92.6%) is more than
                                       hiring rate for adults (42.8%). This indicates that Brazilian
two times higher than the average hiring
youths do not seem to face problems to get jobs in the formal labor market. The difference in
separation is a little less pronounced but still of considerable magnitude. Indeed, the figure for
    ths is as high as 72.4%, while it amounts to 41.3% for the older group (1.8 ratio).
youths


                                                           1996
        Figure 3: Net employment growth rate by age group, 1996-2010




        Source: Authors’ calculations based on RAIS/MTE data.


The comparison of turnover rates adds these two differences and provides the second striking
result. Turnover rates reach the impressive value of 165.1% for young workers and 84.1% for
adults. The rate of 1.65 for youths means that there are more than eight younger worker
transitions into and from formal employment for each five employed young workers, on
average, each year. Even the adult turnover rate is very high for international standards (see,
e.g., Davis and Haltiwanger, 19995 and Corseuil and Santos, 2006). Given the behavior of net
employment growth rates mentioned above, the churning rate for youngsters decreases more
than that for adults (with respect to the turnover rates), but the ratio between the two churning
rates is still around 2.
From Figure 2 we can see that the hiring and separation rates for young workers are more
disperse over time than the corresponding ones for adults. In order to take that into account, we
calculated the coefficients of variation (CV), which are also presented in Table 1. The
interesting finding brought by the CV calculation is the reversal of the order of the comparison
of the hiring and separation rates between the two groups. Indeed, when the dispersion in the
rates is incorporated, the differences between the groups become higher for separations (CV of
0.095 for youths and 0.069 for adults, ratio of 1.4) than for hirings (CV of 0.096 for youths and
0.084 for adults, ratio 1.1). One possible interpretation for this is that young workers flows,
particularly hiring rates, are relatively more affected by the business cycle.


Table 1: Summary of flow indicators by age group, 1996-2010
                                   H                  S                 T                CH
Youths
 Average                         0.926             0.724              1.651             1.448
 CV                              0.096             0.095              0.094             0.137
 CORR GDP                        0.708             0.563              0.652             0.563

Adults
 Average                         0.428             0.413              0.841             0.823
 CV                              0.084             0.069              0.074             0.059
 CORR GDP                        0.555             0.405              0.505             0.429

Ratio Youth/Adults
 Average                           2.2               1.8               2.0               1.8
 CV                                1.1               1.4               1.3               2.3
 CORR GDP                          1.3               1.4               1.3               1.3
Source: Authors’ calculations based on RAIS/MTE data. H: Hiring rate; S: Separation rate; T = Turnover
rate (T=H+S); CH= T - |H-S|. CV is the coefficient of variation. Corr GDP represents the simple
correlation of each variable with GDP.


Table 1 allows us to check how close is the association between the business cycle and the age-
specific labor flows. The rows Corr GDP in the Table display the correlation coefficient
between each flow measure and the GDP. The correlations confirm that the flow measures for
young workers are more sensitive to business cycle than the ones computed for adult workers
(correlations for the former group are around 30 to 40% higher than that of the latter group).
    The results presented in this section indicate that young workers do not seem to face strong
barriers to formal labor market entry in Brazil. The lowest value of the hiring rate was 80%, its


5
 Table 9 in Davis and Haltiwanger (1999) reports hiring and separation rates between 20% and 30% for
developed countries.
average amounted to more than 90%, and in three years (2007, 2008, and 2010) it surpassed
100%. But, though jobs are relatively easy to get, they are also riskier to lose. Indeed, the
figures show that separations rates are also very high for youths: minimum of 65%, average of
more than 70%, and in two years (2008 and 2010) it was above 85%. As a result, young workers
end up experiencing very high levels of labor market turnover. On the one hand transiting
across many different jobs may enhance better matching with firms. On the other hand, entering
and leaving jobs very easily tend to depress the acquisition of general and firm-specific labor
experience. Since the accumulation of this type of human capital is important, the elevated
turnover experienced by youths in Brazil is a factor that hinders the increase in their (future)
productivity and wages.


4. A closer look at youth hiring rates: the role of unstable jobs
Hirings and separations from jobs are not necessarily independent events. For instance, in a
developing country like Brazil, there is a large share of jobs of inferior quality (low wages,
temporary contracts, unsatisfactory working conditions etc.) which are easily filled by the large
share of less qualified workers available in the country. As they do not retain workers for long
periods, high levels of hirings and separations are a common feature of this kind of jobs. If
youths’ hirings are overrepresented in this type of jobs, then at least part of the high levels of
separations we observe for them comes from the high levels of hiring to unstable jobs. In order
words, high separation rates could be induced by entrance “through the wrong door”.
In order to investigate this possibility, we explore some features available in our data to check
whether or not younger workers are overrepresented in some types of jobs that tend to have
higher degree of instability. Specifically, we will look at the proportion of temporary jobs or
jobs at cooperatives in hiring episodes involving young workers.
Figure 4 shows the share of hirings in temporary contracts for young and adult workers. Two
points stand out from this Figure. First, the share of temporary contracts is much lower in Brazil
than what is reported for EU countries: while the share for Brazilian young workers never
reached 13% between 1996 and 2010, the figure is close to 43% in the case of EU countries
(O’Higgins, 2012). Second, despite the similar values at the beginning of the period, the share
of youths hired for temporary jobs rose, while the corresponding share for adults did not change
much. In part, the rise observed for youths can be attributed to the increased use of the
apprentice contract, which was launched by the government in 2000.6
Another form of unstable jobs often pointed as partly responsible for downgrading labor
relations in the country are jobs offered by cooperatives (“coops”).7 Figure 5 shows the share of
youths and adults that were hired by cooperatives between 1996 and 2010. The main point to
notice from this Figure is that the fraction of the age groups hired by coops during this interval
was less than 1%, that is, almost a negligible fraction. Coops do not seem to contribute to inflate
neither the hiring nor the separation rates of young workers.




6
 See Corseuil et al. (2013) for an evaluation of the effects of the apprenticeship program on youth labor
market outcomes.
7
  Since 1994, cooperatives have been exempted from paying many types of labor taxes. Many argue that
this exemption has incentivized the creation of several “fake” cooperatives, i.e. coops that are hired by
other firms only because they can “formally” hire workers without paying taxes. While we can identify
cooperatives in the data, we cannot distinguish whether or not they behave in this counterfeit way.
Figure 4: Share of hirings in temporary contracts by age group, 1996-2010




Source: Authors’ calculations based on RAIS/MTE data.
                                                                                 hiring of young
In summary, the evidence presented in this section shows that the pattern of hirings
workers either in temporary contracts or cooperatives does not seem to be responsible for the
relative higher separation rate observed for this group. Further investigation seems necessary to
check whether this connection from higher hiring to higher separation in fact exists and, if so,
                     ecially for young workers. We focus on separation rates themselves in the
how it operates, especially
next section.
                                                          1996
Figure 5:: Share of hirings by cooperatives by age group, 1996-2010




        Source: Authors’ calculations based on RAIS/MTE data.
                                          se
5. Looking for the determinants of higher separation rates for youths
In this section, we look deeper at the separation rate for young workers. Our data allow us to
investigate three important dimensions of separations. First, we distinguish between what we
call permanent and transitory separations. Second, we see whether separations are relatively
more motivated by one of three reasons: the voluntary decision of the worker to quit the job, the
                                off the worker, or the simple expiration of a temporary contract.
decision of employers to lay--off
            ry to look at whether separations of young workers from their jobs result in a job
Third, we try
                                                                                  w
destruction or the substitution of the young worker for an adult or another young worker.
5.1. Permanent versus transitory separations
Our first distinction is between permanent and transitory separations. It is argued that the
                                     fak lay-offs.8 When this happens, data register a hiring and a
Brazilian labor legislation induces fake
separation of the same worker by the same firm within a certain period of time. In order to
minimize the effect of this “double” counting, we define the permanent separation rate for age
group a as: Spat=Σispit/Xat, where spit is the number of separations that were not reverted at firm i
during year t.. The transitory separation rate can then be defined as: Stat=Sat- Spat, where Sat is the
(gross) separation rate for age group a in year t.
                                                                  1996
Figure 6:: Permanent and temporary separation rates by age group, 1996-2010.




Source: Authors’ estimates based on RAIS/MTE data.


Figure 6 displays the figures for the two types of separations for youths and adults. As it can be
seen, both rates are higher for the younger group but the permanent rate is relatively higher for
                                                      separations) than for youths (account for
adults (it represents on average almost 3/5 of all separations)


8
  One cited example is the situation where the employee negotiates a fake dismissal with the employer so
                                                  benefit for some months and access the accumulated
that the worker can receive the unemployment benefit
amount in his/her individual severance payment account (FGTS).. See Camargo (1996) for a discussion of
the (negative) incentives embodied in the Brazilian labor legislation.
around half of all separations on average). While transitory separations do increase turnover
rates, the sheer magnitude of permanent separations rates of about 34% (always larger than
30%) confirm the volatile attachment of younger workers, compared to older workers.
Permanent separations for adult workers are lower, at about 24% and never higher than 28%.
In order to analyze in a more structural fashion the differences in separations between our
                          st of this section will be based on the measure of permanent separation.
groups of interest, the rest


5.2. Quits versus layoffs
Figure 7 shows that lay-offs
                          offs are the most important reason for separations for both age groups.
                                                           importance over time for both groups,
The Figure also shows that, though they have lost some importance
lay-offs are more relevant as a cause of separation for adults than for young workers. In fact,
this difference has doubled over the years, rising from 6 p.p. in 1996 to 12 p.p. in 2010. The
                             offs was initially compensated by an increase in the contribution of
decline in the share of lay-offs
expiration of temporary contracts but towards the end of the period there was a rise in the share
                                                                                            qui
of voluntary quits. It is worth observing that the termination of temporary contracts and quits
are more relevant for youths than for adults and these differences have increased over time
between the groups.
A set of factors can explain  in what we observe in Figure 7.    7. First, as temporary contracts are
relatively more relevant as a means to hire youth labor (see Figure 4), it is not surprising that
separations due to the expiration of this type of contract are relatively more important for this
group. Also, in the last two decades, labor legislation encouraged the use of more flexible forms
                                        part
of contractss (e.g. temporary jobs, part-time                                offs) in many countries.
                                                  jobs, and temporary lay-offs)
This has not been different in Brazil, a fact that can explain the increase in this form of
separation at least in the first part of our period of analysis.

Figure 7: Share of Separations by Proposer, 1996-2010
                                            1996




Source: Authors’ estimates based on RAIS/MTE data.
Another factor is associated with the labor supply behavior of youths, who tend to “shop” jobs
around more than adults. This can explain why quitting is more prevalent among the former
group. In addition, as workers respond to the prevailing economic conditions, the supply side
can also explain why we observe increases in the contribution of voluntary leaving for both
types of workers in years of economic expansion. Firms may also have different sensitivities to
dismissing adult and young workers over the economic cycle. We saw evidence of that in
section 3, so at least part of the rise in the difference between the groups in the contribution of
lay-offs may be attributed to the distinct response of firms to the last economic cycle in Brazil.9
5.3. Job destruction versus worker substitution
This subsection is based on a decomposition of separation rates. First, when a separation occurs
it can ensue what we term effective job destruction, when the firm terminates position. Second,
when a substitution does take place, the worker can be replaced by another worker of same age
(within substitution) or by a worker from a different age group (between substitution). We will
decompose the separation rate in these three categories.
Let JDat= Σi ∆niatI(∆niat<0)/Xat be the job destruction rate for age group a, where i represents
firms, t the year, and I(.) is the indicator function that assumes value one when its argument is
true and zero otherwise. Similarly, let JCat= Σi ∆niatI(∆niat>0)/Xat be the job creation rate for age
group a in year t.
We define the within age-group substitution rate as the difference between the permanent
separation rate and the job destruction rate for age group a: Wat = Spat – JDat. The between age-
group substitution rate is defined as: Bat = min{JCa’t * xa’,a; JDat}, where a’ denotes a different
age group from a and xa’,a = Xa’t/ Xat.10 Finally, we can define what we call the effective job
destruction rate for group a at time t: EJDat = JDat - Bat. The interpretation of these concepts is
that from all separations that occurred for age group a in the economy, part resulted in the
substitution of workers from the same age group, part in the substitution of workers from
another age group and the rest is attributed to what would be the effective destruction of the job
occupied by workers of group a. 11
Perhaps the most interesting result revealed by Figure 8 is the low degree of substitution
between youths and adults. Indeed, the share of substitution of one type of worker for the other
is on average 4% and never surpasses the 5% level over the entire period of analysis. Though a
more in-depth analysis would be needed, these low figures give an indication that young and
adult labor enter the aggregate production function almost in a fixed proportion fashion. Figure
8 also reveals that substitution within the same age category is more common for youths than
for adults, with a difference in shares of around 6 p.p. for the former group. It is also noticeable
that replacement within the same age group became more important across the years for both
groups. Indeed, there was a rise of more than 10 p.p. for youths and adults when we compare
the share of within substitution in last half of the 1990’s with the last half of the 2000’s. The
opposite movement happened with the share of separations due to job destruction. Again, part
of this may be explained by the response of workers and firms to the economic cycle.




9
  Looking at the correlation coefficient between the share of lay-offs for each group and the GDP growth
rate between 1996 and 2010, the estimate for youths is -0.57 and -0.52 for adults. The test of equality of
these two estimates cannot be statistically rejected, though.
10
     The inclusion of the ratio xa’,a is for compatibility with the denominator of the other rates.
11
     It may be easily seen that Sat=Wat+Bat+EJDat.
Figure 8:: Share of Separations by Type: Job Destruction and Substitution Within or Between
Age Groups, 1996-2010




Source: Authors’ estimates based on RAIS/MTE data.


In sum, the evidence presented in this section shows that: permanent separations are an
                                                                                     time
important fraction of separations for youths, voluntary quits and the termination of time-limited
                  atively more relevant for youths than for adults, and the main form of
contracts are relatively
replacement of youths is not a substitution by an adult but a substitution by another worker of
                                                                                     lay
the same age group. Another important result is that job separations (particularly lay-offs  and
job destruction) for both age groups seem to be affected by the business cycle. Although a
deeper investigation would be needed to reach a clearer understanding of these findings, it is
                                                     factors played their role in explaining the
quite likely that demand, supply, and institutional factors,
                                years
turnover patters in the last 15 years.


6. The effects of workers’ age on turnover
One conclusion that emerges from the previous section is that young and adult workers may
enter the production function in a fixed proportion fashion. That is to say that some jobs may be
allocated only for young workers. Assume that the       he turnover rates for thesethe jobs were
intrinsically higher. If so, the higher turnover rates observed for young workers may be a
                          location to high turnover jobs. For instance, young workers may be
consequence of their allocation
allocated to high turnover industries, like construction or retail trade. Figure 9 below confirms
       ere are sharp differences in turnover or churning rates across industries in our data.
that there                                                                              dat
                                    hurning and youth employment share by industry
                  Figure 9 - Labor churning




Source: Authors’ estimates based on RAIS/MTE data.


In Figure 9 each point corresponds to an industry. The line represents the linear correlation
between the average turnover (measured by labor churning) and the average share of young
                        ies between 1998 and 2010. The Figure
workers across industries                              Figure clearly shows that establishments
                                                              ung workers. Therefore the high
in high turnover sectors tend to employ a higher share of young
turnover computed for young workers may be, at least in part, due to the allocation of this group
across industries. The main goal of this section is to go one step further towards the
                                     ag on turnover.
identification of a direct effect of age


6.1. Variance Decomposition
The argument developed above may be generalized to other establishments’ observable
                                                                dimensional approach, we first
characteristics. In order to expand the analysis to a multi-dimensional
                              between variance decomposition. Worker and job flow metrics are
perform a traditional within-between
calculated for cells defined by a combination of the following characteristics: industry, workers’
age, establishments’ age, establishment size and year.12 These measures are then regressed
                                                                                         regres
                                    characteristic according to the following model.
against a series of dummies for the characteristics
Ya,j,k,m,t = αa + β j + δ k + θ m + λ t + εa,j,k,m,t,
where Ya,j,k,m,t represents a measure of either job or worker flow computed for the cell defined
                                                         “m” and year “t”. In the right hand side
for worker of age “a”, industry “j”, plant age “k”, size “m”,
                                                                                              non
we have the terms capturing the effects of each of these variables, plus a cell idiosyncratic non-
observable component.


12
                                  (14
   We use three age categories (14-17;    18-23 and 24-60), seven firm size categories (00-4; 5-9; 10-19; 20-
49; 50-99; 100-249; 250-499;; and 500 and more workers), two firm age categories (up to 4 years of age;
five years or more) and twenty five industry classifications (roughly following national accounts, subsetor
     ). The industry classification is coarse due to the many classification
ibge).                                                        classification changes over the period.
Table 2 below presents the variance decomposition results for each job and worker flow
measure. The Table reports the explanatory power of each characteristic, measured as the
characteristic mean square divided by the regression mean square. We use mean squares instead
of just squares in order to control for the higher explanatory power of characteristics with more
degrees of freedom. Characteristics that explain twice the regression mean square are
highlighted in gray.

Table 2 – Worker flow metrics within- and between-characteristics variance decomposition
                  Year         Worker age        Firm size        Firm age        Sector
 NET               0,48           10,32            0,09             10,38          0,03
 H                 0,58            8,34            0,18             9,84           0,17
 S                 0,18            7,78            0,13             2,21           0,88
 T                 0,61            5,49            0,29             7,01           0,56
 CH                0,10           10,64            0,23             0,59           0,68
 d_firma           0,86            6,93            0,57             0,23           0,54
 df                 14               3               7                1             25
Source: Authors calculations based on RAIS/MTE data. H = Hiring rate; S = Separation rate; T
= Turnover rate (T=H+S); NET=Net Employment Growth (NET=H-S); Churning rate (CH=T –
|NET|)). Df – characteristic degrees of freedom (number of categories minus one). Cells
measure the ratio between the characteristic mean square and the explained mean squares.
Characteristics mean squares are measured comparing residual sum of squares with and without
the variable group (Anova decomposition). Gray cells indicate characteristics with twice the
regression mean square.


The results indicate that the workers age generate the sharpest difference across cell flow
measures. Other characteristics are relevant (and significant), but with smaller explanatory
power. Business unit age seems more important than industry and firm size. Business cycle
variation has relatively small explanatory power, a result that contrast with one of the stylized
facts in the literature, namely the dominant role of business cycle to explain youth
unemployment. Therefore, there seems to be an important role for cell idiosyncratic non-
observable characteristics in explaining job and worker flow. This is further explored in the next
section.


6.2. Estimation of hazard models
The decomposition above can be considered an illustrative first step in trying to isolate the
intrinsic contribution of age to turnover. But the challenging identification problem remains as
the results on the previous section cannot be used “prima facie” to address this question. The
reason is that age may be associated either to individual characteristics or unobservable job
characteristics. For instance, it has been previously shown in the literature that young workers
accumulate less human capital13, a finding that can be associated with high turnover.
An ideal setting to tackle this issue is to analyze longitudinal worker level data that carries
information on the establishment that hosts his job. At this level, we can analyze the
determinants of employment duration considering both individual and job characteristics.




13
     See, for instance, Farber (1998) and references therein.
The standard econometric procedure to study duration events is the estimation of hazard
models. Our previous discussion suggests that such estimation should be able to take into
account idiosyncratic characteristics on top of observable characteristics. We chose to use the
following proportional hazard model specification with fixed effects:
hij(t) = α.Dij + β.Xij + γj (t) ,           (2)
where hij(t) denotes the logarithm of the hazard rate of worker i completing her employment
spell at establishment j at a length t. Dij are workers age-group dummies, and Xij are observable
characteristics of workers and establishments (to be detailed below). These variables are
measured at the start of the corresponding employment spell. The term γj(.) is the baseline
hazard function of the employment spells. As we use a Cox version of the proportional
likelihood estimator, there is no need to specify any parametric form for the baseline hazard.
The key departure of our specification from conventional proportional hazard models is to allow
variations of the baseline hazard across establishments.14 This takes into account any non-
observable specificity at the firm level that may affect the hazards of its employees, even if such
specificity is also correlated with any other observable characteristic.15 This strategy enhances
the credibility of our identification strategy as does the inclusion of a fixed effect term in
conventional regression models with panel data.16 As mentioned before, workers with similar
observable characteristics could have different separation rates because of heterogeneity across
firms in unobservable characteristics (like manager tolerance with either worker performance or
behavior in the workplace). Allowing establishment idiosyncratic effects as specific baseline
hazard rates allows us to compare workers that are in the same establishment (and therefore
subject to the same idiosyncratic factors). This information is delivered by the parameter α,
which informs how the hazard rates vary among similar workers in the same firm by age group.
As pointed out by Chamberlain (1985) we can use partial likelihood (PL) methods to get rid of
γj(.) and estimate the model without further complications. Allison (1996) shows that such
estimator, which he refers as fixed-effect partial likelihood, performs very well with simulated
data despite Chamberlain’s concerns with the validity of one assumption for PL methods in the
context of duration models.17
For the analysis of hazard rates, we use all episodes of hirings that took place in the period from
1996 to 1998. We measure the employment spell following the worker-establishment match
until one of three restrictions occurs: i) the match is broken and the establishment keeps
employing other workers, ii) the establishment leaves the market (or at least disappears from
RAIS), and iii) the match survives until the last year of our data (2010). If the match faces one
of the two last restrictions we classified the employment spell as a censored one.



14
  Another important departure from duration models with longitudinal data is that we do not have
multiple spells of the same individuals, but rather multiple workers of the same establishment, where each
worker contributes with a different spell within the same establishment.
15
   Allowing such possible correlation is not a standard procedure in the economics literature using hazard
models. These non-observable specificities, when incorporated, are usually treated as independent from
all observable covariates.
16
    As a matter of fact, the following model specification with an additive fixed-effect component,
analogous to conventional regression models using panel data, is a special case of our model:
hij(t) = αj + δ.Dij + β.Xij + γ(t).
17
   Specifically, Chamberlain pointed that in the context of multiple spells for each individual the
censoring time for the last spell depends on the lengths of the preceding spells. This would violate a
necessary condition for the implementation partial likelihood methods. In addition to Allison’s
downgrade in this issue, in our case there is no particular reason to believe that a worker’s employment
spell will be influenced by the ones of his colleagues.
As in other applications using RAIS data, we apply some filters. First, we eliminate separation
episodes that resulted from individual death or retirement. We also exclude from the analysis
employment spells that satisfy, at the initial point, at least one of the following conditions:
worker aged 55 or older, in agriculture, in the public sector, or under a temporary contract.
These procedures leave our sample with 27,162,416 employment spells. For each employment
spell we collected information on workers age, gender, schooling level, and contractual number
of hours.
In order to get more intuition from the results, we present two alternative specifications for the
hazard model: the first includes plant fixed effects and the other does not. Table 3 below
presents the results. The first three rows report the results for the effect of distinct age categories
on the hazard rate relative to the base age category of over 30 years old. The first thing to notice
is that the dummies for young ages (14 to 17 and 18 to 23 years old) are associated with positive
and significant coefficients, in both specifications. This confirms that hazard rates are higher for
young workers. However it is interesting to point the non-monotonic effect of workers age on
the hazard rate. Late young workers (18 to 23) are associated with the highest hazard,
irrespective of the model specification.


Table 3: Hazard estimations for the separation of a worker from the current employer

                               plant fixed-effect                   no plant fixed-effect
     Parameter            Coefficients      Std Errors          Coefficients       Std Errors
       [14-17]              0.06839          0.00190              0.13461           0.00154
       [18-23]              0.09718         0.0008832             0.16531          0.0007722
       [24-30]              0.04727         0.0008430             0.06041          0.0007701
 very low education         0.16722          0.00155              0.69838          0.0009425
   low education            0.10209          0.00121              0.27499          0.0008598
 medium education           0.06648          0.00116              0.09331          0.0008985
         man                0.01825         0.0009346             0.01230          0.0006907
      part-time             0.06070          0.00239             -0.13722           0.00158
        1996               -0.04523          0.00141             -0.06877           0.00122
        1997               -0.03690         0.0007298            -0.03153          0.0006214

Note:
Very low education: First half of primary education
Low education: Second half of primary education (but not complete)
Medium education: Completed primary education or incomplete secondary education
Part-time: Work 30 hours or less per week
Basel categories: women older than 30 years, highly educated that was hired in 1998.

Also interesting is the comparison across specifications of the estimated values of the
coefficients for the first two age categories. The introduction of establishment fixed effects has
similar impacts on the estimated coefficients of these two age categories. The effect for the 14
to 17 years of age group (relative to the base category of older than 30) decreases from 0.135 to
0.068 as we add establishment fixed effects. This 0.07 difference between the two
specifications, almost doubling the coefficient, represent around half the initial estimate and it is
also observed for the 18 to 23 category, for which it represents around 45% of the initial
estimate. This common pattern suggests that both “teen” (14 to 17) and late young workers (18
to 23) tend to be allocated in high turnover establishments, relative to older workers.
The remaining rows in Table 3 report the estimated coefficients of the control variables in each
one of the two specifications. An analysis of the estimated values for these coefficients can be
grouped into three categories according to how the effect changes across model specifications.
Firstly, the effect of education is also reduced once we add establishment fixed effects. In fact,
the magnitude of this reduction is even higher than the one registered for age. We should point
out however that, despite this reduction, the magnitude of the effect of education is still very
high. Moreover, as it can be seen, the lower the education level of the worker, the higher the
impact on turnover. Secondly, the effect of gender is stable across model specifications. Finally,
the effect of working under a part-time contract not only increases once we add establishment
fixed effects, as it flips sign, becoming positive.


7. Concluding comments
Using a rich employer-employee dataset we were able to draw an overall picture of how youths
have performed in the formal labor market in Brazil in a recent period of 15 years. Based on the
flow approach, we show that both the hiring and the separation rate for this group are quite high
both in absolute and relative terms. The average figures for the hiring and separation rates for
youths are over 90% and 70%, respectively, leading to an impressive turnover rate of more than
160%, twice the value observed for adults. Though it may induce better matching with firms,
such a high level of turnover tends to hamper the accumulation of firm-specific experience,
which can be an important form of human capital. A lower level of productivity can result,
producing negative impacts at both the individual and the aggregate levels.
We look deeper at each component of the turnover rate. Potentially, an elevated hiring rate has
both a positive and a negative side. On the one hand, it makes it easier for youths to get a job
but, on the other, it generates less incentive to keep them. This last force induces job separations
and therefore diminishes the duration of employment. In addition, if youth hirings are
concentrated in unstable jobs, even higher levels of separations are expected. Our initial
empirical investigation of the connection from hirings to separations was able to find some
evidence that youths do not seem to be particularly allocated to more unstable jobs (temporary
contracts or cooperative jobs).
Looking at job separations patterns, we found that quits are more prevalent among young
workers than among adults. As mentioned, this can be associated with the high hiring rates of
the former group. But it can also be associated with the supply behavior of youths, which
typically involves more “shopping” across jobs in the labor market. We also found evidence that
separations due to the expiration of temporary contracts are relatively more important for youths
than for adults. The results also show that this cause of separations increased for both groups
during the 2000’s, a phenomenon that may have to do with the introduction of incentives to use
more flexible forms of labor contracts. Finally, we also found that a considerable fraction of
separations do not end up in job destruction but rather in the replacement of one worker for
another. In particular, the results evince that the more prevalent form of substitution is not
across workers of different age groups but between workers of the same group.
Going one step further, we investigated to which extent one can say that the high turnover
measures for youths can be attributed to their younger age. In other words, we conducted some
exercises to isolate the contribution of the workers’ age from that of other factors. This was
carried out through two exercises. The first was a statistical model that tried to separate out the
relative importance of age to explain the variation observed in various flow measures we used
throughout the paper. The second was an econometric model of duration that tried to isolate the
contribution of age on the duration of employment. Establishments’ unobserved characteristics
were incorporated in this last model. The results from both types of models show that to some
extent the age of the worker contributes to explain the higher turnover rates and the lower
employment duration observed for younger workers.
Condensing these results for policy purposes, the main empirical result is that young workers
experience very high rates of turnover in Brazil due to both hiring and separation rates. In order
to make the turnover rate decline, the main margin of policy attention should be the separation
rate. Indeed, though hirings and separations are interrelated, tackling the problem of high levels
of separations looks more efficient in the sense it directly attempts to keep workers longer in
their jobs. The high hiring rates does not credence a lack of jobs for youth. Rather, the high
separation rates imply short lived unstable jobs.
One must firstly recognize that other factors apart from the age of individuals operate. In
particular, as the results of section 6 show, the education of workers seems to be an important
factor to decrease turnover. In this sense, the more the education policy accelerates the increase
in the schooling level of the new cohorts of workers, the lower should be the turnover expected
for them.
Labor market policies should also be part of the strategy to lower the separation rate. Probably,
job search assistance initiatives cannot do much, unless they are capable of generating worker-
firm matchings that produce longer employment durations. Providing wage or tax subsidies for
firms to extend the tenure of youths should be thought very carefully in particular because its
costs can become very high. One could also devise a system that creates incentives for young
workers and firms to increase the value of longer job relationships. Finally, training programs
partially funded by the worker and the firm may create incentives for both parties to invest in
each other in the longer term.


References
Abowd, J. M. and Kramarz, F., (1999). "The analysis of labor markets using matched employer-employee
       data" in: O. Ashenfelter & D. Card (ed.), Handbook of Labor Economics, volume 3, chapter 40,
       pages 2629-2710 Elsevier

Allison, P. (1996) “Fixed-Effects Partial Likelihood for Repeated Events” Sociological Methods &
         Research, 25(2): 207-222.

Blanchard, O.; Diamond, P. The flow approach to labor market. American Economic Review, Papers and
        Proceedings, v. 82, p. 354-359, 1992.

Blanchflower, D. and Freeman, R. (2000) Youth Employment and Joblessness in Advanced Countries,
        Chicago: NBER and University of Chicago Press.

Bell, D. and Blanchflower, D. (2011) “Youth Unemployment in Europe and the United States”, IZA
         Discussion Paper n. 5673.

Burguess, S., Lane and Stevens (2001), “Churning dynamics: an analysis of hires and separations at the
        employer level”, Labour Economics, 8(1): 1-14.
Chamberlain, G. (1985) “Heterogeneity, Ommited Variable Bias, and Duration Dependence” pp.3-38 in
       Longitudinal Analysis of Labor Market Data, ed. J. Heckman and B. Singer. Cambridge Univ.
       Press.
Corseuil, C.H. and L.S. Santos (2006) Criação, Destruição e Realocação de Empregos no Brasil. Rio de
         Janeiro: IPEA.
Davis, S. and Haltiwanger, J.. Gross job flows, volume 3B of Handbook of Labor Economics. North
         Holland, 1999. editors Orley Ashenfelter and David Card.

Farber, H. (1998), “Mobility and Stability: The Dynamics of Job Change in Labor Markets”, Working
        Paper, Industrial Relations Section 400, Princeton.
Flori, P. (2004), “Desemprego de Jovens no Brasil”, mimeo.
Freeman, R. and Wise, D. (1982) The Youth Labor Market Problem: Its nature, causes and consequences.
       Chicago: NBER and University of Chicago Press.
ILO (2012) Global Employment Trends for Youth 2012. ILO, Geneva.
Leighton, L. and Mincer, J. (1982) “Labor Turnover and Youth Unemployment”, in Freeman and Wise
        (editors) The Youth Labor Market Problem: Its nature, causes and consequences. Chicago:
        University of Chicago Press
Maloney, W. (1999) “Does Informality Imply Segmentation in Urban Labor Markets? Evidence from
       Sectoral Transitions in Mexico”, The World Bank Economic Review 13(2): 275-302.

OECD     (2010)   “Off    to    a   good   start?      Jobs    for   the   Youth”     available   at:
        http://www.oecd.org/els/emp/46717876.pdf

O’Higgins (2001) Youth Unemployment and Employment Policies: a global perspective. ILO, Geneva.
O’Higgins (2003) “Trends in the youth labor market in Developing and Transition Countries”, World
        Bank Social Protection Discussion Paper n.0321.
O’Higgins (2012) “This time it’s different? Youth labor markets during ‘The Great’ Recession”. IZA
        Discussion Paper n. 6434.
Saavedra, J. and Chong (1999) “Structural Reform, Institutions and Earnings: Evidence from the Formal
        and Informal Sectors in Urban Peru”, The Journal of Development Studies 35(4): 95-116
