 

 
 

 

An analysis of the influence of the characteristics of firms and academic research 

groups on the geographical distance of university-industry linkages 

Renato Garcia – Instituto de Economia da Unicamp 
Veneziano Araújo - Universidade Federal de São Paulo 
Suelene Mascarini - Escola Politécnica da USP 
Emerson Gomes dos Santos - Universidade Federal de São Paulo 
Ariana Ribeiro Costa - Escola Politécnica da USP 

Abstract 
This  paper  examines  factors  that  affect  the  geographical  distance  of  university-industry  linkages  by 
analysing specific characteristics of both sides of the collaboration - firms and universities. Previous studies 
have provided important evidence related to this issue; however, they have used data from either firms or 
universities. Therefore,  this  paper  contributes to  existing research  on  this issue  by  using  information  on 
both collaboration partners. For this purpose, data from the Directory of Research Groups in Brazil are used 
to estimate an empirical model. The main results indicate that higher absorptive capacity and bigger firms 
tend to  collaborate  with research  groups  that are more  geographically  distant.  Further,  on the university 
side, high-performance and larger research groups tend to attract firms that are more geographically distant 
as  collaboration  partners.  Long-distance  collaborations  therefore  usually  occur  when  firms  require  high 
absorptive capacity and when they cannot find high-quality local universities. 

Keywords: geography of innovation; university-industry linkages; absorptive capacity; 
academic research quality; policy. 

JEL Codes: O18; O31; R12 

Área ANPEC: Economia Industrial 

 

Uma análise da influência das características das firmas e dos grupos de pesquisa 

acadêmicos sobre a distância geográfica das interações universidade-empresa 

Resumo 
Este trabalho examina os fatores que afetam a distância geográfica das interações universidade-
empresa,  por  meio  da  análise  de  características  específicas  tanto  de  empresas  como  de 
universidades. Estudos prévios apresentaram evidências importantes a esta questão, mas utilizam 
dados somente das empresas ou das universidades. Assim, a contribuição deste trabalho reside no 
uso de  informações sobre as duas partes  envolvidas nos projetos  de colaboração. Para isso, foi 
estimado um modelo empírico usados usando dados do Diretório dos Grupos de Pesquisa da base 
Lattes do CNPq. Os principais resultados indicam que firmas maiores e com maior capacidade de 
absorção tendem a colaborar com grupos de pesquisa geograficamente mais distantes. Além disso, 
do  lado  da  universidade,  grupos  de  pesquisa  maiores  e  com  melhor  desempenho  acadêmico 
tendem  a  atrair  firmas  mais  distantes  geograficamente  como  parceiros  de  colaboração.  Assim, 
colaborações  a  longa  distância  ocorrem  usualmente  quando  as  empresas  possuem  elevada 
capacidade de absorção e não encontram universidades locais de alta qualidade. 

Palavras-chave: geografia da inovação; interação universidade-empresa; capacidade de 
absorção; qualidade da pesquisa acadêmica; politicas. 

 

 

 

 

1 

 

An analysis of the influence of the main characteristics of academic research 
groups and firms on the geographical distance of university-industry linkages 

Introduction 

Universities  have  been  playing  an  increasingly  important  role  in  supporting 
innovation.  Academic  research  constitutes  an  important  source  of  new  knowledge  for 
producers, and firms have thus sought to establish collaboration with universities in order 
to  access  new  knowledge.  Accordingly,  university-industry  linkages  have  become  a 
growing  subject  of  interest  in  the  literature,  as  studies  aim  to  understand  how  these 
relationships are shaped. One recent issue in this line of inquiry concerns the geographical 
distance of university-industry linkages, as geographical proximity can provide important 
benefits for firms in terms of access to new sources of information and new knowledge. 
Linked  to  this  issue,  this  paper  aims  to  examine  the  main  factors  that  affect  the 
geographical distance of university-industry linkages by analysing the characteristics of 
both sides of collaboration—firms and universities. 

Several  studies  show  that  the  co-location  of  firms’  R&D  staff  and  academic 
researchers  engendered  important  benefits  (Jaffe, 1989; Audretsch and Feldman, 1996; 
Arundel and Geuna, 2004; D’Este and Iamarino, 2010; De Fuentes and Dutrénit, 2014). 
However, recent analyses show that firms often prefer to collaborate with geographically 
distant universities, as certain factors can induce firms to collaborate with universities in 
geographically  distant  locations  (D’Este  and  Iamarino,  2010;  Laursen  et  al.,  2011; 
Muscio,  2013).  Therefore,  evidence  regarding  the  spatial  distribution  of  university-
industry linkages is conflicting. 

Hence, one of the main questions that the literature aims to answer is why firms 
collaborate  with  geographically  distant  universities.  The  results  generally  point  to two 
main drivers. First, firms seek out distant universities when they cannot find high-quality 
academic research  locally. Second, firms  must have  high absorptive capacity  to  search 
for  local  or  non-local  universities  that  are  able  to  solve  their  innovation  problems. 
Previous studies provide important evidence related to this issue. However, an important 
research gap that requires deeper analysis remains, as evidence from previous studies is 
based  on  information  about  either  universities  (D’Este  and  Iammarino,  2010;  Muscio, 
2013) or firms (Laursen et al., 2011; De Fuentes and Dutrénit, 2014) only.  

Linked to this issue, this paper aims to contribute to existing research by providing 
new evidence on specific factors that affect geographical distance of university-industry 
linkages. In addition, the paper uses comprehensive information on both universities and 
firms  to  analyse  such  collaborations.  In  addition,  it  examines  geographical  patterns  of 
university-industry  linkages  in  a  developing  country,  Brazil,  whereas  most  previous 
analyses have focused on developed countries, mainly European countries. However, it 
is important to note that the main interest of research is to exam the factors that affect the 
decision  of  the  firm  to  interact  with  university,  and  the  analysis  of  the  geographical 
distance of university-industry collaborations  could be a way to understand patterns of 
collaboration between university and firms.  

For this purpose, a comprehensive database of university-industry collaborations 
in  Brazil  in  the  scientific  fields  of  Engineering  and  Agrarian  Sciences  was  used.  The 
primary data came from the Brazilian Ministry of Science and Technology, which gathers 
information on the activities of research groups  in Brazil and their  collaborations with 
firms.  The  database  includes  information  on  the main  characteristics  of  these  research 
groups. Information on their collaborating partner firms was added.  

The results of the empirical analysis show that bigger firms and firms with higher 
absorptive capacity tend to collaborate with research groups that are more geographically 

 

2 

 

distant, indicating that firms must have the capability to find universities, whether local 
or distant, that are able to solve their innovation problems. On the university side, high-
performance and large research groups tend to engage in collaborations at higher average 
geographical  distances,  indicating  that  such  research  groups  are  able  to  attract  more 
distant firms as collaboration partners. 

This  paper  is  organised  into  four  sections  beyond  this  introduction.  The  first 
section  presents  the  main  conceptual  background  related  to  geographical  distance  and 
university-industry linkages and discusses the characteristics of firms and research groups 
as factors affecting the geographical distance of university-industry linkages. Section two 
then  provides  a  brief  description  of  the  data  and  the  empirical  model.  Section  three 
presents the results and discusses the effects of the characteristics of firms and research 
groups on the geographical distance of university-industry linkages. Finally, section four 
offers some concluding remarks and policy implications. 
 

1. Main conceptual remarks 
 
1.1. Geographical distance and university-industry linkages 

 
The role of universities and academic research in fostering innovation is a growing 
subject of interest in the literature. Many studies have examined universities as source of 
new knowledge that supports firms’ innovation and as collaboration partners that solve 
firms’ innovation problems (Nelson, 1959; Klevorick et al., 1995; Cohen et al., 2002). In 
general,  studies  confirm  that  university  research  is  a  very  important  source  of  firm 
innovation, particularly for industries closer to the scientific and technological base of an 
innovation  system  (Klevorick  et  al.,  1995).  University  research  not  only  provides  new 
ideas for industrial R&D projects but also facilitates the completion of ongoing projects 
in firms (Cohen et al., 2002). 

In  the  last  decades,  analyses  of  university-industry  linkages  have  devoted 
increased  attention  to  the  role  of  geographical  proximity  in  collaboration  between 
academic  research  and  industrial  R&D,  and  some  of  these  analyses  have  empirically 
demonstrated  the  benefits  associated  with  the  co-location  of  firms  and  universities.  In 
general,  these  studies  found  empirical  evidence  of  the  presence  of  geographically 
bounded  spillovers  from  academic  research  to  industrial  innovation  (Jaffe,  1989; 
Audretsch and Feldman, 1996; Mansfield and Lee, 1996; Anselin  et al., 1997; Arundel 
and  Geuna,  2004;  Laursen  et  al.,  2011;  D’Este  and  Iammarino,  2010;  De  Fuentes  and 
Dutrénit, 2014).  

Agglomeration  effects  are  also  pointed  as  important  factors  that  benefit  co-
location  of  university  research  and  industrial  R&D  facilities.  Geographical  areas  with 
dense spatial concentrations of universities and firms can engender important benefits for 
local  firms,  both  aiding  and  promoting  their  innovation  efforts.  Firms  with  closer 
proximity to knowledge-generating centres are able to gain a competitive advantage from 
the increased potential for university collaborations. Moreover, firms located proximate 
to  universities  can  benefit  from  local  knowledge  spillovers  from  academic  research 
through the dissemination of knowledge in local communication networks between firms 
and  universities.  Proximity  between  firms  and  universities  also  facilitates  interactive 
learning  process  through  frequent  personal  interactions  and  face-to-face  contact, 
engendering benefits to firms located near scientific and technological centres (Arundel 
and Geuna, 2004; Abramovsky  et al., 2007; Fritsch and Slavtchev, 2007; Ponds  et  al., 
2007; D’Este et al., 2013; Muscio, 2013). 

 

3 

 

By  contrast,  recent  studies  show  that  firms  often  search  for  high-quality, 
geographically  distant  universities  that  are  able  to  solve  their  innovation  problems 
(D’Este  and  Iammarino,  2010;  Laursen  et  al.,  2011,  Muscio,  2013;  De  Fuentes  and 
Dutrénit, 2014). Thus, while geographical proximity is one factor that determines whether 
a  firm  will  collaborate  with  academic  partners  to  benefit  from  enhanced  interactive 
learning through co-location, other factors may influence a firm’s decision to collaborate 
with a certain university, as the firm may require a broad set of academic capabilities to 
help  solve  its  innovation  problems  (Bishop  et  al.  2011;  D’Este  et  al., 2013).  If  a  firm 
requires unique, complex, and tacit knowledge, it will seek out a university that is able to 
solve its innovation problems regardless of the university’s geographical location. 

Accordingly,  a  deeper  examination  of  the  geographical  distance  of  university-
industry linkages is required to examine the main factors that influence the geographical 
distance of such collaborations. In fact, the main factor affecting the role of geographical 
proximity  in  university-industry  linkages  is  a  need  for  tacit  knowledge  required  for 
innovation (Gertler, 2003). However, there are several other sources of tacit knowledge 
sharing, arising through different types of proximity among economic agents (Boschma, 
2005).  

Firms collaborate with universities because they require access to new knowledge 
to foster innovation. If a firm is able to find a geographically close, high-quality university 
that is able to help solve its innovation problems, the firm will likely collaborate with it. 
However, if a local university is not able address the firm’s innovation problems, the firm 
must have the capability to search for, and find, a non-local university that can help the 
firm to solve  its  innovation problems.  Hence,  although  the  literature  identifies  a set of 
benefits  associated  with  the  co-location  of  universities  and  firms,  local  collaborations 
between  universities  and  firms  will  occur  only  if  two  main  factors  are  simultaneously 
met:  first,  the  local  university  is  qualified  to  assist  in  solving  the  firm’s  innovation 
problems; second, the firm does not have the capability to search for a high-quality non-
local university as a collaboration partner. 

Prior  research  provides  some  evidence  regarding  how  the  quality  of  academic 
research affects the geographical distance between collaborating  firms and universities. 
Collaborations involving firms and high-quality research university departments tend to 
occur at greater distances (D'Este and Iammarino, 2010; Muscio, 2013). Additionally, the 
curvilinear relationship between the quality of research and the distance of collaboration 
indicates that collaborations with top-ranked university departments involve significantly 
shorter distances than collaborations with mid-ranked university departments (D'Este and 
Iammarino,  2010). Furthermore, the applicability  of research to industrial purposes are 
also drivers of long-distance collaboration between universities and firms, as well as the 
mobility  of  academic  researchers  (Muscio,  2013).  However,  these  analyses  use 
information on universities only. 

Other  research  using  information  on  the  characteristics  of  firms  shows  that the 
presence of a high-quality local university favours local collaboration, especially for firms 
with low R&D expenditures (Laursen et al., 2011). These results, however, are based on 
data from the UK Innovation Survey 2005, which provides. Hence, the analysis provides 
rich  information  on  the  innovation  efforts  of  firms  but  provides  little  information  on 
firms’ academic partners, as well as the geographical distance between them. The main 
conclusion is that two factors affect the geographical distance of scientific collaborations: 
the quality of research and the intensity of firms’ R&D expenditures. The lack of a high-
quality local partner favours geographically distant collaboration (Laursen et al., 2011). 

 

1.2. Factors affecting the geographical distance of university-industry linkages 

 

4 

 

 
Spatially  bounded  knowledge  spillovers  from  university  research  to  industrial 
innovation can play an important role to foster firms’ R&D activities. However, it is usual 
to find firms collaborating with universities at great geographical distances. In this way, 
it is important to exam how specific characteristics of both firms and universities engaged 
in university-industry linkages affect the geographical distance of such collaborations. 

Regarding the characteristics of research groups, the quality of academic research 
is an important factor that determines whether a firm collaborates with a university. The 
primary benefit of collaborating with top universities for firms is access to state-of-the-
art knowledge generated by such high performance universities. In fact, the generation of 
advanced or radical innovations requires a unique set of knowledge, which is more often 
found  in top universities (D’Este and Iammarino, 2010; Laursen et al., 2011; Bishop et 
al.,  2011).  Thus,  academic  research  excellence  is  an  important  factor  that  determines 
whether a firm collaborates with a certain university to help support its innovation efforts. 
Collaboration with high-performance universities is based on access to complex and tacit 
knowledge,  one  of  the  primary  characteristics  of  state-of-the-art  knowledge.  Such 
universities  are  able  to  master  a  broad  and  complex  set  of  capabilities  that  can  help 
support a firm’s  innovation process. In this way, geographical proximity is particularly 
important if the collaboration involves the sharing of tacit and specific knowledge, which 
requires frequent face-to-face contact and professional mobility (Bishop et al., 2011). The 
size of the research group is another factor that may affect university-industry linkages 
(De Fuentes and Dutrénit, 2012). A research group with more technicians and researchers 
certainly has more accumulated capabilities, derived from both previous research projects 
and previous collaborations with firms. Thus, larger groups can not only share broader 
and more complex knowledge with firms but also overcome barriers to collaborating with 
industry partners. The lifetime of the research group (team age) is another relevant factor 
that may influence university-industry linkages (De Fuentes and Dutrénit, 2012).  

In addition to the characteristics of research groups, the characteristics of partner 
firms may influence firms’ decision to collaborate with certain universities. In particular, 
factors  that  influence  this  decision  include  the  firm’s  absorptive  capacity,  size,  and 
industrial sector (Cohen et al., 2002).  

Absorptive capacity  refers  to  a firm's ability to evaluate, assimilate, and  exploit 
available external knowledge (Cohen and Levinthal, 1990). Firms with greater absorptive 
capacity tend to collaborate more often with universities because they can better exploit 
the  benefits  of  collaborating  with  academic  research  partners  (Boschma  and  Ter  Wal, 
2007; Balland, 2011). In addition, such  firms  have the ability to search for universities 
with capabilities that better fit their innovation problems. Firms’ absorptive capacity thus 
has  a  special  relation  with  the  geographical  distance  of  university-industry  linkages. 
Firms  with  low  absorptive  capacity  depend  more  on  geographical  proximity  to 
universities and less on the quality of universities’ academic research in determining their 
collaboration  partners.  By  contrast,  firms  with  high  absorptive  capacity  have  a  greater 
range  of  potential  academic  partners.  Indeed,  as  these  firms  can  more  efficiently 
incorporate  knowledge  generated  by  the  most  qualified  research  groups  and  more 
effectively search for and coordinate their activities with non-local universities (Laursen 
et  al.,  2011),  they  can  go  beyond  their  geographically  proximate  environment  to  find 
academic  partners.  High  absorptive  capacity  is  thus  particularly  important  when  firms 
cannot find local universities that can help them solve their innovation problems (Bishop 
et al., 2011). 

Another  important  factor  that  affects  scientific  collaboration  is  firm  size.  In 
general, larger firms collaborate more with universities because they have more internal 

 

5 

 

capabilities to develop a wider range of collaborations with academic research  partners 
(Fritsch  and  Lukas,  2001).  Although  small  firms  may  seek  collaborations  with 
universities,  larger  firms  tend  to  seek  such  collaborations  more  often  to  obtain  new 
information,  enhance  their  professional  recruitment,  and  facilitate  the  application  of 
external knowledge in their innovation activities (Bishop et al., 2011). Indeed, most firms 
that collaborate in R&D with research institutes are large firms, as large firms can more 
easily manage and incur the costs of long-distance collaboration (Levy et al., 2009). By 
contrast, small and medium-sized firms tend to rely more on their local environment in 
research collaborations, as collaborations over long distances tend to require a broad set 
of capabilities and incur substantial costs (Muscio, 2013). 

While  previous  studies  have  provided  important  findings,  some  research  gaps 
remain, and a comprehensive analysis of the characteristics of both firms and universities 
in research collaborations is required to fill these gaps. Laursen et al. (2011) uses a data 
set that provides rich information on the characteristics of firms but little information on 
universities.  By  contrast,  D'Este  and  Iammarino  (2010)  and  Muscio  (2013)  almost 
exclusively  use  information  on  the  characteristics  of  universities.  With  regard  to 
geographical  distance,  previous  analyses  are  often  quite  broad,  reporting  aggregate 
results. Further, except in Muscio (2013), the quality of academic research is generally 
measured  by  using  a  broad  proxy,  the  RAE  evaluation,  instead  of  the  number  of 
publications per researcher, which is a more appropriate measure for assessing the quality 
of academic research. Finally, previous studies have measured academic research quality 
at the department level; thus, they rely on the assumption that the average qualification 
level of university departments does not substantially differ among research groups, even 
in large departments.  

To  fill these  research  gaps,  this paper  examines the  main  factors that affect  the 
geographical  distance  of  university-industry  linkages.  For  this  purpose,  an  empirical 
model is estimated to examine the main characteristics of firms and research groups that 
affect the geographical distance of scientific collaborations. 

 

 
2. Empirical analysis 
2.1. Main features of the university-industry linkages in Brazil 
 

As in developed countries, university research has been playing a growing role in 
fostering firms’ innovation in Brazil (Albuquerque, 2007; Suzigan et al, 2009; Rapini et 
al,  2009;  Fernandes  et  al,  2010).  Engineering  and  Agrarian  Sciences  are  the  most 
important scientific fields in which universities collaborate with industry, in convergence 
with the Brazilian industrial structure, where manufacturing industries and agribusiness 
are the main important economic activities (Suzigan et al., 2009). Among the main sectors 
that collaborate with the university, it is possible to find low and medium-tech industries, 
such as mining and oil and gas, and high-tech ones, such as biotechnology (Chaves et al., 
2012). 

University-industry  linkages  in  Brazil  is  characterised  by  a  strong  unequal 
regional  distribution  (Figure  1).  The  geographical  concentration  of  both  collaborative 
firms and university is due to the regional distribution of  private R&D activities and of 
high quality universities, both concentrated in the Southern part of the country. Regarding 
policy,  there  are  several  policies  incentives  to  foster  innovation  by  encouraging 
collaboration  between  firms  and  universities,  and  most of  them  are  similar  to  those  in 
developed countries. In general, these are federal government coordinated policies and, 

 

6 

 

in  some  cases,  focused  on  specific  sectors,  such  as  information  and  communication 
technologies and biotechnology. 
 

Figure 1 – Regional distribution of collaborative firms and research groups 

 

 
 
2.2. Database  
 

 

To  examine  how  the  characteristics  of  universities  and  firms  affect  the 
geographical distance of university-industry linkages in Brazil, a specific data set derived 
from various data sources is exploited. The sample of collaborations between firms and 
universities  was  gathered  from  the  Brazilian  Ministry  of  Science  and  Technology  by 
exploiting the CNPq Directory of Research Groups of the Lattes database, which provides 
a broad set of data on the activities of academic research groups in Brazil1. This data set 
covers the main characteristics of academic research groups, such as the scientific field, 
number  of  researchers,  research  performance,  and  collaborating  firm.  To  these  data, 
information on firms, such as size, industrial sector, and labour force qualification, from 
the  Brazilian  Ministry  of  Labour  was  added.  Further,  information  on  the  geographical 
distance  between  the  firm  and  the  research  group  in  collaboration,  measured  as  the 
distance in kilometres in a straight line from the georeferenced coordinates (latitude and 
longitude) of the zip code (ZIP) for the firm and research group, was added. 

Therefore, the final database includes 4,337 collaborations involving 3,063 firms 
and 1,738 Engineering and Agrarian Sciences research groups in 2010 from all Brazilian 
regions. The average firm is involved in collaborations with 1.42 research groups, and the 
average research group is involved in collaborations with 2.49 firms. The average number 
of  published  papers  per  researcher  is  15;  the  average  size  of  a  research  group  is  9 
researchers; and the average lifetime of a research group is 10 years. Moreover, in a large 
share of the firms (25%), at least 42% of the employees have a higher degree. Regarding 
number  of  employees,  substantial  variation  exists  within  the  sample:  firms  in  the  first 

                                                             
1 CNPq is the Brazilian Council for Scientific and Technological Development, an institution of the Brazilian 
Ministry  of  Science  and  Technology  that  is  dedicated  to  the  promotion  of  scientific  and  technological 
research. Previous studies, such as Suzigan et al. (2009), Rapini et al (2009) and  Fernandes et al (2010) 
had also used this database to analyse university-industry linkages in Brazil. 

 

7 

 

quartile have fewer than 3 employees, whereas firms in the last quartile have more than 
248 employees. 
 
2.3. Econometric analysis  

An  empirical  model  is  estimated  on  this  data  set  to  examine  how  the  main 
characteristics of firms and research groups affect the geographical distance of university-
industry linkages in Brazil.  

The dependent variable is the geographical distance between the research group 
and  the  firm  in  logarithmic  form  (DistColl).  The  use  of  geographical  distance  as  the 
dependent variable is line with the main aim of the paper, which is to examine the main 
factors that affect the geographical distance of university-industry linkages. Further, the 
independent  variables  are  those  characteristics  of  research  groups  and  firms  that  may 
affect  the  geographical  distance  of  such  collaborations.  The  selected  characteristics  of 
research groups are the quality of academic research (Quali), measured as the number of 
published  papers  per  researcher  during  the  period  2009-2010;  the  size  of  the  research 
group  team  (SizeG),  measured  as  the  number  of  researchers;  and  the  research  group 
lifetime (TimeG). At the firm level, the selected characteristics are the firm’s absorptive 
capacity (AbsorCF), measured as the share of employees with a higher degree, and the 
firm’s size (SizeF), measured as the number of employees in logarithmic form (Table 1). 

 

8 

 

Table 1: Description of the variables 

 

Variable 

DistColl 

O-Dist 

Quali 

SizeG 

TimeG 

AbsorCF 

Description 
Distance  in  kilometres  in  a  straight  line  from  the  georeferenced 
coordinates (latitude and longitude) of the zip code (ZIP) for the firm and 
the research group (logarithmic form) 
1 = less than 100 km, 2 = between 100 km and 500 km; 3 = more than 
500 km. 
Number of articles per researcher (2009-2010) 

Number of researchers in the research group 

Research group lifetime 
Share  of  employees  of  the  firm  with  a  higher  education  degree 
(undergraduate or higher) 

SizeF 

Logarithm of the number of employees in the firm 

AgglomLev  Population density in the region in which the firm resides 

K-index 

Krugman’s specialisation index for the region in which the firm resides 

R&D_LG 

R&D_LF 

Number of active, full-time PhD professors per 10,000 inhabitants of the 
municipality in which the firm is located 
Number of R&D researchers per 10,000 workers  of the municipality in 
which the firm is located 

Financ 

Dummy for finance 

MacroR_F  Dummy for firm’s Brazilian macro regions 

MacroR 

Dummy for research group’s Brazilian macro regions 

Metro 

Dummy for metropolitan regions 

SciField 

Dummies for scientific fields* 

Ind 

Dummies for industries** 

CollType  Dummies for different types of collaboration*** 

Source 

Original work 

Original work 

CNPq, 2010 

CNPq, 2010 

CNPq, 2010 

RAIS, 2008 

RAIS, 2008 

IBGE, 2000 
Original work, 
using RAIS, 
2008 
INEP, 2009 and 
IBGE, 2010 

RAIS, 2008 

CNPq, 2010 
CNPq, 2010; 
IBGE 
CNPq, 2010; 
IBGE 
 

CNPq, 2010 

CNPq, 2010 

CNPq, 2010 

Source: Original work. 
* Agrarian Sciences, Food Technology, Zootechnology, Veterinary Medicine, Computing Science and 
Industrial Design and Agricultural Engineering: 1: Civil, Transportation and Sanitary Engineering; 2: 
Chemistry, Nuclear, Materials, Metallurgical and Mining Engineering; 3: Aerospace, Mechanics, Naval, 
Oceanic and Production Engineering; 4: Electrical and Biomedical Engineering. 
** Advanced Knowledge Providers, Mass Production Goods, Supporting infrastructure services, Personal 
goods and services (Castellaci, 2008). Remain sectors were grouped in three additional sectors: 
Agricultural, Extractive Industries and Others. 
*** R&D collaborative projects, Technology transfer, Consultancy, Engineering and Software 
development, Material Supply, Training and Others 

 
Controls  are  also  added  to  consider  exogenous  factors  related  to  the  locational 
pattern  of  the  firms  and  research  groups.  Locational  factors  can  also  affect  a  firm’s 
decision to collaborate with a certain research group (D’Este and Iammarino, 2010). The 
first control is the density of the urban population of the region in which the firm resides, 
the so-called agglomeration level (AgglomLev). Firms located in more dense urban areas 
can benefit from the presence of broader and more diversified local academic capabilities, 
which may influence their decision to collaborate with local universities. Another control 
for agglomeration effects is the Krugman specialisation index (K-index), which measures 
the relative  level of regional  industry specialisation or diversification (Crescenzi et al., 
2007). Economic diversity can play an important role in fostering interactive learning and 

 

9 

 

innovation, since a diversified environment can create greater opportunities for firms to 
imitate, share, and recombine ideas and practices across industries (Glaeser et al., 1992; 
Storper  and  Venables,  2004).  Additionally,  heterogeneity  in  local  capabilities  can 
stimulate the exchange and cross-fertilisation of existing ideas and the generation of new 
ideas across different industries (Storper and Venables, 2004; Duranton and Puga, 2001). 
Variables capturing academic and industrial R&D (R&D_LF and R&D_LG, respectively) 
are also included to control for local R&D expenditures at both the firm and the university 
level.  A  dummy  variable  for  metropolitan  regions  (Metro)  was  included  to  capture 
differences of collaborative patterns among firms in main metropolitan regions in Brazil. 
To control for other locational factors, a dummy that captures macro-regional differences 
for both firms (MacroR_F) and research groups (MacroR_G) due to the unequal regional 
distribution  of  economic  activity,  innovation  and  research  among  Brazilian  regions  is 
used. 

Furthermore, a dummy capturing the scientific fields of research groups (SciField) 
is included, since universities’ role in supporting innovation and pattern of collaboration 
with  firms  may  differ  by  scientific  field  (Meyer-Krahmer  and  Schmoch,  1998; 
Schartinger et al., 2001; Bekkers and Bodas-Freitas, 2008). The inclusion of dummies for 
scientific  fields  is  also  important  because  they  can  also  control  sectoral  policies  that 
encourage  university-industry  linkages  and  could  affect  geographic  distance  of 
collaborations. Other dummies capturing industry sector (Ind) and type of collaboration 
(CollType)  are 
the  geographical  distance  of  university-industry 
collaborations may differ by both industry (Abramovsky et al., 2007; Schartinger et al., 
2001) and type of collaboration (Perkmann et al., 2011; D’Este and Patel, 2007). Finally, 
because  different  patterns  of  financial  support  may  influence  in  the  establishment  and 
frequency of university-industry collaborations (De Fuentes and Dutrénit, 2012), patterns 
of financial support (Financ) for such collaborations are controlled for. 

included,  as 

The empirical model is defined as follows: 
 
𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝐶𝑜𝑙𝑙 = 𝑄𝑢𝑎𝑙𝑖 + 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝐺 + 𝑇𝑖𝑚𝑒𝐺 + 𝐴𝑏𝑠𝑜𝑟𝐶𝐹 + 𝑆𝑖𝑧𝑒𝐹 + 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙𝑠 

 
Table 2 shows the relationships between geographical distance (DistColl) and the 
other variables, such as research quality (Quali) and research group size (SizeG) at the 
research group level and absorptive capacity (AbsorCF) and firm size (SizeF) at the firm 
level.  Accordingly,  comparisons  of  the  average  geographical  distance  for  each  of  the 
selected variables can be made. In general, collaborations between research groups and 
firms  from  the  last  quartile  occur  at  higher  average  geographical  distances  than 
collaborations between research groups and firms from the first quartile, suggesting that 
positive relations exist between geographical distance and the selected variables. 

 

 
 

  

 

Table 2: Average distance between research groups and firms 

  
First quartile (a) 
Second quartile  
Third quartile  
Last quartile (b) 

(b) - (a) 

Source: Original work. 

Quali 

SizeG 

SizeF 

301.5 
306.3 
333.2 
325.1 

23.6 

288.2 
328.3 
275.6 
373.9 

85.7 

278.8 
277.4 
347.3 
362.6 

83.8 

AbsorCF 
268.6 
291.7 
316.1 
389.6 

120.9 

10 

 

Table 3 presents the descriptive statistics. The average distance between firms and 
research groups is 316.5 km; however, the variance is high, as half of the collaborations 
occur  within  a  distance  of  82.4  km.  By  contrast, 25% of  the  collaborations  occur  at  a 
distance greater than 366.3 km, up to a maximum of 3,344.6 km. 

 

Table 3: Descriptive Statistics (N = 4,337) 

 

Variable  Min 

First 
quartile 

Median 

Third 
quartile 

Max 

Mean  Std. dev. 

DistColl 

SizeG 

Quali 

TimeG 

AbsorCF 

SizeF 

Firm’s employees 

AgglomLev 

K-index 

R&D_LF 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.0 

0.3 

0.4 

0.0 

R&D_LG 

0.0 
Source: Original work. 

6.9 

5.0 

4.6 

4.0 

0.02 

1.9 

7.0 

82.4 

8.0 

10.1 

9.0 

0.2 

4.3 

366.3 

3,344.6 

316.5 

544.0 

12.0 

19.1 

16.0 

0.5 

6.1 

54.0 

144.5 

78.0 

1.0 

11.8 

9.6 

14.1 

11.3 

0.3 

4.0 

6.2 

14.3 

9.9 

0.3 

2.6 

73.0 

440.0  139,047.0 

664.4 

3,381.9 

67.5 

337.5 

1,112.6 

5,796.0 

1,207.1 

1,786.7 

0.6 

478 

2.1 

0.7 

0.8 

1.9 

663.4 

942.8 

1839.3 

40.3 

59.8 

312.3 

0.7 

736.5 

46.3 

0.2 

368.5 

51.0 

 

 
 
 

 

11 

 

3.  Results and discussion 

Table 4 presents the results for a robust regression estimation in which distance in 
kilometres is the dependent variable (DistColl). Another estimation was made using an 
ordered logit model that includes three different levels of geographical distance (O-Dist) 
and results are quite similar. 

 

Table 4: Robust regression results (1) and ordered logit (2) (N = 4,337) 

 

SizeG 

Quali 

TimeG 

AbsorCF 

SizeF 

AgglomLev 

K-index 

R&D_LF 

R&D_LG 

Finac 

MacroR_F 

MacroR_G 

SciField 

Ind 

CollType 

Metro 
R2 

DistColl 

0.015**    (0.006) 

0.005*    (0.002) 

0.002       (0.003) 

0.535***   (0.12) 

0.035**  (0.013) 

0.000***        (0) 

0.536***(0.161) 

0.000      (0.000) 

-0.010***(0.001) 

0.192**  (0.066) 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

0.1745 

O-Dist + 

0.018** (0.006) 

0.005* (0.002) 

0.001 (0.003) 

0.728*** (0.121) 

0.023 (0.013) 

0.000*** (0) 

0.849*** (0148) 

-0.000 (0.000) 

-0.006*** (0.000) 

0.192** (0.063) 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

 

0.064 

Source: Original work. 

+ O-Dist - 1 = less than 100 km, 2 = between 100 km and 500 km; 3 = more than 500 km. 

*** p < 0.1%; ** p < 1%; * p < 5%; standard deviation presented in brackets 
 
Regarding  the  selected  characteristics  of  research  groups,  the  quality  of  the 
research  performed  by  the  research  group  (Quali)  and  the  size  of  the  research  group 
(SizeG) positively affect the geographical distance of university-industry collaborations. 
Specifically, the results regarding the positive impact of the quality of the research 
performed by the research group (Quali) show that high-performance research groups are 
associated with a higher mean geographical distance between the collaborating firm and 
the research group. This result suggests that  firms are willing to  collaborate  with  more 
distant  high-quality  research  groups  to  support  their  innovation  efforts,  solve  their 
production and operational  problems, and  foster the development of new products and 
processes. Firms seek high-quality research groups as collaboration partners because they 
believe  that  such  research  groups  have  greater  capabilities  for  handling  complex 
problems.  This  result  is  consistent  with  the  primary  assumptions  presented  in  the 
conceptual discussion that firms primarily  collaborate  locally;  however,  when they are 
searching  for  high-quality  research  groups,  they  may  extend  their  search  efforts  over 
greater distances to obtain an academic partner for collaboration. 

By  contrast,  low-performance  research  groups  engage  in  more  geographically 
proximate  collaborations,  as  indicated  by  the  lower  average  distance  of  their 
collaborations.  This  result  indicates  that  mid-  and  low-quality  research  groups  more 
commonly collaborate with local producers whose demands they  can sufficiently meet, 

 

12 

 

showing  the  importance  of  the  local  channels  of  sharing  knowledge.  These  research 
groups  may  lack  capabilities  and  expertise  to  justify  the  higher  costs  of  developing 
linkages  with  distant  firms.  Low-performance  local  universities  are  nevertheless 
important, since local universities are better positioned to collaborate with local firms on 
simpler  problems  that  do  not  require  access  to  cutting-edge  knowledge  or  expertise 
(Mansfield and Lee, 1996). 

Furthermore,  the  size  of  the  research  group  (SizeG)  positively  affects  the 
geographical  distance  of  university-industry  collaborations,  indicating  that  research 
groups  with  more  researchers  engage  in  collaborations  that  are  more  geographically 
distant. Larger research groups have a broader structure that provides them with greater 
and more diversified academic capabilities to solve more complex innovation problems. 
In addition, such research groups have more experience collaborating with firms, granting 
them capabilities for solving problems related to managing interactive projects with firms. 
This set of capabilities allows larger research groups to solve innovation problems for not 
only  local  firms  but  also  firms  located  in  regions  that  are  more  distant.  By  contrast, 
smaller research groups, which have fewer researchers, do not collectively have a broad 
set of  academic  capabilities,  limiting  their ability  to  meet the needs of  firms  located in 
regions  that  are  more  distant.  Therefore,  smaller  research  groups  generally  collaborate 
with local firms. 

Regarding  the  final  selected  characteristic  of  research  groups  (TimeG),  the 
coefficient for the lifetime of the research group is not significant; thus, nothing can be 
inferred about the relation between the lifetime of the research group and the geographical 
distance of university-industry collaborations. Hence, even the oldest and longest-lasting 
research groups, which likely have more experienced researchers, do not collaborate with 
firms at greater distances more often other firms do. 

Regarding the selected characteristics of firms, the coefficients for both absorptive 
capacity  (AbsorvCF)  and  firm  size  (SizeF)  are  positive  and  significant,  indicating  that 
both  characteristics  positively  affect  the  geographical  distance  of  university-industry 
collaborations. 

The positive coefficient for  absorptive capacity (AbsorvCF) indicates  that  firms 
with  higher  absorptive  capacity  collaborate  with  research  groups  that  are  more 
geographically  distant.  Previous  studies  demonstrate  that  firms  with  higher  absorptive 
capacity  collaborate more often with universities than other firms, as they  have greater 
capabilities for  searching  for academic  partners to  solve  their  innovation problems and 
provide  academic  benefits  to  research  groups,  such  as  ideas  for  new  projects  and  new 
insights  for  the  research  agenda  (Bishop  et  al.,  2011;  Tartari  and  Breschi,  2012). 
Extending  these  findings,  results  show  that  firms  with  higher  absorptive  capacity  also 
collaborate with research groups that are more geographically distant. Empirical results 
show that firms with 25% more skilled workers with higher education degree, the proxy 
for  absorptive  capacity,  collaborate  with  universities 
in  average  14.5%  more 
geographically distant. Moreover, this finding shows that the absorptive capacity is the 
principal factor that affect geographical distance of collaborations. 

In this way, despite the importance of the local bounded knowledge spillovers and 
the  local  channels  of  sharing  knowledge,  higher  absorptive  capacity  is  a  factor  that 
stimulate  firms  to  collaborate  with  university  at  greater  geographical  distances.  High 
absorptive  capacity  firms  are  able  to  search  for  research  groups  that  can  solve  their 
innovation problems regardless of their geographical location. Thus, these firms are less 
dependent  on  co-location  with  research  groups  to  obtain  academic  partners  for 
collaboration.  Furthermore,  these  firms  tend  to  face  problems  that  are  more  complex; 
thus,  they  seek  collaboration  with  distant  universities  even  if  with  such  collaboration 

 

13 

 

entails  higher  costs.  Previous  studies  show  that  firms  with  higher  absorptive  capacity 
collaborate more often with universities than other firms (Boschma and Ter Wal, 2007; 
Balland, 2011).  Results show that  firms with  high absorptive capacity  also  collaborate 
with universities that are more geographically distant, as these firms can more efficiently 
assimilate knowledge from high-quality research groups and can more effectively search 
for and select academic partners.  

By contrast, firms with  lower absorptive  capacity  may  find  it difficult to  locate 
research  groups that  are  able  to  address their  needs;  consequently,  they  may  primarily 
collaborate  with  local  universities.  For  these  firms,  geographical  mechanisms  of 
dissemination  of  information  and  knowledge  sharing  with  university  play  a  very 
important role to stimulate collaboration with firms (Arundel and Geuna, 2004; Laursen 
et  al.,  2011).  Firms  with  lower  absorptive  capacity  tend  to  experience  fewer  complex 
problems  in  their  production  and  innovation  processes,  and  low-performance  local 
universities can generally solve these problems, eliminating any justification for seeking 
collaboration with distant research groups. 

Regarding  the  other  selected  characteristic  of  firms,  firm  size  (SizeF)  has  a 
significant,  positive  influence  on  the  geographical  distance  of  university-industry 
linkages. This result indicates that larger firms have better capabilities for collaborating 
not only more frequently with universities (Levy et al., 2009; Gallie and Roux, 2010), but 
also with research groups that are more geographically distant. Such firms have a broader 
set of capabilities for searching for distant research groups and managing long-distance 
collaborations.  Moreover,  long-distance  collaborations  with  universities  entail  higher 
costs, and larger firms are better able to finance such collaborations2.  

The results for the control variables reveal the effect on locational factors on the 
geographical distance of university-industry linkages. First, the positive and significant 
coefficient for the population density in the firm's region (Agglom) indicates that firms in 
regions  with  higher  population  density 
in  university-industry 
collaborations  that  are  more  geographically  distant.  This  finding  show  clearly  the 
importance  of  the  geographical  mechanisms  of  knowledge  sharing  between  firms  and 
university, as pointed by the conceptual remarks. Thus, more densely populated regions 
could present greater opportunities for collaboration with universities, given the existence 
of  potential  partners  with  a  broader  set  of  academic  and  research  capabilities  in  such 
regions. Moreover, opportunities to collaborate with local universities can enhance firms’ 
capabilities for collaborating with distant universities. 

tend  to  engage 

Second,  the  positive  and  significant  coefficient  for  the  measure  of  the  main 
features  of  the  local  productive  structure, the  Krugman  specialisation  index  (K-index), 
indicates that firms that are located in more diversified regions tend to collaborate more 
often with  local research groups. This relationship  likely arises from the existence of a 
broader  set  of  local  firms  in  diversified  regions.  Such  regions  likely  have  a  more 
heterogeneous local industry that includes firms with greater capabilities for collaboration 
with  universities.  In  fact,  the  diversity  of  the  local  industry  structure  emphasises  the 
importance  of  urban  agglomeration,  which  allows  for  the  concentration  of  diversified 
industry and high-quality academic research centres, and such concentration can generate 
cross-fertilisation effects and strengthen university-industry linkages. These processes are 
the  central  point  of  the  argument  that  agglomeration  in  diversified  regions  can  foster 
different types of collaboration among co-localised players, such as frequent interactions 
and  face-to-face  contact  (Storper  and  Venables,  2004).  By  contrast, the  results  for the 
                                                             
2 A second model, an ordered logit regression, was estimated in order to compare the effect of size of the 
department, in the same way as Muscio (2013). The model presents similar inference results regarding 
the coefficient signs and magnitudes that the original robust regression. 

 

14 

 

Krugman index suggest that firms located in specialised regions may have considerable 
difficulty  finding  opportunities  for  collaboration  with  academic  researchers.  In  such 
cases,  firms  may  be  compelled  to  seek  collaboration  with  distant  research  groups,  and 
they may have more difficulty building up capabilities for collaboration with universities. 
Third,  academic  R&D  (R&D_LG)  has  a  significant  and  negative  effect  on  the 
geographical distance of university-industry linkages. The higher local university R&D 
expenditures are, the more localised collaborations with firms become. Thus, in regions 
with higher academic research expenditures, firms tend to engage in collaborations within 
shorter  distances.  This  tendency  arises  because  in  regions  with  potential  academic 
partners with a wide range of academic capabilities, local academic partners can usually 
address  the  main  needs  of  co-localised  firms  in  supporting  their  innovation  efforts. 
Therefore, firms do not need to search elsewhere for collaboration partners. In fact, if they 
are choosing among universities with similar levels of research quality, firms will usually 
prefer to collaborate with local universities (Laursen et al., 2011). This finding supports 
the important role of spatial co-location and geographical proximity in university-industry 
linkages.  Finally,  the  positive  and  significant  coefficient  for  research  group  financing 
(Financ)  reveals  that  research  groups  that  receive  financing  from  firms  engage  in 
collaborations across greater distances. This result indicates that such research groups are 
able to provide useful knowledge to  firms, which leads  to  collaborations that  are more 
geographically  distant.  Precisely,  financially  supported  collaborations  are  19.8%  more 
geographically distant than others with the same features but without funding. 

 

 
Final remarks and policy implications 

 
Several  studies  have  recognised  the  role  of  university-industry  linkages  in 
fostering innovation, and recent studies have sought to understand the spatial distribution 
of such collaborations, as geographical proximity can engender important benefits related 
to  face-to-face  contact  and  frequent  interactions.  Firms  may  nevertheless  seek  to 
collaborate with geographically distant universities to provide specific solutions to their 
innovation problems. Linked to this issue, this paper examines the main factors that affect 
the geographical distance of university-industry linkages by analysing the characteristics 
of both sides of the collaboration—firms and universities. 

To examine this issue, a comprehensive database from the Brazilian Ministry of 
Science and Technology on university-industry linkages in Brazil in the scientific fields 
of  Engineering  and  Agrarian  Sciences  is  used.  This  database  contains  information  on 
academic research groups  in Brazil, their  main characteristics, and their collaborations 
with  firms.  To  these  data,  information  on  the  collaborating  firms  is  added.  Hence,  in 
contrast to previous studies, this paper uses a  broad data set comprising information on 
both universities and firms in research collaborations. 

The main  findings from the empirical analysis at the firm level show that firms 
with  higher absorptive capacity tend to  collaborate  with research groups that are more 
geographically distant, indicating that such firms are able to collaborate with both local 
and  distant  universities.  Similarly,  bigger  firms  collaborate  with  research  groups  at 
greater geographical distances. At the university level, research groups that produce high-
quality  academic  research  engage  in  collaborations  at  higher  average  geographical 
distances,  indicating  that  they  collaborate  with  both  local  and  distant  firms.  Likewise, 
larger research groups collaborate with firms at greater average geographical distances. 

In sum, the main results show that a firm’s decision to collaborate with a university 
is  related  to  the  need  to  find  solutions  to  its  innovation  problems.  Firms  with  low 

 

15 

 

absorptive capacity  usually  face  simpler problems, and  they  are not able to  search  for, 
and find, geographically distant research groups as collaboration partners. For this reason, 
they tend to collaborate with local universities. By contrast, firms with higher absorptive 
capacity  face  more complex  innovation problems, which require broad, heterogeneous, 
and cutting-edge knowledge to solve. Consequently, these firms often cannot find local 
universities that  are able to  assist them  in solving their  complex problems; hence, they 
seek  to  establish  collaborations  with  geographically  distant,  high-quality  universities. 
Accordingly, collaborations between high-performance research groups and firms tend to 
occur over higher average geographical distances, as the superior academic capabilities 
of high-performance research groups attract geographically distant firms as collaboration 
partners.  Furthermore,  the  superior  solutions  that  high-quality  research  groups  can 
provide outweigh the higher costs of long-distance collaborations. 

Findings of this paper are based on the Brazilian experience in university-industry 
linkages. As  in developed countries, collaboration with university  has  been playing an 
increasing role to foster innovation in Brazil, and policy measures have been designed to 
stimulate  collaboration  between  firms  and  universities.  In  this  way,  lessons  from  the 
Brazilian  experience  can  be  very  important  to  the  understanding  factors  that  affects 
university-industry linkages and its pattern of distribution in geographical space. 

Finally, the findings have some policy implications. First, the results highlight the 
importance of universities for firm innovation. Policy makers should thus aim to stimulate 
and  strengthen  university-industry  linkages.  Moreover,  policy  measures  should  be 
designed  to  strengthen  linkages  between  high-absorptive  capacity  firms  and  high-
performance  research  groups  because  these  linkages  constitute  important  tools  for 
fostering innovation, especially when radical or cutting-edge innovations are involved. In 
such  collaborations,  geographical  distance  is  not  a  barrier  to  collaboration,  since  both 
high-absorptive  capacity  firms  and  high-performance  universities  can  launch  and 
maintain university-industry collaborations over long distances.  

By contrast, low-absorptive capacity firms have more difficulty collaborating with 
non-local  universities.  Hence,  policy  makers  should  aim  both  to  strengthen  firms’ 
capabilities  and  to  support  R&D  in  mid-  and  low-performance  universities.  Low-
absorptive capacity firms tend to face simpler problems that do not require cutting-edge 
knowledge; thus, low-performance local universities are likely able to address the specific 
needs  of  local  producers,  constituting  an  important  tool  for  local  development.  In 
addition,  policy  makers  should  aim  to  stimulate  low-performance  research  groups  to 
engage  in  knowledge  networks,  as  such  networks  will  help  them  overcome  barriers  to 
collaborating  over  greater  geographical  distances  by  strengthening  their  academic 
capabilities and abilities to collaborate at greater distances. 

 

References 

Abramovsky L, Harrison R, Simpson H (2007) University Research and the Location of 

Business R&D. The Economic Journal 117: 114–141 

Albuquerque,  E  (2007).  Inadequacy  of  technology  and  innovation  systems  at  the 

periphery. Cambridge Journal of Economics, 31(5): 669-690. 

Anselin  L,  Varga  A,  Acs  Z  (1997)  Local  geographic  spillovers  between  university 
research and high technology innovations. Journal of Urban Economics 42: 422–448 
Arundel  A,  Geuna  A  (2004)  Proximity  and  the  use  of  public  science  by  innovative 

European firms. Economics of Innovation and New Technologies 13: 559–580 

 

16 

 

Audretsch D, Feldman M (1996) R&D spillovers and the geography of innovation and 

production. American Economic Review 86(4): 253–273 

Balland P (2011) Proximity and the Evolution of Collaboration Networks: Evidence from 
Research  and  Development  Projects  within  the  Global  Navigation  Satellite  System 
(GNSS) Industry. Regional Studies 46(6): 741–756 

Bekkers  R,  Bodas-Freitas  IM  (2008)  Analysing  knowledge  transfer  channels  between 
universities and industry: to what degree do sectors also matter? Research Policy 37: 
1837–1853 

Bishop K, D’Este P, Neely A (2011) Gaining from interactions with universities: Multiple 

methods for nurturing absorptive capacity. Research Policy 40: 30–40 

Boschma R, Ter Wal A (2007) Knowledge Networks and Innovative Performance in an 
Industrial District: The Case of a Footwear District in the South of Italy. Industry and 
Innovation 14(2): 177–199 

Boschma, R (2005) Proximity and  innovation  - a critical  assessment. Regional Studies 

39(1): 61-74 

Chaves  CV,  Carvalho  SSM, Silva  LA,  Teixeira  TC,  Bernardes,  P  (2012)  The  point of 
view  of  firms  in  Minas  Gerais  about  the  contribution  of  universities  and  research 
institutes to R&D activities. Research Policy 41: 1683–1695 

Cohen M, Levinthal  A (1990) Absorptive Capacity a new perspective  in Learning and 

Innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly 35(1): 128-152 

Cohen W, Nelson R, Walsh J (2002) Links and impacts: the influence of public R&D on 

industrial research. Management Science 48: 01-23 

Crescenzi R, Rodríguez-Pose A, Storper M (2007) The territorial dynamics of innovation: 
a Europe-United States comparative analysis. Journal of Economic Geography 7: 673–
709 

Castellacci, F (2008) Technological paradigms, regimes and trajectories: Manufacturing 
and service industries in a new taxonomy of sectoral patterns of innovation. Research 
Policy 37(6): 978-994. 

D’Este  P,  Guy  F,  Iammarino  S  (2013)  Shaping  the  formation  of  university-industry 
research  collaborations:  what  type  of  proximity  does  really  matter?  Journal  of 
Economic Geography 13: 537–558. 

D’Este  P,  Iammarino  S  (2010)  The  spatial  profile  of  university-business  research 

partnerships. Papers in Regional Science 89(2): 335-351 

D’Este  P,  Patel  P  (2007)  University-industry  linkages  in  the  UK:  what  are  the  factors 
underlying the variety of interactions with industry? Research Policy 36: 1295–1313 
De Fuentes C, Dutrénit G (2012) Best channels of academia–industry interaction for long-

term benefit. Research Policy 41(9): 1666–1682 

De  Fuentes  C,  Dutrénit  G  (2014)  Geographic  proximity  and  university–industry 
interaction:  the  case  of  Mexico.  The  Journal  of  Technology  Transfer.  Published 
online: 15 August 2014. 

Duranton G, Puga D (2001) Nursery Cities: Urban Diversity, Process Innovation, and the 

Life Cycle of Products. The American Economic Review 91(5): 1454-1477 

 

17 

 

Fernandes,  AC,  Souza,  BC,  Silva,  A,  Suzigan,  W,  Chaves,  C,  Albuquerque,  E  (2010) 
Academy-industry links in Brazil: evidence about channels and benefits for firms and 
researchers. Science and Public Policy, 37(7), 485-498 

Fritsch M, Lukas R (2001) Who cooperates on R&D? Research Policy 30(2): 297–312 
Fritsch  M,  Slavtchev  V  (2007)  Universities  and  innovation  in  Space.  Industry  and 

Innovation 14: 201–218 

Gallié  E,  Roux  P  (2010)  Forms  and  Determinants  of  R&D  Collaborations:  Evidence 

Based on French Data. Industry and Innovation 17(6): 551–576 

Gertler MS (2007) Tacit knowledge in production systems: how important is geography? 

In: POLENSKE, K.R. (Org.) The Economic Geography of Innovation, Cambrigde. 

Glaeser EL, Kallal HD, Scheinkman  JA, Shleifer A (1992) Growth in Cities. The Journal 

of Political Economy 100 (6): 1126 – 1152. 

Jaffe AB, (1989) Real effects of academic research. American Economic Review 79(5): 

957–970 

Klevorick  A,  Levin  R,  Nelson  R,  Winter  S  (1995)  On  the  sources  and  significance  of 
inter-industry differences in technological opportunities. Research Policy 24: 185–205 
Laursen K, Reichstein T, Salter A (2011) Exploring the effect of geographical proximity 
and  university  quality  on  university-industry  collaboration  in  the  United  Kingdom. 
Regional Studies 45(4): 507–523 

Levy R, Roux P, Wolff S (2009) An analysis of science–industry collaborative patterns 

in a large European University. The Journal of Technology Transfer 34: 1–23 

Mansfield  E,  Lee  J  (1996) The  modern  university:  contributor to  industrial  innovation 

and receipt of industrial R&D support. Research Policy 25: 1047–1058 

Meyer-Krahmer F, Schmoch U (1998) Science-based technologies: university–industry 

interactions in four fields. Research Policy 27: 835–851 

Muscio A (2013) University-industry linkages: What are the determinants of distance in 

collaborations. Papers in Regional Science 92(4): 715–739 

Nelson  R  (1959)  The  Simple  Economics  of  Basic  Scientific  Research.  The  Journal  of 

Political Economy 67(3): 297–306 

Perkmann,  M;  King,  Z.;  Pavelin,  S.  (2011)  Engaging  excellence?  Effects  of  faculty 
quality on university engagement with industry. Research Policy 40 (2011) 539–552 
Ponds  R,  Oort  FV,  Frenken  K  (2007)  The  geographical  and  institutional  proximity  of 

research collaboration. Paper in Regional Science 86(3): 423–443  

Rapini  M,  Albuquerque  E,  Chaves  C,  Silva  L,  Souza  S,  Righi  H,  Cruz  W  (2009) 
University-industry interactions in an immature system of innovation: evidence from 
Minas Gerais, Brazil. Science and Public Policy 36: 373–386 

Schartinger D, Schibany A, Gassler H (2001) Interactive relations between universities 
and  firms:  empirical  evidence  for  Austria.  The  Journal  of  Technology  Transfer  26: 
255–268 

Storper  M,  Venables  AJ  (2004)  Buzz:  face-to-face  contact  and  the  urban  economy. 

Journal of Economy Geography 4(4): 351–370 

Suzigan W, Albuquerque E, Garcia R, Rapini M (2009) University and industry linkages 
in Brazil: some preliminary and descriptive results. Seoul Journal of Economics 22: 
591–611 

 

18 

 

Tartari V, Breschi S (2012) Set them free: scientists’ evaluations of the benefits and costs 
of university–industry research collaboration. Industrial and Corporate Change 21(5): 
1117–1147 

 

 

 

19 

