Finance, Development and the   

Chinese Entrepreneurial State1: 

A Schumpeter- Keynes – Minsky Approach 

Leonardo Burlamaqui2 

 

Abstract 

The main purpose of the paper is analytical, not descriptive. Its central claim 

is that China’s speed and ability to leapfrog its peer-nations in the last three 

decades  stems,  largely,  from  the  fact  that  it  is  a  fully  developed 

Entrepreneurial State (ES). The discussion seeks to dig deeper on ES as a 

bridging concept that fits well with the Schumpeter-Keynes-Minsky analytical 

framework and one that is particularly appropriated analyzing contemporary 

China’s development trajectory.   

 

Resumo 

Esse  é  um  trabalho  de  corte  analítico,  e  não  descritivo.  Seu  argumento 

central  é  que  a  o  sucesso  da  China,  e  de  várias  empresas  chinesas,  em 

ultrapassar seus competidores em termos de mudança estrutural, upgrading 

tecnológico, velocidade de crescimento e gerenciamento de crises se deve 

ao  fato  de  ter  um  Estado  Empreendedor  como  instituição-chave  de  sua 

estratégia de desenvolvimento. A discussão subsequente explora o conceito 

de Estado Empreendedor dentro de uma abordagem analítica amparada nas 

ideias de Schumpeter, Keynes, e Minsky. A Conclusão é de que ambos, a 

abordagem  e  o  conceito,  são  particularmente  adequados  para  a 

compreensão da trajetória recente de desenvolvimento da China   

 

 

 

 

Área: Crescimento, Desenvolvimento Econômico e Instituições 

Códigos JEL: 01, 033,038 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                        

1  Paper submitted to the ANPEC meeting, 2014.   

 

2  Associate Professor at the University of the State of Rio de Janeiro ( UERJ) 

Page 1 of 19 

 

1.  Introduction 

 

In the ongoing debate on China and globalization, a very common question 

is  the  following:  “Will  China  be  a  winner  or  a  loser  in  the  evolving  global 

landscape?” The response is often…ultimately a loser and  a host of reasons is 

offered  to  back  it.  The  one  party  institutional  setting,  the  lack  of  democracy 

(Acemoglu,  and  Robinson:  2012),  the  way  the  financial  system  is  organized 

(Walter  and  Howie:  2012),  the  failure  to  properly  liberalize  the  exchange  rate 

regime and interest rates, and so on (Pettis: 2013, chapter 4). In my attempt to 

address  the  theme,  I  depart  from  a  very  different  perspective  by  suggesting  a 

radically different question: how did China manage to become a “winner” so fast, 

and  so many fronts? (For  approaches that  begin  to recognize  some  of China’s 

sustainable strengths, see Berggruen and Gardels: 2013, and Lee: 2012).   

In 1976 the country barely managed to cover the costs of sending its highest-

ranking dignitary to speak at the UN (Walter and Howie: 2012, p ). By 2011, it had 

become  the  second  larger  national  economy,  the  largest  exporter,  the  largest 
manufacturer, the possessor of the world’s largest current account surplus3, and 
the holder of the biggest amount of foreign reserves. In fact China is said to be 

currently the US’s “banker” (World Bank: 2012, p 25, Tselichtchev: 2012 ,Bergsten 

et Alii: 2010:p 9-10).   

China also exhibits the fastest rate of growth of any nations over the past two 

decades,  an  extremely  fast  rate  of  technological  upgrading  (Keidel:  2007  and 

2011,  Gallagher  and  Porzecanski:  2010,  chapter  4)  and  one  of  the  most 

successful set of policies for poverty alleviation, which allows it to take millions 

above  the  poverty  line  every  year.  In  one  sentence:  China  has  become  an 
economic  superpower.  It  did  not  “catch-up”  with  the  west.  It  leapfrogged. 4  In 
addition, let me recall that the country is already a nuclear power and has veto 
power at the UN Security Council5.   

                                                        

3  Direct investment overseas by Chinese companies has increased from just $5.5bn in 2004 

to $56.5bn in 2009. About 70 per cent of the money invested in 2010 went to other parts of Asia. 

Latin America came in second place with 15 per cent (“The China Cycle” FT. 09.13.2010.) 

4  For a discussion, from an evolutionary perspective, of the pertinence of using that concept 

instead of “catch-up”, see Burlamaqui: 2011, and Gerschenkron (1962) for historical illustrations 

of leapfrogging without using the concept.     

5  And this whole scale structural transformation went beyond dry economic statistics: when 

deplaning in Beijing for the 2008 Olympic games, McGregor recounts, the New York Times 

architecture writer, Nicolai Ouroussoff, compared arriving at the city’s new airport ‘to the 

epiphany that Adolf Loos, the Viennese architect, experienced in New York more than a century 

ago. He had crossed the threshold into the future.’(2010: Locations 529-531). 

 

 

 

Page 2 of 19 

To answer the question of how did all this happen is well beyond the purpose 

of this paper, but that’s the “factual background” that I think is appropriate to use 

when  discussing  China’s  current  situation  and future  prospects  and  the kind  of 

institutional  configuration  that’s  likely  to  emerge  from  its  successive  waves  of 

reform . The reason for that is the following: looking at China as a “big success 

case”  (although  obviously  not  lacking  problems)  invites  searching  for  lessons 

instead of recommending emulation (especially of Anglo-American practices and 

institutions).   

*** 

However, my main purpose in what follows is analytical, not descriptive, and 

the central claim is that China’s speed and ability to leapfrog its peer-nations in 

the  last  three  decades  stems,  largely,  from  the  fact  that  it  is,  to  use  Mariana 

Mazzucato 

thoughtful  approach 

(Mazzucato:  2013),  a 

fully  developed 

Entrepreneurial State (ES). The goal of the following pages is to dig deeper on 

ES  as  a  bridging  concept  that  fits  well  with  the  Schumpeter-Keynes-Minsky 

analytical  framework  under  construction  within  the  current  Ford-INET  line  of 

research, and one that is particularly appropriated for China.         

From  a  theoretical  point  of  view,  China’s  achievements  reaffirms  key 

elements  of  works  of  Hilferding,  Schumpeter,  Keynes,  Minsky  and    the 

“Developmental State” approach to economic analysis and public policy. Some of 

those  features  are  well  known:  The  centrality  of  credit  for  innovation  and 

development  (instead  of  “savings”),  the  key  role  of  the  State  in  steering  and 

governing the development process (instead of “free markets”), the strategic role 

of  investment-development  banks  to  provide  the  necessary  funding,  and  the 

functionality of financial restraint to avoid the buildup of “financial casinos” (for the 

last point, see Hellman, Murdock and Stiglitz: 1996 and Bresser Pereira: 2010). 

China’s  development  trajectory  has  them  all.  Briefly  discussed  below,  they 

point  towards  a  two  folded  conclusion:  First,  it  suggests  that  the  concept  of 
Entrepreneurial  State  should  synthesize  three  core  elements:  a)  a  “Hilferding-

Minsky’s”  type  of  banking  system;  b)  an  extension,  to  the  Government,  of 

Schumpeter’s  link  between  entrepreneurial  skills  and  structural  change;  and  c) 

the presence of a robust degree of socialization of investment as stated by Keynes 

in  the  General  Theory  and  also  by  Schumpeter  in  his  characterization  of 

“socialism”.    The second conclusion is that the Chinese State encapsulates all 

three dimensions and therefore should be taken as the prototype of a developed 

Entrepreneurial State. These are admittedly bold propositions, which should invite 

further debate and discussion. 

 

2. Conceptualizing the Entrepreneurial State 

“A context of deliberately created stability achieved by risk-spreading 

mechanisms  can facilitate industrial deepening, export expansion, and 
political compromises to share adjustment costs. ... Unassisted entrepreneurs 

 

Page 3 of 19 

 

may not have either the foresight or the access to capital to follow long-term 

prospects. Their decisions may lock in the country into a specialization in 

industries with inferior prospects" (Wade: 1990) 

 

Wade’s  model  was  Taiwan.  Continental  China  followed  the  path,  and  went 

further. Concerning ES’s first element: from a “macrofinancial” perspective, China 

is Minsky on Steroids. To be more precise, of what Minsky characterized, echoing 

Hilferding,  as  a  (reinvigorated)  form  of  Finance  Capitalism;  a  financial  system 

dominated  by  universal  banks  with  close  ties  with  commerce  and,  especially, 

industry,  and  geared  towards  finance  for  development  (Hilferding:  1981[1910], 
Minsky: 1978, 1992, 1996, and Wray: 2010, for a discussion of Minsky’s analysis)6. 
A universal bank model combines commercial banking and investment banking 

functions in a financial institution that provides both short term lending and long 

term  funding  of  the  operations  of  firms.  It  issues  liabilities,  including  demand 

deposits,  to  households  and  buys  the  stocks  and  bonds  of  firms.  It  might  also 

provide  a  variety  of  other  financial  services,  including  mortgage  lending,  retail 
brokering, and insurance7.   

If accessed through its finance-investment behavior, China’s banking system 

– the “Big 4” banks plus China’s Development Bank and their SIV’s ramifications 

-  is,  the  newest  incarnation  of  the  Hilferding-Schumpeter’s  model  of  Finance 

Capitalism. The especially “Minskyian” traces in the model are the pervasiveness 

of speculative finance, the buildup of situations of “financial fragility”, but also the 
presence of a “Big Bank” and of robust financial governance8. Public ownership 
of the main banks is a new feature in that financial design. An important point to 

stress  here  is  that  animal  spirits  in  the  Hilferding-Schumpeter’s  model  come 

largely from the investment banks. It is their money, not the entrepreneur, which 

is  at  stake.  In  the  Developmental-State  version,  they  shift  to  the  Government 

producing  a  clear  case  of  “Socialization  of  investment”,  an  issue  I  will  address 

below     

The  second  element  backing  up  the  ES  concept  points  to  an  obvious  and 

badly needed extension of Schumpeter’s theoretical approach: to the State. The 

state is, more often than not, an entrepreneur and should be at the center of a 

                                                        

6  Minsky treated these as “phases of capitalism” instead of varieties. According to him, that 

phase of finance capitalism collapsed in the Great Depression. What emerged afterwards was a 

new stage of capitalism: managerial welfare-state capitalism (Minsky 1992, Wray 2010). I don’t 

agree with that taxonomy. It is very much US-rooted. A state-led variety of “Finance capitalism” 

resurfaced in Asia and was a key feature of the “Asian miracles”. China is the latest example of 

that pattern (on steroids).     

7  From the nineteen century to WWII, Germany had in its own Big 4’s. The “4 Ds”: 

Deutsche, Dresdner, Darmstader and Disconto (Hilferding: 1981 [1910], Landes: 1969: chapter 

5).             

8  Which were not in Hilferding’s model. 

 

Page 4 of 19 

theory  of  economic  development.  An  institution  that  combines  the  functions  of 

macro-strategist,  venture  capitalist  in  chief  (forging  and  funding  industrial, 

innovation  and  technology  policies)  and  creative  destruction  management 

(stimulating  the  creative  part  of  the  process  in  order  to  speed  productivity 

enhancement  and  innovation  diffusion  and  acting  as  a  buffer  to  its  destructive 
dimension)  clearly  “qualifies”  as  entrepreneurial 9 .  In  fact,  the  Developmental 
States – especially in their Asian incarnations – and the National Security State in 
the US – are different forms of a “Schumpeterian State”10   

The third element for structuring the concept of ES is the presence of a robust 

degree of socialization of investment. As stated by Keynes in GT’s last chapter:   

“The  State  will  have  to  exercise  a  guiding  influence  on  the  propensity  to 

consume  partly  through  its  scheme  of  taxation,  partly  by  fixing  the  rate  of 

interest,  and  partly,  perhaps,  in  other  ways.  Furthermore,  it  seems  unlikely 

that the influence of banking policy on the rate of interest will be sufficient by 

itself to determine an optimum rate of investment. I conceive, therefore, that 

a  somewhat  comprehensive  socialization  of  investment  will  prove  the  only 

means of securing an approximation to full employment; though this need not 

exclude all manner of compromises and of devices by which public authority 

will co-operate with private initiative” ( 1937: p 377-8 ). 

 

Keynes’s  central  message  for  conceptualizing  the  Entrepreneurial  State,  I 

suggest,    is  that  it  should  extend  itself  much  beyond  the  “Schumpeterian 

dimensions” (finance, innovation and creative-destruction management). Income 

distribution, employment, regulation and public-private partnerships were already 

at the core of his vision. However, the relevant, and scarcely noticed, fact I would 

like to call the reader’s attention to for the purposes of the following discussion, is 

the close resemblance between Keynes’s idea of socialization of investment and 

Schumpeter’s  discussion  of 

“Socialism”.  Schumpeter’s  broad  –  and 

unconventional-  description  of  Socialism  (Schumpeter:  1942:  chapters  16-17) 

provides us with a concrete illustration of his arguments that “Socialism” can work 

and can beat “Capitalism” on the grounds of conflict management and economic 

                                                        

9  See Ruttan: 2006, Block and Keller: 2012, Mazzucato: 2013 and Weiss: 2014 for 

complementary analyses of the US case, the whole literature on the developmental state for 

Asia’s cases (for instance: Johnson: 1982, Wade: 1990, Vogel: 2011, Kim and Vogel –eds.- 2011 

and Musacchio and Lazzarini: 2014 for Brazil. 

10  See Lundvall: 1992 and Nelson: 1993 for attempts to fill that gap, but the emphasis is 

mostly on “Collective entrepreneurship” – Lundvall - and “the institutions and mechanisms 

supporting technical innovation …in various countries- Nelson. The state is there, but not front 

and center.             

 

 

Page 5 of 19 

efficiency. Take China as the materialization of the Keynes-Schumpeter concepts 

of socialization of investment /Socialism and perceive what a good fit it provides.     

  Schumpeter begins his analysis with a, well-known, rhetorical question: Can 

Socialism  work?  His  answer  is  “of  course  it  can”  (1942:  167).However, 

Schumpeter’s definition of socialism does not focus on statisation of the means 

of  production  nor  on  the  eradication  of  private  property,  but  rather  on  their 

socialisation,  which  involves  essentially  redesigning  the frontiers  and modes  of 
interaction between the private and public spheres11. In his own words:   

“By socialist society we shall designate an institutional pattern in which 

the control over means of production and over production itself is vested 

with  a  central  authority—or,  as  we  may  say,  in  which,  as  a  matter  of 

principle, the economic affairs of society belong to the public and not to 

the private sphere” (1942: 168).   

The core concept in the definition is control by a central authority. Translating 

it  to  China,  the  Communist  Party’s  Politburo  Standing  Committee  provides  a 

perfect  fit.  The  author  also  does  not  mention  absence  of  private  property  that 

could,  and  should  exist.  About  the  day-to-day  operations  of  that  system, 

“regulated managerial freedom” should be the norm:   

“There may also be a supervising and checking authority—a kind of cour 

des  comptes  that  could  conceivably  even  have  the  right  to  veto 

particular  decisions.  As  regards  the  second  point,  some  freedom  of 

action must be left, and almost any amount of freedom might be left, to 

the "men on the spot," say, the managers of the individual industries or 

plants. For the moment, I will make the bold assumption that the rational 

amount of freedom is experimentally found and actually granted so that 

efficiency suffers neither from the unbridled ambitions of subordinates 

nor  from  the  piling  up  on  the  desk  of  the  minister  of  reports  and 

unanswered questions” ( Schumpeter: 1942,168). 

Thirdly,  the  innovative  process  could  be  co-ordinated  taking  into 

account  timing  and  locational  considerations.  In  the  process  of  creative 

destruction,  creation  would  be  performed  in  a  co-ordinated  manner  and 

destruction by means of exit policies: 

 

 

 

“...the planning of progress, in particular the systematic co-ordination 

and the orderly distribution in time of new ventures in all lines would 

be incomparably more effective in the prevention of bursts ... and of 

depressive reactions ... than any automatic or manipulative variations 

of the interest rate or the supply of credit can be...    And the process 

of discarding the obsolete, that in capitalism – specially in competitive 

capitalism – means paralysis and losses that are in part functionless 

could be reduced to what discarding the obsolete actually conveys to 

the layman’s mind within a comprehensive plan providing in advance 

                                                        

11  This discussion elaborates on material from Burlamaqui: 2000.   

Page 6 of 19 

 

for the shifting to other uses of the non-obsolete complements of the 

obsolete plants or pieces of equipment.”    (Ibid., p. 200, my italics). 

Fourthly, 

the 

relation  between 

technological  change  and 

employment  could  be  also  rationalised  by  co-ordination  policies  so  that  it 

would  be  possible  to  "re-direct  the  men  to  other  employments  which,  if 

planning  lives  up  to  its  possibilities  at  all  might  in  each  case  be  waiting  for 

them"  (ibid,  p.  201).  Finally,  the  resistance  to  changes  could  be  "strongly 

discouraged",  and  consequently  the  promotion  of  innovations  would  be 

operated in a quicker and more rational way.   

McGregor (2010) gives a good example, which sums up the whole 

picture: 

“Most foreigners dealing with large Chinese state companies in the 

early  days  of  economic  reform  –  he  writes-  felt  much  like  the 

Japanese  executives  from  the  giant  Mitsubishi  conglomerate 

negotiating  to  build  a  power  plant  for  Baoshan  Steel...  The 

Japanese were aggrieved when the Chinese side got the better of 

them during the talks and they were forced into concessions. ‘Yes, 

you win the negotiations,’ the Mitsubishi executives exclaimed. ‘But 

it was your national team fighting our company team!’ Chen Jinhua, 

a titan of state industry who recounted this story in his biography, 

said the Japanese were right. ‘We had invited many capable experts 
from China’s electrical power system to join our negotiating team, 

but  Mitsubishi,  as  a  single  company,  had  been  unable  to  do  so,’ 

Chen  wrote.  ‘This  example  showed  the  superiority  of  our  wide 
socialist co-operation.” (McGregor: 2010 Locations 1155-1161, my 

italics). 

 

3. The Entrepreneurial State in Finance 

 

“The money market is always, as it were, the headquarters of the capitalist 
system, from which orders go out to individual divisions and that which is debated 

and decided there is always in essence the settlement of plans for further 

development” (Schumpeter, 1912,Ch.3).   

 

 

 

 

 

 

China’s development trajectory fully supports Schumpeter’s statement, which 

is clearly a forerunner of Minsky’s “Wall-Street paradigm”. However, the first fact 

to  register  when  looking  at  the  Chinese  financial  sector  is  that  the  state  and 

publicly owned banks are by large and far the biggest players:   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Page 7 of 19 

 

 

TABLE 1 - Relative holdings of financial assets in China, FY2010 (RMB trillion) 

 

 

RMB trillion 

2006  2007  2008  2009 

2010 

2010 

US$ 
trillion 

PBOC 

12,86  16,91  20,70  22,75 

25,93 

3,9 

Public Banks 

43,95  52,6 

62,39  79,51 

95,3 

14,4 

Securities 

companies* 

1,6 

4,98 

1,19 

2,03 

1,97 

0,3 

Insurance 

companies* 

1,97  2,9 

3,34 

4,06 

5,05 

0,8 

 ∑ 

60,38  77,39  87,62  108,35  128,25  19,4 

Note: *Includes brokerages and fund management companies. 

Source: Walter and Howie table 5: Location806. 

The framework of China’s current financial system was set in the early 1990s. 

The  process  of  establishing  a  legal  framework  for  these  reforms  gathered 

momentum  with  the  passage  by  the  National  People’s  Congress  (NPC)  of  a 

central bank law, a commercial bank law and a company law. China in the mid-

1990s  created  the  so-called  policy  banks,  for  agriculture,  foreign  trade  and 

domestic infrastructure, as a way of relieving commercial banks of the burden of 

making  government  policy-directed  loans-  which  continued  on  a  large  scale 

nevertheless (Keidel:2007, p.1). As for financial regulation, the Chinese system is 

lean and quite straightforward. The financial sector is regulated by one bank - the 
People’s Bank of China (PBOC, the central bank12) and three commissions: the 
regulatory commissions for banking, securities and insurance.   

The banking sector falls under the supervision of the People’s Bank of China 

and the China Banking Regulatory Commission (Cousin: 2011, p.21). The China 

Banking Regulatory Commission (CBRC) was established in March 2003 with the 

aim of increasing the independence of the central bank and, especially, making 

the  regulatory  function  of  financial  institutions  more  robust.  The  CBRC  is  the 

supervisor  of  financial  institutions  under  the  leadership  of  the  State  Council.  It 

turned to be a key player in the guidance of the financial system through reform 

and recapitalization after the Asian Crisis and, even more, in preventing China’s 

financial system from diving into the kind of “casino capitalism” that was growing 
in the US and all over Europe since the eighties13. Lardy affirms this very clearly: 

                                                        

12  Founded in 1948. 

13  When the savings-and-loan fiasco erupted in the US. 

Page 8 of 19 

 

“Most obviously, since China's financial regulatory agencies had steadfastly 

refused to permit the creation of complex derivative products in the domestic 

market and severely limited financial institutions' exposure to foreign sources 

of  these  products,  Chinese  financial  institutions  had  little  exposure  to  toxic 

financial assets” (2011, Locations 452-454).   

 

In  fact,  when  in  the  summer  of  2008,  a  small  group  of  foreign  “financial 

experts” headed to China to give financial advice, Wang Qishan, the vice-premier 

in charge of China’s financial sector, quickly made it clear that China had little to 

learn  from  the  visitors  about  its  financial  system.  His  message  concisely:  “You 

have  your  way.  We  have  our  way.  And  our  way  is  right!”  (Mc  Gregor:  2010, 

Locations  51-52).In  the same  vein,  Chen Yuan, the  celebrated chair  of China’s 

Development Bank was thinking along these lines when he declared, in July 2009, 

“[We] should not bring that American stuff and use it in China. Rather, we should 

develop around our own needs and build our own banking system” (Yuan quoted 

by Walter and Howie: 2012, 27).   

They  had  a  point.  If  we  look  at  Chinese  Banks’s  capitalization  and  non-

performing  loans  at the height  of  the crisis  (compared  to  JP  Morgan,  the  go-to 

bank for the Obama administration), the data speak for itself: 

 

Table 2- Chinese Bank’s Capitalization Compared with J P Morgan (JPM) in 

2010     

 

.

n
b
$
S
U
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
l

a
t
i
p
a
C
 
t
e
k
r
a
M

226

202

186

163

136

126

250

200

150

100

50

0

66

60

39

24

Source: Walter and Howie, Location 1069     

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Page 9 of 19 

 

 

Table 3 – Non-Performing Loans of Top Chinese Banks: 1999-2010 

 

n
b
B
M
R

3.500

3.000

2.500

2.000

1.500

1.000

500

0

3.277

1.983 2155 2077

2441

1718

1313 1255 1268

560

497

429

40,00%

35,00%

30,00%

25,00%

20,00%

15,00%

10,00%

5,00%

0,00%

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010

Total NPLs

NPL ratio

 

Source: Walter and Howie, Location 1114     

 
This provides a snapshot what “socialization of finance” (Schumpeter’s style) 

can  produce  by  combining  robust  financial  regulation  with  countercyclical 
measures and a strategic stimulus package (Keynes and Minsky)14.   

However,  the  most  entrepreneurial  player  in  China’s  finance  is  China’s 

Development  Bank  (CDB).  Sanderson  and  Forsythe  put  it  concisely:  “In  one 

decade, CDB has become the financial enabler of both China’s global expansion 

and domestic boom” (2013, introduction).   

With that strong statement, the authors begin their analysis of what they claim 

to be “the core of China’s state capitalism”… “A system of government-controlled 

banks and companies that many development countries see as an alternative to 

a  more  free  market-focused  system”  (Ibid).  Founded  in  1994,  with  “global 

operations  springing  from  Asia  to  Africa  and  Latin-America”  (more  on  that  in 

section 3 below), with total assets of almost 1 trillion dollars and a non-performing 

loan ratio of 0.4 % by the end of 2010, CDB is in fact the “pilot agency” of China’s 

aggressive  financial  diversification  in  the  last  ten  to fifteen  years. In  2011  CDB 

had a loan portfolio of around US$ 884 Billion and “a business presence in 116 

economies around the globe (Yuan: 2012, Chairman’s message for the 2011 CDB 

Annual Report http://www.cdb.com.cn/english/Column.asp).   

CDB’s  hallmark  financial  innovation  was  the  system  of  local  government 

finance,  which  transformed  China’s  landscape  in  just  over  a  decade.  To 

understand  this  innovation,  I  have  to  recount  the  reversal  of  one  of  the  core 

principles  of  the  Communist  Revolution:  the  redistribution  of  land  from  rich 

                                                        

14  For a comprehensive analysis of China’s response to the financial crisis, see Lardy: 

2011). 

 

Page 10 of 19 

property  owners  to  landless  peasants.  Between  1996  and  1997,  as  the  Asian 

crisis started, countercyclical spending on infrastructure in China doubled, and by 

2002, it had risen by nearly three times.   

This  massive  urbanization  was  a  sensible  response  to  collapsing  “global 

demand”, an event that would be repeated in 2008-09. However, it came with a 

serious downside, requiring a re-appropriation of land by the state as a condition 

to create “development zones” where bullet  trains,  sports complexes,  shopping 

malls, apartment blocks and all kinds of urban facilities where produced/erected 

at  a  very  fast  pace.  This  re-appropriation  of  land  was  the  equivalent  of  a  vast 

enclosure movement where millions of peasants were obliged to leave their land 
in order to give way to urban expansion15. This growth spurt of urban construction 
required finance and funding in large scale, but there was still a problem to solve. 

In  1994,  China’s  premier  Zu  Ronjin  cut  local  governments  off  from  direct 
borrowing  due  to  spiraling  inflation.  In  the  words  of  Chen  Yuan 16,  “While  our 
national government enjoys virtually unlimited credit, the initiators of urbanization 

projects, 

local 

governments, 

have 

little” 

(http://www.cdb.com.cn/english/NewsInfo.asp,  and  Sanderson  and  Forsythe: 

2013). Here, CDB enters the scene. The bank is funded by treasury bonds, which 

are typically bought by China’s commercial banks, and had no difficulty in giving 

seed  money  to  local  governments  to  start  the  projects.  However,  more  credit 

would  have  to  follow  in  order  to  provide  for  the  full  funding  of  the  projects. 

Collateral was the problem to solve.   

Here, Yuan’s entrepreneurial vision coupled with CDB’s innovation solved it. 

Yuan knew that urbanization would  vastly increase land’s prices and land was, 

now, in the hands of local governments, which meant the local governments were 

sitting  into  a  potential  “gold  mine”.  The  innovation  was  the  local-government 

financing vehicle (LGFV), a public SIV. A company set up by local governments 

to allow them to spend beyond the limits of their budgets (Sanderson and Forsythe: 

2013). They would get additional money from CDB but trough LGFVs, giving land 

as  collateral,  collateral  whose  value  was  bound  to  increase  because  of 

investments made possible by the bank’s strategy. Higher land prices would mean 

more local government income; hence, more room for loans – and spending. 

This was a self-fulfilling strategy, a type of financial operation already devised 

by  Soros  (1987)  who  pointed  out  that  the  willingness  of  a  bank  to  finance  an 

investment project has a direct impact on its viability and thus, on its returns, and 

                                                        

15  They received compensation, but well below their market value and especially to their 

“expected future value” once urbanization was in place. Of course if we stay within this 

somewhat Marxist way of looking at the picture, the same stroke also helped produce a sizable 

labor force, Marx’s “industrial reserve army”, available to sell its labor force in the new factories 

for a very modest price by any international standard.         

16  Echoing one of Modern Money Theory’s key statements. 

Page 11 of 19 

 

therefore,  on  its  price (Kregel  :  2001). It  was  also  a  Schumpeterian  one where 

credit  allowed  investment  to  occur,  raised  the  collateral’s  value  and,  as  the 

investment  matured,  generated  the  cash-flows  to  repay  the  loan.  The  “Wuhu 
Model”, as it was labeled17, worked. As    Sanderson and Forsythe recount it: “[this 
system] managed to transform a sleepy city into a bustling metropolis that today 

is home to one of China’s most prominent car makers, Chery Automobile, which 

happens to be owned by one of the first LGFVs”.   

Furthermore, the model’s success in Wuhu was replicated across the country, 

with CDB lending money to LGFVs in Shanghai (home to former president Jiang 

Zemin), Tianjin (home to Premier Wen Jiabao) and Suzhou. The system spread 

across the country, and came into its own in 2008 when it helped shield China 

from the worst effects of the global financial crisis. Now, every province in China 

has  set  such  companies  to finance  infrastructure  investments. (Sanderson  and 

Forsythe: 2013, 9-12). 

At  this  point,  the  reader  should  be  wondering  the  obvious:  wasn’t  that 

precisely the type of financial behavior that produced the sub-prime crisis in the 

US – a leveraged lending binge backed by the assumption that real estate prices 

would never collapse. If so, why so much enthusiasm about it? My answer to that 

question is no, and for several reasons, all related to the existence and course of 

action of the Chinese Entrepreneurial state. First, all the players involved were, 

public entities. The loans came from public banks to local governments and had 

guaranties from  both the  People’s  Bank  of  China    and  the  Ministry  of  Finance 

(MOF). Secondly, under those circumstances what we have is a State-sponsored 

– public bank’s -funded expansion, which could last for a very long time. It did. 

The non-performing- loan rates consistently declined for the top Chinese banks 

between 1999 and 2010 (Recall table 3 above). 

Thirdly, in the worst-case scenario, the banks could become filled with “bad 

loans”. Even then, they would never face credit freeze or a “let the market do its 

job”  in  the  way  it  happened  in  the  Lehman  Brothers  –  difficult  to  understand  - 
decision18. The banks would be recapitalized again, and the collateral would still 
be there, waiting for  the urban migration already  gaining momentum. However, 

                                                        

17  Because it started in the city of Wuhu. 

18  Note that after Lehman, there were many mergers and acquisitions as well as 

restructurings and an ocean of cash and guarantees injected by the FED and the Treasury in the 

US “too big to fail” banks, insurance and corporations. After Lehman, no other big institution 

closed in the US, supposedly the “land of the market” (See Blinder: 2013 for an excellent 

discussion of these issues). From that perspective China’s preemptive policy action of 

recapitalizing the banks when they needed it and then making sure that finance and funding 

would be there when needed was not surprising at all: as mentioned before, Big Government plus 

Big Bank plus industrial policy. A Keynes-Minsky-Schumpeter approach to “policy in hard 

times”.     

 

Page 12 of 19 

that scenario never materialized. Fourthly, and critical, there was no “destructive 

lending”  in the  process: no “NINJA”  loans,  no  synthetic  layers  of leverage  over 

leverage (naked selling or derivatives such as CDO’s and CDS’s ) pilling over the 

loans  to  enhance  trader’s  gains,  and  no  betting  against  a  “client”  such  as   

Goldman Sachs- ABACUS, Paulson style.   

Finally, and most importantly, the Party treats its banks as basic utilities that 

provide  unlimited  capital  to  the  cherished  state-owned  enterprises  (Mc  Gregor: 

2012.p27).    Zhou Xiaochuan, a PBOC’s Director has framed the purpose of the 

banking  system  straightforwardly  when  discussing  the  need  for  the  previous 

banking  reforms-cum-recapitalization:  “…China’s  financial  system  would  be  a 

drag on its economic growth, making it impossible for the system  to service the 

economy and support development” (2009, quoted by Cousin 2011, my italics). 

 

4. The Entrepreneurial State and Industrial & Technology Policy 

 

"[The State] gave leads. It exerted pressure. It helped in various ways in 

financing and promoting ... This active leadership was, of course, something 

very different from mere control or regulation, and also from mere 

conditioning" (Schumpeter: 1939, Vol2, p. 973, my emphasis).   

 
The quote above refers to Schumpeter’s analysis of the German recovery in the 
thirties19. Nevertheless, he could be commenting on China’s Entrepreneurial State. 
China’s 12th five-year plan for 2011 to 2015 was launched in March 2011. The plan 
highlights  the  importance  of  the  “magic  seven”  industries:  (1)  energy  saving  and 

environmental  protection, 

(2)  next-generation 

information 

technology, 

(3) 

biotechnology, (4) high-end manufacturing, (5) new energy, (6) new materials and 

(7) clean-energy vehicles. The plan’s objective is to “shape” those industries in order 
to  raise  their  share  from  3  percent  to  15  percent  of  the  economy  by  202020.  No 
wonder  that,  way  before  the  Plan’s  announcement,  China’s  banks  were  already 

pouring money in order to fund the long-term projects whose purpose is to turn that 

scenario into reality. 

                                                        

19  Before the reader jumps to political judgments here, let me make clear that Schumpeter 

was not praising Hitler in that passage, but – surprisingly for most “Schumpeterians”- a way of 

state directed development. In addition, let us recall that when Hitler gained power, Germany was 

already on her way to recovery and full employment– via infrastructure spending- and that the 

turn to militarization did not start until 1936 (cf. Tooze: 2006). As Joan Robinson has aptly put it: 

“Germany had already eliminated unemployment before Keynes had time to explain it” 

(Robinson: Collect Works, Vol 3).             

20  For a thorough analysis of the plan, see “China 2030 - Building a Modern, Harmonious, 

and Creative High-Income Society”. The World Bank and Development Research Center of the 

State Council, the People’s Republic of China, 2012.   

Page 13 of 19 

 

In fact, Chinese companies have started to win first places in global markets. 

Huawei has overtaken Sweden’s Ericsson to become the world’s largest telecoms-

equipment-maker.    The  company  is  becoming  an  increasingly  powerful  global 

player, capable of going head-to-head with the best in intensely competitive markets. 

It  follows  Haier,  which  is  already  the  leading  white-goods-maker;  now  Lenovo  is 

challenging Hewlett-Packard as the world’s biggest PC-maker. Much more will follow 

(cf. The Economist/ Leader: August 2012). The Economist’s piece also raises a key 

issue from the perspective of “western competitors”: “Western governments are also 

suspicious of the subsidies, low-interest loans and generous export credits lavished 

on  favored  champions”.  The  article  has  the  right  perception.  The  arsenal  behind 

China’s industrial and technology policies is formidable and to downplay it would be 

a huge mistake.     

Take environment. In 2010, China invested some $ 51.1 billion into clean energy, 

the  largest  investment  by  any  country  in  the  world.  However,  in  2006, four years 

before that record, two Chinese companies were already on the list of top-ten solar 
cell producers. In 2010, six made the list, according to a BNEF report21. Among them 
is Yingli, founded in 1998, and one of the biggest beneficiaries of CDB loans in the 

solar industry, borrowing at least $ 1.7 billion in dollar-denominated loans from CDB 
from 2008 through early 201222. In 2009, Yingli opened offices in New York and San 
Francisco; by the year’s end, it held 27 percent of the California market. China simply 

took over. “In 2011, the country supplied some 72 percent of global crystalline-silicon 

module  production,  the  most  popular  type  of  solar  module  that  converts  light  to 

energy”.  (Sanderson  and  Forsythe:  p.  150,  my  emphasis.).  A  clear  and  stunning 

case of Leapfrogging. 

In fact, 2010 saw an explosion of loans to renewable energy, mostly from CDB. 

The bank lent $ 14.7 billion to clean energy and other energy-saving projects. The 

European Investment Bank lent € 8 billion for clean energy projects in 2010; BNDES 

lent $ 3.16 billion and the US Federal Financing Bank $ 2.12 billion. In all, since 2010, 

CDB  – alone-  has made  available  at  least  $  47.3  billion  in credit  lines to  support 

Chinese solar and wind companies (BNEF: October 2011).     

Let’s return to telecom and, in particular, to Huawei. A private firm founded in 

1987  with  just  21,000  Yuan,  a  bit  more  than  $5,000  at  the  time,  Huawei  at  first 

struggled  to  win  customers  even  in  China.  In  2012,  as  mentioned,  it  surpassed 

Ericsson to become the world’s largest telecoms-equipment-maker. Now, it is a $32-

billion business empire with 140,000 employees, customers in 140 countries and 65% 

of its revenue coming from outside China. In Europe it is involved in over half of the 

superfast 4G telecoms networks that have been announced, and it has become a 

strong  competitor  in  mobile  phones,  In  Africa,  Huawei’s  cheap  but  effective 

                                                        

21  BNEF: Bloomberg New Energy Finance.   

22  When fiscal deficits were ballooning and the credit for long-term projects from private 

finance were frozen in most of the “North”.   

Page 14 of 19 

 

equipment  helped make the continent’s mobile-telecoms revolution  possible (The 

Economist, “Huawei: The Company that Spooked the World: August 2012). 

On  December  27,  2004,  in  Beijing,  Huawei  and  CDB  signed  a  $  10  billion 

agreement for overseas markets, the first of many CDB credit lines to its customers 

across the developing world that would allow it to gain significant market share. It 

also  was the beginning  of CDB’s support of Chinese firms  to “go global.” In April 

2005, Huawei and CDB signed a risk-sharing “win-win” agreement and agreed to 

share  information  on  clients  and  projects  after  the  loan  had  been  dispensed.  In 

December 2005, Vodafone Group, then the world’s largest mobile phone company, 

named Huawei its first Chinese-approved supplier of network equipment. Huawei’s 
road to global domination had begun23  (Sanderson and Forsythe, p. 160). How did 
this happened? I am not aiming to provide a comprehensive answer here, but the 

one-liner is public funding and, ultimately, China’s entrepreneurial state as the key 

player in forging and backing up the whole process. 

 

 

Table 4: Huawei’s Overseas Sales after CDB Loan 

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

1999

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

 

 
Source: Sanderson and Forsythe, p. 162 

 

                                                        

23  At that point, a high official of Alcatel-Lucent remembers telling his boss, the 

Chairman… “We won’t die at the hands of Huawei; if we die, it will be at the hands of China 

Development Bank.” 

 

 

 

 

Page 15 of 19 

5. Conclusion 
There is no space for further elaboration of these points here. Nevertheless, I 

trust  the  discussion  above  has  provided  some  concrete  evidence  to  the  key 

propositions  of  the  paper.  a)The  usefulness  of  the  Entrepreneurial  State  as  a 

bridging concept – and the need to have it as the key concept of a contemporary 

Schumpeter-Keynes-Minsky  based  theory  of  economic  change;  and  b)  the 

concept’s fitness to contemporary China – and to the Asian developmental states in 
general24. In closing, I invite the reader to evaluate China’s growth path as well as 
its innovation pace under the Entrepreneurial State’s analytical lenses. My bet is that 

it will throw more light than heat- although it will bring heat – to the discussion.     

 

Bibliography 

 

Acemoglu, D and Robinson, J. 2012: Why Nations Fail. Crown Publishers. 

Amsden, A. 1989: Asia’s Next Giant. Oxford University Press.   
Berggruen and Gardels: 2013. Intelligent Governance for the 21st Century. Polity 

Press. 

Blinder A: 1913. When the Music Stopped. The financial crisis, the response, and 

the work ahead. Penguin Press. Kindle edition. 

Block,  F  and  Keller,  M  (eds):  2011.  The  State  of  Innovation,  The  U.S 

Government’s Role in Technology Development. Paradigm Press. 

Bresser Pereira, LC: 2010. Globalization and Competition. Cambridge University 

Press.     

Burlamaqui,  L Tavares, M.C  and Torres,  E:1991.  Japão:  Um caso  exemplar  de 

capitalismo organizado. IPEA/ CEPAL 

Burlamaqui  L:  2000.  “Evolutionary  Economics  and  the  Role  of  State”  in     

Burlamaqui, Castro, A. C e Chang, H.J (eds.) Institutions and The Role of 

the State E. Elgar 

Burlamaqui: 2007. Global Economic Governance. Program Officer Memorandum, 

The Ford Foundation. New York. 

Burlamaqui,  L:  2011.  “Development  Theory:  Convergence,  Catch-up  or 

Leapfrogging?   

A Schumpeterian Approach”. Paper given at the Celso Furtado Workshop on     

        Novo  Desenvolvimentismo  e  uma  Macroeconomia  Estruturalista  do 

Desenvolvimento. FGV/ SP, August. 

Burlamaqui,  L:  2012.  “Knowledge  Governance:  An  Analytical  Approach”  in 

Burlamaqui, Castro and Kattel eds: Knowledge Governance- Reasserting 

the Public Interest. Anthem Press. 

Carmody,  P  and  Owusu,  F:  ”A  Expansão  da  China  para  a  Africa:  Interessea  e 

Estratégias” in Leão, Pinto and Acioly (eds): 2011. 

                                                        

24  Furthermore, I also claim its relevance to understand properly successful credit-based 

development-cum-technological upgrading processes in West.   

Page 16 of 19 

 

Castro, A. B. 2011. O Inconformista – Homenagem do IPEA ao Mestre. 

Castro,  A.  B.  2012:  Do  Desenvolvimento  Renegado  ao  Desafio  Sinocêntrico. 

Campus.     

Chang: 2006. The East Asian Development Experience. Zed Books.   

Cousin, V: 2011. Banking in China. Palgrave. 

Gallagher, K, Irwin, A and Koleski, K “The New Banks in Town: Chinese Finance 

in Latin America,” Inter-American Dialogue (February 2012). 

Gallagher, K and Porzecanski, R: 2010. The Dragon in the Room – China and the 

Future of Latin American Industrialization. 

Gerschenkron,  A:  1962.  Economic  Backwardness  in  Historical  Perspective. 

Harvard University Press.   

Guthrie, D: 2006. China and Globalization – The Social, Economic and Political 

Transformation of Chinese Society. Routledge.   

Hellman,  Murdock  and  Stiglitz:  1996.  “Financial  Restraint:  towards  a  new 

paradigm” in Aoki, Kim and Fujiwara (eds): The Role of the Government 

in East Asian Economic Development. Oxford- Clarendon Press. 

Hilferding, R. 1981 [1910]: Finance Capital. Routledge. 

Johnson, C. 1982: MITI and the Japanese Miracle. Stanford University Press. 

Keynes,  J.M.:  1937.  The  General  Theory  of  Employment,  Interest  and  Money. 

Harcourt Brace. NY. 

Keidel, A: 2007. “China’s Financial Sector: Contributions to Growth and Downside 

Risks” paper delivered at for the Conference “China's Changing Financial 

System: Can it Catch Up With or Even Drive Economic Growth?” Indiana 

State University. 

Keidel, A. 2011: China Economic Developments, Prospects and Lessons for the 

International Financial System. Unpublished paper.   

Kim, B and Vogel, E: 2011.The Park Chung Hee Era: The Transformation of South 

Korea. Harvard University Press. 

Kregel, J: 1997: "Yes, 'It' Did Happen Again - A Minsky Crisis Happened in Asia", 

Jerome Levy Institute Working Paper. 

Kregel,  J  2001.  Derivatives  and  Global  Capital  Flows.  Applications  to  Asia  in 

Chang,  H.  J  et  alii  (eds)  Financial  Liberalization  and  the  Asian  Crisis. 

Palgrave. 

Kregel, J: 2008.Changes in the U.S. Financial System and the Subprime Crisis. 

Jerome Levy Institute Working Paper 530. 

Lardy, N: 2011: Sustaining China's Economic Growth After the Global Financial 

Crisis. Peterson Institute. Kindle Edition. 

Leão, Pinto and Acioly (eds): 2011. A China na Nova Configuração Global. IPEA. 

Lee, A. 2012. What The U.S Can Learn From China. Demos- BK Publishers. 

Mazzucato, M: 2013. The Entrepreneurial State. Anthem Press. 

McGregor,  Richard:  2010.  The  Party:  The  Secret  World  of  China's  Communist 

Rulers HarperCollins. Kindle Edition.   

 

Page 17 of 19 

Minsky,  H.:  1978:  “The  Financial  Instability  Hypothesis:  An  Interpretation  of 

Keynes and an Alternative to Standard Theory”, in Minsky, H. (1982) 

Minsky,  H:  1982:  Can  “IT”  Happen  Again:  Essays  on  Instability  and  Finance, 

Armonk, M. E. Sharpe. 

Minsky,  H:  1986  a:  Stabilizing  an  Unstable  Economy,  New  Haven  and  London, 

Yale Univ. Press. 

Minsky, H: 1986 b:  "Money and Crises in Schumpeter and Keynes"    in Wagner e 

Drukker eds. The Economic Law of Motion of Modern Society. CUP. 

 

Minsky,  H:  1996:  Uncertainty  and  The  Institutional  Structure  of  Capitalist 

Economies” Jerome Levy Institute , Working Paper nº 155 

Pereira,  A:  2008.  Whither  the  Developmental  State?  Explaining  Singapore's 

continued Developmentalism in Third World Quarterly, Volume 29,    Issue 

6. 

Pettis, M: China Financial Markets    http://www.mpettis.com/   

Pettis, M: 2013. The Great Rebalancing: Trade, Conflict, and the Perilous Road 

Ahead for the World Economy. Princeton University Press.   

Ruttan, V. 2006: Is War Necessary for Economic Growth? Oxford. 

Scholte, J.A.: 2005. Globalization- A Critical introduction. Palgrave. 

Schumpeter, J: 1934 [1912]. The Theory of Economic Development. Transaction 

Press. 

Schumpeter, J: 1939: Business Cycles. Mc Graw Hill.   

Schumpeter, J: 1942. Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. Routledge.     

Soros, George. 1987. The Alchemy of Finance. New York: Simon and Schuster. 

The  Economist:  2007.  The  Alchemists  of  Finance  –  Special  Report  (May  19th, 

2007). 

The Economist: 2012. The Economist, “Huawei: The Company that Spooked the 

World: August. 

The  World  Bank  and  Development  Research  Center  of  the  State  Council,  the 

People’s  Republic  of  China:  2012.  “China  2030  -  Building  a  Modern, 

Harmonious, and Creative High-Income Society”. 

Tooze, A: 2006. The Wages of Destruction. Penguin Books.       

Vogel,  E.  2011  Deng  Xiaoping  and  the  Transformation  of  China.  Harvard 

University Press. 

Wade, R. 1990: Governing the Market, Princeton University Press. 

Walter, C and Howie J. T: 2012. Red Capitalism. Wiley 

Weinstein, M ed: 2005: Globalization – What’s new ? Columbia University Press. 

Weiss, L: 2014: America Inc. ? Cornell University Press. 

Wolf, M: 2012. “The wealth of nations – Review of Why Nations Fail: The Origins 

of Power, Prosperity and Poverty”, Financial Times , March, 2. 

Woo, J. 1991. Race to the Swift – State and Finance in Korean Industrialization. 

Columbia University Press. 

 

Page 18 of 19 

Wray, R: 2010. What Should Banks Do? A Minskyian Analysis, Public Policy Brief 

115, September. 

 

 

Page 19 of 19 

