Term limits and political budget cycles at the local level:

evidence from a young democracy

Sergio Naruhiko Sakurai (Departament of Economics - FEA-RP - USP)

Fabio Alvim Klein (EACH - USP)

July 16, 2014

Abstract

The existing empirical literature on political budget cycles (PBCs) has generally ignored the
eﬀects of term limitations on ﬁscal opportunism. In this paper, we explore the diﬀerent electoral
incentives faced by ﬁrst term mayors who are eligible for reelection and second term mayors
who are legally banned to stand for another term in oﬃce. Our results point to signiﬁcant ﬁscal
diﬀerences between both types of mayors in Brazil. During elections, ﬁrst term mayors decrease
revenues from own local taxation and change their budget composition by moving from current
expenditures towards capital related ones, while budget balances and total expenditures remain
unchanged. These ﬁndings are consistent with recently developed signalling models of PBC
and with the conditional political budget cycles literature, where incumbents aiming at maxi-
mizing their reelection chances subject to institutional restrictions on ﬁscal deﬁcits change the
composition of the budget in electoral years by providing more visible and targeted expenditures.

Key words: Term limits; Political budget cycles; Local government budget; Panel data

Abstract

A literatura sobre ciclos pol´ıtico-or¸cament´arios (CPOs) tem geralmente ignorado os efeitos
de limita¸c˜oes de mandato sobre o oportunismo ﬁscal dos pol´ıticos. Nesse artigo, exploramos
os diferentes incentivos eleitorais presentes em prefeitos de primeiro mandato, que s˜ao eleg´ıveis
`a reelei¸c˜ao, e prefeitos de segundo (´ultimo) mandato que est˜ao legalmente impedidos de per-
manecer no cargo por mais um mandato. Nossos resultados mostram que esses dois tipos de
prefeitos apresentam comportamentos ﬁscais distintos no Brasil. Durante as elei¸c˜oes, prefeitos
de primeiro mandato reduzem a arrecada¸c˜ao com tributos locais e mudam a composi¸c˜ao do
gasto atrav´es de redu¸c˜oes em despesas correntes e aumentos em despesas de capital, mantendo
inalterados o balan¸co or¸cament´ario e o gasto total. Essas evidˆencias s˜ao consistentes com teo-
rias recentes de CPOs baseadas em modelos de sinaliza¸c˜ao de competˆencia e com a literatura
sobre ciclos pol´ıticos condicionados, onde governantes interessados em maximizar suas chances
de reelei¸c˜ao sujeitos `a restri¸c˜oes ﬁscais institucionais, alteram a composi¸c˜ao do or¸camento, priv-
ilegiando gastos mais vis´ıveis e focalizados.

Palavras-chave: Limite de mandato; Ciclos pol´ıtico-or¸cament´arios; Finan¸cas p´ublicas mu-

nicipais; Dados em painel

JEL: H72, C23, D72

´Area 5 - Economia do Setor P´ublico

1

1

Introduction

Since Nordhaus (1975) launched his model of political business cycle - in which an incumbent politi-
cian seeking reelection would behave opportunistically by promoting expansionary economic policies
prior to elections - a large body of empirical work testing his theory has been produced over the last
30 years. Among the many political motivations driving political business cycles, perhaps the main
one is the ambition of reelection (of a politician or party). Therefore, the legal and real possibility of
an incumbent politician or party to be reelected is a necessary condition for the emergence of political
business cycles. However, not all incumbents are eligible to run for reelection, and indeed, not all
seek reelection. Most of the literature ignores this fact. This omission is critical, since incumbents
who are not eligible for reelection should not, a priori, engage in opportunistic ﬁscal policy as a
strategy to increase their reelection chances. As prescribed by Rogoﬀ (1990) in his classical model
of rational political budget cycles (PBCs), “The prospect of being able to run for reelection again
in the future raises the temptation to distort ﬁscal policy, and thus tends to exacerbate the political
budget cycle.”(Rogoﬀ (1990), p. 30).

How, then, do the ﬁscal strategies of politicians who are eligible for reelection diﬀer from those
who cannot stand for a subsequent mandate as elections draw close? In other words, does the
possibility of reelection aﬀect ﬁscal policy? If the theoretical predictions of opportunistic ﬁscal cycles
are correct, one should expect more loose ﬁscal policies in the last years of a mandate (i.e. election
years) for the group of ﬁrst term politicians (who are eligible for reelection) than for the group of last
term politicians (who are legally impeded from running for reelection). Surely, the assumption that
ﬁrst term incumbents are more inclined to behave opportunistically compared to those at their last
term could be false if one considers that even last term incumbents still have incentives to behave
opportunistically, for example, if they seek to secure the reelection of their parties or bolster their own
political career once their permitted term expires. Moreover, it could be that last term incumbents
would be inclined to generate higher deﬁcits whenever transferring oﬃce to a political opponent,
leaving an unfavourable ﬁscal environment for the following government.

The above arguments are very plausible and show how diﬃcult it might be to empirically deter-
mine the driving forces behind ﬁscal opportunism. Those arguments suggest that what to expect
empirically may not be clear-cut because of the diﬀerent factors that potentially inﬂuence the be-
haviour of incumbents. Yet, if both ﬁrst term and last term incumbents face - to a greater or lesser
extent - electoral incentives to manipulate ﬁscal outcomes, it is reasonable to assume that observable
diﬀerences in their ﬁscal behaviour, after one has adequately controlled for other relevant factors,
may be explained by their diﬀerent reelection conditions. In this sense, we posit that identifying
incumbents as ﬁrst or last term oﬃce holders is both feasible and meaningful for an appropriate
empirical analysis of the opportunistic-type PBC.

The main purpose of this paper is to estimate the eﬀect of term limitations on the ﬁscal strategies
employed by Brazilian local governments, especially during election periods. Based on ﬁscal and
electoral data of 3,393 Brazilian municipalities between 2001 and 2008, this paper provides evidence
in support of the proposition that signiﬁcant diﬀerences exist between the ﬁscal strategies employed
by ﬁrst term and second term mayors during elections. As elections draw near, ﬁrst term mayors
reduce local tax revenues and adjust their budget composition by moving from current towards
capital-related expenditures. Interestingly, they do so without detriment to the budget balance. The
ﬁndings of this paper are consistent with recently developed signalling models of PBC and with the
conditional political budget cycles literature:
in Brazil, ﬁrst term mayors and reelection runners,
while facing incentives to behave opportunistically, are at the same time subject to institutional
restrictions on ﬁscal policy. As a consequence, mayors running for reelection change the composition
of the budget in electoral years by increasing the types of expenditures which are more visible and
presumably more appealing to voters (i.e.
investments) while keeping a controlled ﬁscal balance.
This regard for ﬁscal balance signals levels of competence or policy preferences to rational and

2

heterogeneous voters who may (or may not) be averse to higher spending in general, but have a
preference for targeted expenditures (Drazen & Eslava (2010)).

Brazil is an interesting case study to test the opportunistic ﬁscal cycle at the local level for a
number of reasons. First, Brazil has over 5,500 municipalities and almost 140 million voters, making it
one of the biggest and most politically decentralized federalist countries in the world. Additionally,
municipalities constitute the smaller electoral district in Brazil, being the main geographical unit
where votes are cast in local, state and national elections - in this sense, much of the political
game is played at the municipal level. Thirdly, municipalities are subject to a number of common
constitutional rules, being comparable in a broad range of institutional features. Finally, using the
terminology developed in the recent literature on political cycles (e.g. Brender & Drazen (2005); Shi
& Svensson (2006)), Brazil can be classiﬁed as a young developing democracy. Following 20 years
of military dictatorship (1964-1984), Brazilian voters have been getting adapted to the electoral
process over the recent past, which should have reduced the scope for ﬁscal manipulations during
elections.
In fact, the Brazilian economy has recently undergone important institutional changes
aﬀecting electoral and ﬁscal policies, with potentially relevant impacts on political cycles. As the
recent conditional political budget cycles literature suggests, the presence and magnitude of electoral
ﬁscal cycles are conditioned on certain institutional, political and economic contexts (e.g. De Haan
& Klomp (2013a)).

The paper is structured as follows. Section II provides a brief literature review on political
business cycles and term limitations, with a particular focus on ﬁscal policy.
In section III, we
present the Brazilian institutional setting, followed by a description of the data in section IV. In
section V we describe the empirical methodology. The main results are analyzed in section VI,
followed by concluding remarks in section VII.

2 Literature review

The literature on political business cycles has traditionally identiﬁed two sources of politically mo-
tivated economic cycles.
In the opportunistic political cycles models, politicians utilise electoral
periods as an opportunity to increase their reelection chances by promoting positive shocks to the
economy in the period before elections1. In the partisan cycles models, business cycles are partially
caused by changes in economic policy according to the diﬀerent ideological positions of the elected
parties2. In the present study, we are speciﬁcally interested in opportunistic cycles at the local level
in Brazil and in how they relate to term limitations3.

In the last 20 years, the empirical literature on political budget cycles (PBCs) has generated a good
range of ﬁndings and explanations about their nature and mechanics, promoting a rich discussion on
the topic. For instance, many studies have conﬁrmed the classical theoretical view of pre-electoral
increases in deﬁcits (Brender & Drazen (2005); Shi & Svensson (2006); Veiga & Veiga (2007)), while
others have only found increases in certain types of expenditures, but not in overall spending or
deﬁcits (Drazen & Eslava (2010); Schneider (2010)). These later studies were aligned somewhat with
the “voters as ﬁscal conservatives” concept (Brender (2003); Brender & Drazen (2008); Peltzman
(1992)), for which the median voter prefers less - rather than more - government spending and thus

1Important initial references on opportunistic political business cycles are Fair (1978); Kramer (1971); Lindbeck
(1976); Nordhaus (1975) and Tufte (1975) - among others - who focused on cycles in monetary (macro) variables.
Subsequent studies have switched attention to political cycles in ﬁscal variables, being the works Frey & Schneider
(1978a); Frey & Schneider (1978b); Rogoﬀ (1990); Rogoﬀ & Sibert (1988) and Tufte (1978) the main initial references.
2Key studies on partisan cycles are Alesina (1987); Alesina & Roubini (1992); Alesina, Roubini & Cohen (1997);

Beck (1982); Hibbs Jr. (1977) and Sheﬀrin (1989).

3A seminal and comprehensive analysis of the political determinants - including election cycles - of public spending
in Latin America is found in Ames (1987). Barberia & Avelino (2011) explore how political budget cycles are aﬀected
by democratic experience in Latin America. Sakurai & Menezes Filho (2011) oﬀer a new test of both the opportunistic
and partisan budget cycles in Brazilian municipalities.

3

punishes - rather than rewards - electoral year increases in deﬁcits4.Yet, Drazen & Eslava (2010)
explain that voters’ ﬁscal conservatism is perfectly aligned with opportunistic PBCs in certain types
of expenditures. They develop a model in which ﬁscal conservative voters are averse to higher public
spending in general, but have an appetite for particular types of targeted spending. As a result,
PBCs can take place via a change in the composition of spending, leaving total spending and budget
balances unchanged. They conﬁrm their predictions using data on local elections in Colombia5.

Following a diﬀerent perspective, Jones, Meloni & Tommasi (2012) explain that increases in
overall spending are perfectly consistent within a “voters as ﬁscal liberals” context. They argue that
in some federalist systems, such as those in Argentina, Brazil and Russia, the local provision of public
services is mostly ﬁnanced by federal funds - and not by local tax revenues - with the result that
rational voters demand more government spending rather than less. Their main argument is that in
the context of ﬁscal federalism, local voters may reap the beneﬁts of public spending without directly
paying for its costs. They empirically conﬁrm their proposition by analyzing the case of Argentine
ﬁscal federalism.

The need to account for the eﬀects of ﬁscal federalism in the analysis of PBCs have been previously
addressed by Alt & Lassen (2006), who have highlighted the important role played by regional
and local governments in ﬁscally decentralized political systems. The authors claim that central
governments operating in these systems can aﬀect ﬁscal outcomes at the local level through the
strategic allocation of discretionary transfers. One good example is found in Berry, Burden & Howell
(2010), who examine the distribution of federal outlays in the United States to conclude that districts
and counties whose legislative representative belongs to the president’s party are systematically
rewarded with more federal transfers. Larcinese, Rizzo & Testa (2006) reach similar ﬁndings at the
state level, showing that American states with governors belonging to the president’s party receive
more federal funding. However, neither studies test if these politically motivated transfers increase
or not during elections. Yet, other studies have combined the analyses of tactical allocation with
political ﬁscal cycles. Rumi (2008) and Lema & Streb (2013), for example, show that Argentine
provinces politically aligned with the central government receive more voluntary federal transfers in
election years. Ferreira & Bugarin (2007) reach similar conclusions for the Brazilian federal system,
showing that mayors who are politically aligned with either the President or State Governors receive
more voluntary transfers from these upper government levels during elections.

Recently, studies on political cycles have emphasized that the presence and magnitude of electoral
ﬁscal cycles are conditioned on certain institutions and political and economic contexts (Aidt, Veiga
& Veiga (2010); Brender & Drazen (2005); Franzese & Jusko (2008); Rose (2006); Schneider (2010);
Shi & Svensson (2006); Vergne (2009)). A good survey on the conditional political budget cycles
literature is found in De Haan & Klomp (2013a), who discuss the role of various factors inﬂuencing
political ﬁscal cycles, such as development levels, democratic experience, political institutions and
ﬁscal rules. Following the well-cited works of Brender & Drazen (2005) and Shi & Svensson (2006) for
example, for whom the presence and magnitude of ﬁscal cycles are greatly dependent, respectively,
on the democratic experience and on the development levels of countries, many scholars have come
to agree that young developing democracies are particularly prone to ﬁscal opportunism. However,
some recent studies have shown that governments in developed and democratic nations also enact
opportunistic ﬁscal cycles depending on their political and institutional conditions. Alt & Lassen
(2006) examine a panel of 19 OECD countries over the nineties to conclude that electoral year
deﬁcits are signiﬁcantly higher in developed countries with lower ﬁscal transparency and higher
political polarization. Streb, Lema & Torrens (2009) present evidence that PBCs are present in both

4Arvate, Avelino & Tavares (2009) analyze state-level elections for governors in Brazil and show that Brazilian
voters are in general ﬁscal conservatives, but after controlling for some measurements of voters’ sophistication (such
as income, inequality and education), more naive voters punish deﬁcits much less severely.

5Schneider (2010) applies the composition of expenditures approach to German states, while Vergne (2009) presents

results for a sample of developing countries.

4

young and established democracies when legislative checks and balances over executive discretion
are weak. Other studies focused on subnational governments in developed and democratic countries
have shown that strict ﬁscal rules have important limiting eﬀects on political budget cycles (Rose
(2006); Schneider (2010))6.

Term limits are a key institutional rule to be considered in the analysis of conditioned political
cycles, but have been somewhat neglected by the literature. Most existing studies on term limits
are restricted to legislative mandates 7. In those in which the chief executive is the central object of
analysis, the focus has been on diﬀerences in the average ﬁscal behaviour of term limited and non-
term limited incumbents, with no particular emphasis on the crucial role of elections. This omission
is critical, once the prospects of holding oﬃce in the future are considered the key driver for the
emergence of opportunistic ﬁscal policies (Rogoﬀ (1990)). In the absence of reelection incentives,
ﬁscal cycles should be mitigated, since a term limited incumbent would have no incentive to signal
superior competence levels during elections.

The paper by Besley & Case (1995) is perhaps the most famous study addressing the eﬀects of
executive term limits on ﬁscal performance. They develop and test a model in which incumbents care
more about their reputation if they are eligible to run for a second mandate. Therefore, when two
(or more) terms are allowed, incumbents who provide higher ﬁrst-term payoﬀs to voters have higher
chances of being reelected8. Based on data for 48 U.S. states from 1950 to 1986, their results show
that governors who cannot stand for reelection tax and spend more during their whole mandate,
deviating from the preferences of the median ﬁscal conservative American voter (Peltzman (1992)).
Still within American states but in a relatively diﬀerent perspective, List & Sturm (2006) ﬁnd
evidence that term-limited U.S. governors do not only modify the management of ﬁscal indicators, but
also the implementation of environmental policies. The recent paper by Alt, Mesquita & Rose (2011)
deepens the analysis on the eﬀects of term limits on accountability and competence in U.S. states.
By exploiting variations in term limits across space and time both within and between American
states and also controlling for tenure in oﬃce, they ﬁnd that under reelection-eligible incumbents,
economic activity is higher and taxes and spending lower compared to term-limited incumbents who
have equal years of experience in oﬃce, which is evidence of an accountability eﬀect. Moreover, when
both incumbents are not eligible for reelection, policy outcomes are better under second (last) term
incumbents than under ﬁrst (last) term ones, conﬁrming a competence eﬀect.

Johnson & Crain (2004) extend the empirical strategy of Besley & Case (1995) to a panel of demo-
cratic countries and ﬁnd that last term incumbents who cannot run for reelection promote higher
increases in expenditures and taxes. They point that these eﬀects are stronger under a single-term
limit rule than under a two-terms limit one. However, while a two-terms limit system is associated
with lower size of government, it promotes higher ﬁscal volatility. Nogare & Ricciuti (2011) reach
substantially diﬀerent ﬁndings in their recent cross-country analysis: their results reject any signiﬁ-
cant eﬀects of term limits on overall spending and budget deﬁcits. The only signiﬁcant (but negative)
eﬀect of term limits is found in social services and welfare expenditures in presidential systems. The
authors explain that this ﬁnding is consistent with the idea that term-limited incumbents care less
about their reputation, since lower provision of social spending might well be contrary to the ﬁscal

6In a recent empirical work, De Haan & Klomp (2013b)analyse 65 democratic countries between 1975 and 2005
to show that the presence of political budget cycles varies signiﬁcantly, comprising both developing and developed
countries, as well as young and old democracies

7See, for instance, the recent study by Aidt & Shvets (2012) and the references therein. By analysing the allocation
of pork barrel spending within legislative districts in seven US states, the authors show that term limited legislators
reduce the amount of state transfers to their districts when they cannot seek reelection.

8Smart & Sturm (2006) oﬀer a theoretical model in which reputational concerns may be ineﬃcient in the absence
of term limits. Their main conclusion is that a two-terms limit system (or more) is preferable to a single or no-term
limit system, because in those systems, there is a combination of selection and truthfulness eﬀects, where voters are
able to select the best incumbents and these have little incentive to deviate from their true type even in their ﬁrst
terms.

5

preferences of ﬁscal liberal voters in such presidential systems.

Out of U.S. states and cross-country comparisons, studies relating term limits and PBCs at the
local level are scarce. For example, the works of Rosenberg (1992) in Israel, Meneguin & Bugarin
(2001) and Nakaguma & Bender (2006) in Brazil or Aidt, Veiga & Veiga (2010) in Portugal are
mainly interested in analyzing the relationships between reelection probabilities, the incumbent’s
decision to run for reelection and political cycles, but not in addressing the issue of term limits. The
diﬀerence is that while term limits are an exogenous condition, the decision to run is an endogenous
choice of the incumbent.

It is clear from the literature review above that studies concerned with the relationships between
term limits and political budget cycles are mainly restricted to the U.S. states and to a few cross-
country analyses. The present paper ﬁlls this gap by exploring the eﬀects of term limits on political
budget cycles in local governments in Brazil. In this respect, our sample of Brazilian municipalities
allows us to hold relevant institutional and economic factors constant, which is always a challenge
in cross-country analysis (Schneider (2010)). Moreover, this paper’s econometric speciﬁcation and
choice of variables explicitly control for potential sources of tactical allocation between the federal or
state governments and municipalities, allowing a precise estimate of the marginal eﬀects of term limits
on local ﬁscal choices. Additionally, this study compliments the most recent conditional political
budget cycles literature (De Haan & Klomp (2013a)) as Brazil, a young developing presidential
democracy, has implemented important institutional changes aﬀecting elections and ﬁscal policies in
the past 15 years. Among those, we focus speciﬁcally on the Reelection Amendment (Constitutional
Amendment n. 16, 1997), which relaxed restrictions on term limits - from one-term to two-terms
term limits - allowing executive chiefs to run for reelection for one consecutive term. More precisely,
we look at how diﬀerences in term limits aﬀect the ﬁscal behaviors of mayors in Brazil, especially
during elections. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst empirical study to address the eﬀects of term
limits on ﬁscal policy at the local level in Latin America9.

3

Institutional context

Brazil is organized as a republican federation under a presidential system. Its federalist structure
comprises three autonomous and independent government levels: the Union, 26 states (plus the
federal district, holding the capital Bras´ılia) and 5,565 municipalities. With almost 140 million
voters, Brazil is one of the most politically decentralized countries in the world. Upon the ending of
military dictatorship in 1984 and with the new Constitution of 1988, elections have been held in a
regular basis with ﬁxed dates (usually in October), making the electoral calendar strictly exogenous
and perfectly known in advance by both voters and politicians. Having experienced fourteen regular
and democratic elections since then, the country can be considered a young developing democracy.10
Until the 1998 national elections, chief executives (President, state governors and city mayors)
stood in oﬃce for four years only. But with the Reelection Amendment approved in 1997, term limits
have been extended to allow for an extra four-year term in oﬃce in the case of reelection, permitting
eight consecutive years in oﬃce. In the case of local governments, the elections held in 2000 were the
ﬁrst in which all incumbent mayors were allowed to run for reelection11.

9Ferraz & Finan (2011) addressed the eﬀects of term limits on Brazilian mayors’ political corruption, but not on
ﬁscal policies. Their results suggest that Brazilian mayors in their ﬁrst term are less corrupt than those in their second
and last term.

10Chief executives of the three government levels are chosen by a majority rule, whereas Legislative council members
are appointed by a proportional rule. Elections for mayors in cities with more than 200,000 voters follow an absolute
majority rule in a two-round system, where the candidate who receives more than 50% of the valid votes in the ﬁrst
round is elected. If that percentage is not reached, then the two highest-polling candidates meet again in a second and
ﬁnal round. In cities with less than 200,000 voters, a one round system based on a simple majority rule is adopted.

11In our sample of 3,393 municipalities, 2,112 incumbent mayors ran for reelection in 2000 (62%), from which 1,227

were reelected (36%).

6

Local politics play an important role in the Brazilian federal system. First, the new democratic
constitution of 1988 established that the federal, state and municipal governments are commonly
responsible for the provision of a wide variety of policies. However, it also established that most public
services should be provided primarily by local administrations, with state and federal governments
assuming a subsidiary role. Second, although the ﬁscal structure in the Brazilian federal system is
characterized by high centralization of tax revenues at the federal level, there is high decentralization
of expenditures and provision of public services at the local level. For the average municipality,
for example, local taxes represent little more than 6% of its total revenues. But while the average
Brazilian municipality is highly dependent on federal and state transfers (both legal and discretionary
ones), there is some considerable level of discretion over expenditure allocation. Hence, to the eyes
of local citizens, mayors hold the main responsibility for the level and quality of local public services.
Finally, municipalities constitute the smaller electoral district in Brazil, being therefore the main
geographical unit where votes are cast in local, state and national elections. As a result, much of the
political game is played at the municipal level.

In the past 15 years, Brazil has undergone important institutional changes aﬀecting the electoral
and ﬁscal incentives of politicians. Three deserve particular attention: the Reelection Amendment
(of greater concern here), the new Electoral Legislation and the Law of Fiscal Responsibility. The
Reelection Amendment aﬀected ﬁscal outcomes by promoting diﬀerent electoral incentives for incum-
bents in their ﬁrst and last terms, as have been discussed by the literature on term limits 12. This
paper contributes to this discussion by exploring the diﬀerent electoral incentives faced by Brazilian
mayors in their ﬁrst and last terms13.

Whereas ﬁscal opportunism has expectedly increased with the Reelection Amendment, it was
probably counterbalanced by the eﬀects of the new Electoral Legislation (Federal Law n. 9504, 1997).
According to this law, incumbent politicians are legally impeded, three months before elections, to
participate in the inauguration of public works; to implement administrative changes aﬀecting staﬀ,
public employees and civil servants (especially promoting new hires and nominations) and to make
voluntary transfers to lower government levels (from the Union to states and municipalities, or from
states to municipalities). Additionally, six months before elections, incumbent politicians cannot
adopt revision of salaries and payments of public employees to a level in excess of the inﬂation rates
prevailing in the ongoing election year. Thus, the Electoral Legislation most probably reduced the
scope for ﬁscal opportunism in some expenditures, especially those related to current spending, such
as personnel expenditures for instance.

As for the Law of Fiscal Responsibility (Complementary Law n. 101, 2000), known as one of the
most relevant and comprehensive ﬁscal adjustment plans in Brazilian history, a series of limitations
and rules related to the ﬁscal management of all government levels were created, especially restricting
new deﬁcits and debts. For example, it imposed limits on the share of personnel expenditures over
net current revenues. It also introduced new rules promoting transparency, control and monitoring
of ﬁscal activity, providing voters greater access to governments’ budgets as well as a greater ability
to evaluate governments’ ﬁscal performance.

While in this paper we are particularly concerned with the eﬀects of the Reelection Amendment
on ﬁscal policy, our analysis must take into account that Brazilian mayors are restricted by the
Electoral Legislation and the Law of Fiscal Responsibility.
In this scenario, we propose that the
ideal place to look for evidence of political cycles is not in total spending or budget deﬁcits, but
mainly and mostly in changes in the composition of the budget (Drazen & Eslava (2010); Rogoﬀ
(1990); Schneider (2010)). From this perspective, politicians may engage into opportunistic ﬁscal

12Alt, Mesquita & Rose (2011); Besley & Case (1995); Nogare & Ricciuti (2011); Smart & Sturm (2006)
13Although mayors, state governors and the President are limited to hold oﬃce for only two consecutive terms, they
can run again for the same post after a one-term hiatus (four years), which should make them more concerned about
future reputation and thus more accountable today. In the case of mayors, however, Ferraz & Finan (2011) explain
that the low probability of returning to political oﬃce again makes the average second-term mayor to behave as a
lame duck.

7

policies by moving from less visible to more visible and electorally eﬀective types of spending, without
increasing total expenditures or promoting deﬁcits. Regardless of whether Brazilian voters are ﬁscal
conservatives (Peltzman (1992)) or ﬁscal liberals (Jones, Meloni & Tommasi (2012)), we believe that
the current institutional setting in Brazil has resulted in politicians having “one hand tied behind
their backs”, where the change in the composition of the budget becomes a second best strategy
(Schneider (2010)).

4 Data description

The data set used in this study contains electoral, ﬁscal and economic variables for a sample consisting
of an eight years (2001-2008) balanced panel of 3,393 Brazilian municipalities, which represents 61% of
the 5,565 municipalities14. Electoral data were obtained from the Superior Electoral Tribunal, while
municipal ﬁscal data were taken from the Secretary of National Treasury. The source of demographic
and economic data, in turn, is the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics. All ﬁscal variables
are in real per capita terms, in Brazilian currency units (Real-R$) at 2008 prices (adjusted by using
the IPCA). It is important to clarify that the time frame under analysis includes two local mandates,
namely, 2001 - 2004 (mayors elected in October of 2000) and 2005 - 2008 (mayors elected in October
of 2004), so that in each of them, there are both mayors who can and cannot run for a subsequent
mandate15.

Various budget categories for the ﬁscal dependent variables are analyzed in this study, namely:
(i) Budget Balance; (ii) Total Spending; (iii) Local Tax Revenues; (iv) Current Expenditures; (v)
Personnel Expenditures and ﬁnally (vi) Capital Investments. These ﬁscal variables were chosen
based on both their traditional presence over the PBC literature and on their relevance for testing
opportunistic ﬁscal cycles at the municipal level in Brazil. According to the classical PBC hypothesis,
one should expect a decrease in revenues (especially tax revenues) and an increase in spending during
elections, leading to a decrease in the ﬁscal balance. Following the most recent literature, focused on
the change in the composition of spending under a ﬁscal conservative context (e.g. Schneider (2010);
Drazen & Eslava (2010)), one should expect increases in those types of expenditures which voters
care more about and decreases in those that are found to be less attractive to the electorate, so that
the overall balance should remain unchanged.

Table 1 is a good starting point to begin our analysis of the eﬀects of term limits on political budget
cycles at the municipal level in Brazil. The last column from the table indicate that the percentage
share of tax revenues, current expenditures and personnel expenditures (over total revenues) are
reduced during elections to a greater extent under ﬁrst term mayors than under last term mayors.
First term mayors also present a relatively greater increase in the share of capital investments during
elections compared to last term mayors. This change in the composition of the budget (reductions in
current expenditures and increases in capital investments) comes with an improvement in the budget
balance, as capital expenditures represent a much smaller fraction of total spending than current
expenditures. Thus, a small reduction in the share of current expenditures followed by a similar
percentage increase in the share of capital investments allows for an improvement in the budget
balance.

14Due to data unavailability for important variables, the remaining 2,172 municipalities had to be excluded from
the sample. This exclusion could theoretically generate a sample bias if quality and consistency of ﬁscal reporting is
an attribute of the “best” local administrations. In this sense, the true eﬀects of ﬁscal opportunism might be diﬀerent
than those found here. For instance, the excluded municipalities might present worse ﬁscal conditions than those in
the present sample.

15The descriptive statistics are presented in Table A.1, in the appendix.

8

Table 1: Mean diﬀerences in ﬁscal variables for ﬁrst and second term mayors - percentage share over
total revenues

First Term Mayor

Last Term Mayor

First x Last Term Mayors

Electoral Non Electoral

Electoral Electoral Non Electoral

Electoral

Year

Years

Year change Year

Years

Year change

(Term’s Average)

(Term’s Average)

(A)

(B)

(A) - (B)

(E)

(F)

(E) - (F)

(A-B) - (E-F)

96,83%

97,99%

-1,16%*** 98,04%

98,49%

-0,45%***

-0,71%***

3,17%

2,01%

1,16%***

1,96%

1,50%

0,46%***

0,70%***

6,60%

6,73%

-0,14%N S

6,70%

6,63%

0,07%N S

-0,21%***

83,74%

86,00%

-2,26%*** 84,13%

84,70%

-0,57%***

-1,70%***

Fiscal

Variable

(% share over
total revenues)

Total

Expenditures

Budget
Balance

Tax

Revenues
Current

Expenditures

Personnel

Expenditures

Capital

Investments

42,57%

43,44%

-0,86%*** 42,18%

41,98%

11,25%

10,06%

1,19%*** 12,12%

11,92%

0,19%N S

0,20%N S

Municipalities

2.386

1.007

-1,06%***

1,00%***

3.393

Notes: Municipalities refer to the average number of municipalities with ﬁrst term and last term mayors for the whole period (2001-2008).

Source: authors’ calculations

Asterisks refer to statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences at * = 10%; ** = 5% and *** = 1%, respectively.

The sample comprises a balanced panel of 3,393 municipalities.

NS refers to diﬀerences not statistically signiﬁcant.

5 Empirical methodology

This study builds on the work of Besley & Case (1995) by testing not only the eﬀects of term limits
on the ﬁscal choices of incumbents for their whole mandate, but in particular, their speciﬁc behaviour
in election years. We test for the presence and magnitude of opportunistic ﬁscal cycles in Brazil using
the following linear dynamic panel model:

F Vit = α + fi + γ.F Vit−1 + β1.ELECt + β2.T ERMit + β3.(ELECt.T ERMit) + Control V ariables + it
(1)
where the dependent variable F Vit is the natural log of a ﬁscal variable observed for municipality i
in year t (excluding the budget balance, measured in absolute terms as it can assume negative values),
α, fi and it are, respectively, the constant term, the municipal ﬁxed eﬀects and the idiosyncratic
error. The variable ELECt is a time dummy equal to 1 in the electoral year and 0 otherwise, while
T ERMit is an individual dummy equal to 1 for a ﬁrst term mayor and 0 for a second term mayor.
The interaction ELECt ∗ T ERMit is the main variable of interest in this study, which is equal to 1
for a ﬁrst term mayor in an election year and 0 otherwise. Thus, β3 identiﬁes the additional positive
ﬁscal stimulus in an election year resulting from the possibility of reelection.

According to the main PBC hypotheses, it is expected that β3 > 0 for expenditure variables
(on average, ﬁrst term mayors increase public spending during electoral years more than second
term mayors) and β3 < 0 for revenues variables (on average, ﬁrst term mayors reduce taxation
and collection during electoral years more than second term mayors). Given this pattern of higher
spending and lower revenue collections, it is expected that β3 < 0 for the overall budget balance.

the index of votes fractionalization in the last election, given by the formula 1−(cid:80)J

The set of control variables accounts for other political and demographic determinants of ﬁscal
policy, namely: (i) the lag of constitutional transfers received by municipalities from both state and
federal governments, accounting for legally determined resources available to local governments; (ii)
j , in which vj
is the share of votes obtained by each candidate j running for mayor at municipality i - the higher the

j=1 v2

9

index, the more fragmented are voters’ preferences, making it harder for the mayor to deﬁne what set
or mix of ﬁscal policies are more electorally eﬀective; (iii) a dummy indicating the political alignment
between the mayor’s and the governor’s parties and (iv) a dummy indicating the political alignment
between the mayor’s and the president’s parties - following similar arguments as those presented
by Ferreira & Bugarin (2007), Lema & Streb (2013) and Rumi (2008), it could be that mayors
whose parties belong to the governor’s and/or President’s parties receive more voluntary transfers
and grants from the state and/or federal governments, especially during electoral periods; and (v)
two political dummies - right and left - indicating the ideological orientation of the mayor’s party, in
order to account for potential partisan eﬀects on ﬁscal policy16. As demographic controls, we included
(vi) total population, (vii) proportion of elderly (people over 65 years old) and (viii) young (people
below 14 years old) living in each municipality. The inclusion of population size is used to account
for the demand for government services and also for the degree of political accountability, which is
thought to be inversely proportional to the size of the electoral district (Porto & Porto (2000)). The
age structure of the population (proportion of elderly and young) has become a standard approach
in the PBC literature for capturing variations in the demand for government services (Brender &
Drazen (2005); Rose (2006); Sakurai & Menezes Filho (2011); Veiga & Veiga (2007)).

Given that ﬁscal variables usually exhibit persistence over time, the estimations include the ﬁrst
lag of the dependent variable as an additional regressor. However, as is well known, the inclusion of
a lagged dependent variable and of municipal ﬁxed eﬀects lead to inconsistent OLS estimators. First
diﬀerencing Equation 1 eliminates the ﬁxed eﬀects, but results in ∆F Vit−1 being correlated with
∆it. To solve this endogeneity problem, estimations were performed according to the System-GMM
(General Method of Moments) procedure proposed by Blundell & Bond (1998), which uses lags of
the dependent variable, in levels, as instruments for the diﬀerenced equation, and one lag of the
dependent variable, in diﬀerences, as instruments for the level equation. Additionally, the standard
errors were clustered at the municipal level and adjusted for ﬁnite sample sizes using the Windmeijer
(2005) correction.

6 Results

In this section, we present the results generated from the estimation of Equation 1 for the six selected
ﬁscal variables using the Blundell & Bond (1998) system-GMM method. The list of instruments,
Sargan tests of instrument validity and the m1 and m2 tests of absence of ﬁrst and second-order
correlated errors terms are reported at the bottom of the tables. The Windmeijer (2005) robust
standard errors (corrected for ﬁnite samples) are reported in parentheses.
The main variable of interest is the interaction ELECt ∗ T ERMit (Electoral Year x First Term
Mayor), which identiﬁes the diﬀerence in the examined ﬁscal variable between ﬁrst term and second
term mayors over the electoral and non-electoral periods (β3). Two other important variables captur-
ing the eﬀects of elections and term limits on ﬁscal policy are ELECt (Electoral Year) and T ERMit
(First Term Mayor). The results regarding ELECt correspond to the electoral year diﬀerence in
ﬁscal variable for second term mayors (β1), while the results for T ERMit identiﬁes the diﬀerence in
the term’s average ﬁscal variable (non-electoral years) between ﬁrst term and second term mayors
(β2).

Before reviewing the results displayed in Table 2, note that all the estimations comply with the
Sargan test, i.e. the selected set of instruments exhibits no correlation with the error term. Addi-
tionally, the m2 test indicates that the diﬀerenced error term exhibits no second-order correlation.
Also, the ﬁrst lag of the dependent variable is signiﬁcant only in the case of overall budget balance
(positive) and capital investments (negative), suggesting that throughout the period under analysis,

16We classiﬁed the political parties in the sample as left, right and center (the base-group) based on Mizuca (2007)

and Rodrigues (2002).

10

budget balances have improved and investments have deteriorated.

The ﬁgures in Table 2 conﬁrm the presence of political cycles in local tax revenues, current ex-
penditures and capital investments at the local level in Brazil, but not in the budget balance, total
expenditures or personnel expenditures. While mayors in their second (and ﬁnal) term increase taxes
and current expenditures during elections (see the positive coeﬃcients for Electoral Year), ﬁrst term
mayors do exactly the opposite (see the negative coeﬃcients for the interaction Electoral Year x
First Term). A similar but inverse pattern occurs for capital investments: while last term mayors
reduce investments in election years, ﬁrst term mayors substantially increase them. Fiscal diﬀerences
over the term in oﬃce (non-electoral years) are practically negligible (see the statistically insigniﬁ-
cant coeﬃcients for First Term Mayor), with the exception being smaller levels of total expenditures
under ﬁrst term mayors. These ﬁgures show that ﬁrst term mayors behave opportunistically by
promoting reductions in local taxation and in current expenditures and increases in capital invest-
ments. Moreover, they do so without aﬀecting the budget balance, overall spending or personnel
expenditures.

Table 2: First term x Second term mayors - System-GMM estimations

Coeﬃcient

(Standard deviation)

Electoral year

First term mayor

Electoral year x First term mayor

Constitutional transfers (lag)

Right

Left

Fractionalization of votes

Alignment with State government

Alignment with Federal government

Total population

Elderly

Young

First lag of dependent variable

Constant

Observations (NxT)

Budget
Balance

23.782
(43.299)
-81.913

(162.818)

-47.590
(67.125)
-235.187
(192.097)
-239.047
(467.855)
292.258
(626.409)
-1047.208
(1104.522)
-342.510*
(179.948)
413.678*
(220.252)

69.461

(110.289)
10760.413
(7363.090)

542.551

(1857.210)

0.102**
(0.044)
649.616

(2216.157)

27,144

Instruments for diﬀerenced equation

from yit−2 to yit−4

Instruments for level equation

Sargan (p-value)

m1 (p-value)
m2 (p-value)

∆yit−1
0.118
0.000
0.247

Tax

Total

Current

Personnel

Capital

Revenues

Expenditures

Expenditures

Expenditures

Investments

0.513*
(0.296)
0.362
(2.618)
-0.669*
(0.366)
1.411***
(0.512)
2.996
(6.857)
2.581
(2.780)
8.175
(9.982)
-0.899*
(0.489)
-1.651**
(0.722)
0.463
(0.338)
4.871

(35.478)
12.746*
(6.778)
0.092
(0.078)
-20.105*
(11.596)
27,144
yit−2
∆yit−5
0.476
0.582
0.691

0.043
(0.078)
-0.625**
(0.292)
-0.036
(0.107)
0.705***
(0.179)
-0.182
(0.604)
0.372
(0.361)
2.778
(1.891)
0.454
(0.320)
0.032
(0.199)
-0.105
(0.103)
19.405
(15.873)

1.612
(3.465)
0.157
(0.248)
-0.875
(1.770)
27,144
yit−2
∆yit−3
0.125
0.010
0.230

0.288***
(0.086)
-1.333
(1.114)
-0.312**
(0.124)
1.601***
(0.315)
-1.199
(2.013)
2.835**
(1.399)
4.522
(5.802)

-1.040***

(0.356)

-1.076***

(0.183)
-0.622
(0.496)
13.813
(23.880)

4.013
(4.363)
-1.091
(0.740)
6.049
(6.304)
27,144
yit−2
∆yit−3
0.996
0.052
0.391

0.130
(0.188)
-0.007
(0.609)
-0.132
(0.276)
1.074***
(0.126)
-0.058
(2.201)
0.158
(1.526)
9.182
(7.244)

-0.885***

(0.220)

-0.809***

(0.230)
-0.322
(0.538)
0.081

(10.542)

-2.850
(3.956)
-0.523
(0.487)
1.535
(6.876)
27,144
yit−2
∆yit−3
0.977
0.763
0.310

-5.844***

(1.876)
-0.868
(2.210)
7.953***
(2.638)
2.474
(1.585)
-5.618
(9.087)
-0.725
(5.857)
-22.711
(32.664)

-9.850
(8.099)
-4.775
(5.623)
0.378
(0.788)
-11.180
(76.155)

1.124

(20.292)
-2.014**
(0.922)
11.718
(9.815)
27,144
yit−3
∆yit−4
0.266
0.037
0.131

Notes: *** Signiﬁcant at 1%; ** Signiﬁcant at 5%; * Signiﬁcant at 10%; Windmeijer (2005) Robust standard errors in parenthesis;

Sargan is a test for valid instruments under the null hypothesis, asymptotically distributed as χ2, with degrees of freedom equal to the
number of over-identifying restrictions. m1 and m2 are tests for ﬁrst and second-order serial correlation in the ﬁrst-diﬀerenced residuals,

asymptotically distributed as N(0,1) under the null hypothesis of no serial correlation.

Source: Own authors

11

The above results suggest that term limits are an important source of variation in ﬁscal policies
during electoral years. First term mayors, facing the reelection incentives presented by another term
in oﬃce and having the objective of maximizing their reelection probability subject to electoral and
ﬁscal constraints, seem to adopt the so-called “change in the budget composition approach” (Drazen
& Eslava (2010)). By changing the allocation of budgetary resources in electoral periods, ﬁrst term
mayors increase the types of expenditures which are more visible and presumably more appealing to
voters (i.e. investments) while keeping a controlled ﬁscal balance.

These ﬁndings are somewhat contrary to the predictions presented by Rogoﬀ (1990). According
to Rogoﬀ’s model, there should be an increase in government consumption spending during elec-
tions and a decrease in capital expenditures. The proposed explanation is that while government
consumption spending is contemporaneously observed by voters and oﬀer direct beneﬁts (such as
transfers and subsidies), capital expenditures are observed only with a time lag. As examples of
capital expenditures, Rogoﬀ (1990) cites investments in national defense (which could be hidden
from the eyes of the public due to security reasons), vesting of public pensions, oﬀ-budget loan guar-
antees and other types of capital expenditures whose eﬀects are only observed in the future. The
assumptions by Rogoﬀ (1990), however, do not really apply to Brazilian municipalities. For exam-
ple, expenditures related to national defense, debt service, subsidies to speciﬁc sectors and loans are
mostly concentrated in the federal government, thus not so relevant for an understanding of political
cycles at the municipal level. As for increases in wages and salaries of civil servants and government
employees, they are strongly restricted by the Electoral Legislation and Law of Fiscal Responsibility
and are thus diﬃcult to manipulate. Besides, since most local current expenditures are channelled
to cover bureaucratic and administrative needs (such as personnel expenditures, expenditures on
utilities and other purchases of goods and services), it is not obvious that they are readily visible to
citizens or have any positive and direct impact on voters’ welfare. The opposite is true for capital
investments: comprising the acquisition of new equipment, machinery and other capital goods (such
as new ambulances, school buses and medical equipment), as well as investments on infrastructure
projects (construction of roads, schools, hospitals, social houses, etc), these are highly and timely
visible expenditure items (remember that elections take place at the end of the year), besides being
undoubtedly welfare improving. All in all, ﬁrst term mayors in Brazil with an interest in holding
oﬃce for four more years have strong incentives to increase capital expenditures and decrease current
expenditures during elections in order to win the support of voters.

Turning to the eﬀects of the control variables, we see that lagged values of constitutional transfers
have a positive and signiﬁcant eﬀect on both tax revenues and expenditures (no signiﬁcant eﬀects
on budget balance and capital investments), while the eﬀects of political alignment with either the
president or governor on these same variables are negative.

Constitutional transfers refer to legally determined redistributions and compensations from the
states and the Union to municipalities, based on the shares and quotas the municipalities have
over state and federal tax revenues and on their legal share over natural resource revenues (water,
minerals and oil). Hence, diﬀerent municipal characteristics are reﬂected in varying levels of legal
transfers among cities. The results in Table 2 suggest that these legal transfers are associated with
an improvement in local tax collection and in overall current expenditures.

As for the negative eﬀects observed for the political alignment between mayors and governors or
president, we interpret them as reﬂecting the various mechanisms through which local public services
are provided directly by the state or federal governments when these are politically aligned with local
administrations. There are many ways in which this is possible: technical cooperation, ﬁnancial
assistance, in-kind transfers, grants, services provided by decentralized state and federal agencies at
the regional and local levels, and through parliamentary amendments to the state and federal budgets.
In the latter case, state and federal deputies belonging to the government coalition may allocate direct
resources to politically connected mayors. Note that the eﬀects of federal alignment are somewhat
greater than those of state alignment. This result may reﬂect the practice of ﬁscal federalism in

12

Brazil, where the vast majority of municipalities are highly dependent on federal assistance. Finally,
it is worth mentioning that while mayors’ political alignment with the state government is associated
with decreases in budget balances, these are improved when mayors are politically aligned with
the federal government. A possible explanation is that the high degree of dependence on federal
assistance (especially in the form of voluntary transfers, such as current and capital transfers grants)
on the part of most municipalities obligates them to comply with some of the stringent ﬁscal rules
imposed by the federal government17.

In order to pursue a deeper analysis of the diﬀerent incentives faced by ﬁrst and second term
mayors, we decided to investigate whether or not the results change when we compare ﬁrst term
mayors who actively exercise their option to run for reelection to second term mayors. This is an
important distinction, given that not all ﬁrst term mayors do in fact run for reelection - in our data
sample, in 2004 elections, among 2,166 ﬁrst term mayors (i.e.mayors able to be reappointed), only
1,352 ran for a subsequent period of government. In 2008, these values were equal to 2,605 and 1,860,
respectively. Therefore, our previous results on the eﬀects of term limits on political cycles, based
on the comparison of ﬁrst term mayors and second term mayors, are probably underestimating the
reelection incentives of term limits. Since we expect reelection runners to enact even higher levels of
ﬁscal opportunism, we test this possibility further below.

As the decision made by eligible candidates to run for reelection is clearly endogenous, (i.e.

it
is the politician’s choice, inﬂuenced by a set of determinants), we performed estimations in line
with the traditional method proposed by Heckman (1979). At ﬁrst, we undertook a ﬁxed eﬀects
(or conditional) logit regression estimating the probability of an eligible candidate running for a
subsequent mandate, including the following set of controls: political variables: (i) dummies for
political alignment with State and Federal executive government levels, separately for the ﬁrst and
last two years of the local mandate18 - these variables were included in order to capture the poten-
tial eﬀect of political support coming from higher levels of government at the executive branch;(ii)
share of votes obtained by the mayor’s party in the elections for state and federal deputies, which
indicates the potential degree of legislative support the mayor enjoys from higher government lev-
els. The higher are these vote shares, the greater may be the allocation of budgetary amendments
proposed by the deputies to the municipality; (iii) fractionalization index of votes in the previous
local election, in order to control for the heterogeneity of voter’s preferences; ﬁscal variables: (iv)
the amount of discretionary grants (current and capital) received from superior (State and Central)
levels of government during the whole local mandate (both in natural logarithm), so as to capture
the prospects of resources availability coming from upper government levels which can be subject
to tactical allocation; demographic variables: municipality’s (v) total population (in logs); (vi)
proportion of elderly and (vii) young population; mayors’ personal characteristics: (viii) age of
the mayor (and its square value, in order to capture any non-linear eﬀect), (ix) a dummy for gender
(equal to 1 if the mayor is male); (x) a dummy for public servant and ﬁnally, (xi) a dummy indicating
whether the candidate holds a university degree.

Results generated by the ﬁxed eﬀects logit model are presented in Table 3. Starting with the
political variables, mayors are more likely to run for reelection when their party also holds oﬃce in
both Federal and State governments during the second half of the mandate. On the other hand, this
likelihood appears to be lower when the alignment with State and Central government occurs during
the ﬁrst half of a mayor’s mandate. Higher share of votes for state and federal deputies appear to
reduce the mayors’ probability of running for oﬃce again, although only the latter is statistically
signiﬁcant. This negative correlation runs counter to our initial predictions. However, we interpret

17In its articles 23 and 51, for example, the Law of Fiscal Responsibility states that subnational governments may
no longer receive voluntary transfers or sign credit operations if they do not comply with the cap limits on personnel
expenditures (article 23) or do not report their accounting summaries within the pre-scheduled dates (article 51).

18Local elections in Brazil are staggered with State and Federal elections, so that the political alignment between

local and higher levels of government can vary within a given local mandate.

13

this result in a similar fashion as in Castro & Martins (2013): a party’s increased political status at
higher government levels increases the mayor’s political career options at the end of his term. As we
already mentioned, many ﬁrst term incumbents give up running for reelection as mayors. It could
be that some of them opt for a legislative career. In any case, we would need more information to
investigate this further. Finally, a higher fractionalization of votes in the previous election increases
the probability that a mayor runs for reelection. The reason is that higher fractionalization of votes
indicates a wider distribution of votes among competing parties, meaning that electoral contests in
these cases are more openly fought.

As for discretionary transfers received by mayors throughout their mandates, only the amount of
current grants seems to have a positive and statistically signiﬁcant (at 10%) eﬀect on the decision to
run for reelection - the coeﬃcient regarding capital transfers grants is not statistically diﬀerent from
zero.

Table 3: Probability of running for reelection - ﬁxed eﬀects (conditional) logit estimation

Alignment with State government - ﬁrst half

Alignment with State government - second half

Alignment with Federal government - ﬁrst half

Alignment with Federal government - second half

Share of votes - State deputy

Share of votes - Federal deputy

Fractionalization of votes

Current transfers grants (natural logarithm)

Capital transfers grants (natural logarithm)

Total Population (natural logarithm)

Elderly

Young

Age

Age squared

Male

Public servant

University degree

Observations (N x T)

Source: Own authors

-0.232**
(0.103)
0.174*
(0.103)
-0.174
(0.108)
0.719***
(0.206)
-0.662
(0.971)
-1.704**
(0.784)
1.342***
(0.318)
0.028*
(0.016)
0.014
(0.011)
-0.173
(0.513)
-6.737
(9.478)
10.414
(7.164)

-0.221***

(0.036)
0.002***
(0.000)
-0.361**
(0.175)

-0.727***

(0.093)
-0.009
(0.091)
4,688

Notes: Dependent variable assumes 1 if the local mayor runs for reelection and 0 otherwise.

***Signiﬁcant at 1%; ** Signiﬁcant at 5%; * Signiﬁcant at 10%; Standard errors in parenthesis; Time dummies included.

Finally, concerning mayors’ personal characteristics, our estimations suggest that age decreases
(at a decreasing rate) the likelihood of a mayor choosing to run for reelection. A negative eﬀect is
also observed for male and public servant, suggesting that male mayors who have a previous position
in the public sector are less likely to run for another term than females or mayors with no history in
public service.

As an additional step to solve the endogeneity present in a mayor’s decision to run for reelection,
we included the Inverse Mills Ratio (calculated according to the logit estimation19)as a regressor in

19Given that second term mayors cannot run for reelection, we replaced the estimated linear probability by zero

14

Table 4: Reelection runners x Second term mayors controlling for selectivity bias - system GMM
estimations

Coeﬃcient

(Standard deviation)

Electoral year

First term mayor (reelection runners)

Electoral year x First term runners

Constitutional transfers (lag)

Right

Left

Fractionalization of votes

Alignment with State government

Alignment with Federal government

Total population

Elderly

Young

Inverse Mills ratio

First lag of dependent variable

Constant

Observations (NxT)

Budget
Balance

37.505
(26.324)
914.499

(1158.585)

-68.542
(50.716)
-154.626*
(93.605)
-230.568
(248.984)
-207.531
(428.490)
-2520.285
(1738.731)
-360.299**
(173.262)
462.655**
(195.031)
134.250
(105.383)
9763.903
(7082.610)
1034.914
(1170.614)

-215.713
(225.397)
0.102**
(0.047)
493.795

(1260.477)

27,144

Instruments for diﬀerenced equation

from yit−2 to yit−4

Instruments for level equation

Sargan (p-value)

m1 (p-value)
m2 (p-value)

∆yit−3
0.498
0.000
0.149

Tax

Total

Current

Personnel

Capital

Revenues

Expenditures

Expenditures

Expenditures

Investments

0.314**
(0.126)
6.188
(9.448)

-0.472***

(0.139)
1.256***
(0.432)
1.281
(3.433)
-2.826
(5.958)
8.089
(7.838)

-0.870***

(0.303)
-1.287**
(0.603)
0.576
(0.916)
4.165

(32.897)

8.441
(5.162)
-1.165
(1.364)
0.057
(0.070)

-15.933**

(7.065)
27,144
yit−2
∆yit−5
0.160
0.590
0.693

0.045
(0.143)
3.289*
(1.775)
-0.038
(0.208)
0.876***
(0.260)
-0.957
(0.784)
-2.362*
(1.274)
0.334
(3.261)
0.050
(0.762)
-0.083
(0.288)
0.219
(0.320)
-10.551
(16.138)
-6.211*
(3.211)
-0.564*
(0.327)
0.042
(0.637)
2.241
(2.274)
27,144
yit−2
∆yit−5
0.517
0.260
0.418

0.249***
(0.037)
0.215
(2.604)

-0.298***

(0.059)
1.379***
(0.213)
-1.058
(0.835)
1.456
(1.596)
3.357
(5.089)

-0.959***

(0.304)

-1.090***

(0.152)
-0.304
(0.454)
-4.987

0.197
(0.153)
3.551
(3.156)
-0.277
(0.272)
0.880***
(0.172)
-0.702
(1.752)
-1.562
(1.768)
2.885

(12.695)
-0.671**
(0.279)

-0.820***

(0.219)
-0.004
(0.918)
-7.683

(12.545)

(11.909)

1.734
(2.795)
-0.147
(0.433)
-0.551
(0.479)
3.276
(2.216)
27,144
yit−2
∆yit−3
0.668
0.081
0.140

-0.926
(5.521)
-0.674
(0.534)
0.060
(0.652)
0.557
(7.489)
27,144
yit−2
∆yit−3
0.473
0.433
0.685

-4.344***

(1.651)
18.450
(34.699)
6.322**
(2.482)
1.472
(1.517)
8.194

(21.701)

-5.821

(14.643)
-46.002
(90.671)
-10.981
(9.778)
-3.818
(6.000)
3.847
(5.533)
107.501
(154.373)

20.412
(58.448)

-3.492
(5.296)
-2.155*
(1.160)
-19.163
(40.107)
27,144
yit−3
∆yit−5
0.849
0.402
0.179

Notes: *** Signiﬁcant at 1%; ** Signiﬁcant at 5%; * Signiﬁcant at 10%; Windmeijer (2005) Robust standard errors in parenthesis;

Sargan is a test for valid instruments under the null hypothesis, asymptotically distributed as χ2, with degrees of freedom equal to the
number of over-identifying restrictions. m1 and m2 are tests for ﬁrst and second-order serial correlation in the ﬁrst-diﬀerenced residuals,

asymptotically distributed as N(0,1) under the null hypothesis of no serial correlation.

Source: Own authors

15

Equation 1 and ran it again, but now comparing ﬁrst term mayors who run for reelection to mayors
in their second and last term (TERM = 1 if the mayor runs for reelection and 0 if he is in second
term). According to the estimations presented in Table 4, one can observe that, except for the case
of total expenditures, the parameter regarding the Inverse Mills Ratio lacks statistical signiﬁcance,
i.e. there is no evidence of selectivity bias20.

Compared to the results from Table 2, the results in Table 4 remain practically unchanged,
except for one important diﬀerence: average total expenditures over the term (non-electoral years)
are higher under ﬁrst term mayors who run for reelection. In fact, as the inverse Mills ratio indicated,
the amount of total expenditures and the decision to run for reelection are closely related21. All other
results point to the same conclusion: ﬁrst term mayors who run for reelection act opportunistically
by reducing both local taxes and current expenditures and increasing capital investments in a ﬁscally
responsible manner, as budget balances and total expenditures remain unchanged during elections.
These ﬁgures conﬁrm our initial proposals: given the current institutional setting in Brazil, a greater
degree of ﬁscal opportunism in capital investments was to be observed relatively to current and
personnel expenditures (refer to discussion in section 3).

In summary, we ﬁnd that ﬁrst term mayors and reelection runners, relative to second term mayors,
reduce tax revenues and move ﬁscal policy away from current expenditures towards capital invest-
ments in electoral years. This movement appears strange at ﬁrst, since by employing this strategy,
ﬁrst term mayors direct ﬁscal policy away from the budget “heavy weights” accounts (such as cur-
rent expenditures) towards smaller accounting rubrics (such as capital investments). However, the
decision to switch the composition of spending from less visible (and more burdensome) expenditures
to more visible (and ﬁscally sustainable) ones is consistent with a politician whose objective function
is to maximize his probability of reelection subject to institutional constraints on ﬁscal manage-
ment. Such ﬁscal movement is even more relevant if we assume that voters are ﬁscal conservatives
and evaluate incumbents mostly by observing visible public policies and services, especially during
elections(i.e. voters are short sighted)22.

One potential caveat in the study refers to the role of competence. Second term mayors can
be considered especially competent incumbent types, as they survived previous elections and were
reelected by voters. Besides, their longer tenure in local oﬃce endows them with more experience of
the administrative and ﬁscal situation of the municipality. Are our ﬁndings aﬀected by competence
diﬀerences between ﬁrst and second term mayors? We believe not. If competent incumbents are those
who deliver the most preferred public services (highly visible and welfare improving expenditures) at
the lowest costs (lower taxes) and with the least negative externalities (lower deﬁcits), then our results
should present signiﬁcant diﬀerences for the First Term Mayor dummy, as it captures diﬀerences in
the term’s average ﬁscal variable (non-electoral years) between ﬁrst term and second term mayors.
This was not the case. In fact, ﬁscal diﬀerences between ﬁrst and ﬁnal term mayors were mostly
observed during elections. The reason is simple:
it is precisely during elections that the need to
signal competence and be accountable to voters becomes stronger. Mayors in their second and ﬁnal
term, although proven to be competent, lack the accountability incentives related to reelection and
do not need to signal competence or build a positive reputation for a next mandate. As a result, the
ﬁscal policies carried out by last term mayors in the last years of their second mandate should not
deviate much from those followed throughout their term, or at least not as much as those of ﬁrst

and calculated the Inverse Mills Ratio at this value.

20Similarly to Table 2, the estimations comply with both Sargan and m2 tests for dynamic panel data.
21This somehow echoes the ﬁndings in Sakurai & Menezes Filho (2008), for whom higher total spending over the

term increases the mayor’s party reelection probability.

22The literature is still inconclusive about whether Brazilian voters are ﬁscal conservatives or ﬁscal liberals. Arvate,
Avelino & Tavares (2009) suggest that voters do not like deﬁcits in general at the state level. Sakurai & Menezes Filho
(2008) show that voters enjoy higher total spending at the local level, but do not test their reaction to deﬁcits.
Theoretically, local voters in the Brazilian ﬁscal federalism should act as ﬁscal liberals (Jones, Meloni & Tommasi
(2012)).

16

term mayors. Our estimates suggest that electoral cycles are stronger under ﬁrst term mayors and
reelection runners. We believe this ﬁnding matches the theoretical predictions of higher accountability
eﬀects of elections for incumbents who are not limited to stand for another term in oﬃce23.

7 Concluding remarks

This article tested the eﬀects of term limits on opportunistic political budget cycles (PBC) in mu-
nicipal elections in Brazil, by comparing diﬀerences in the ﬁscal behaviour of ﬁrst term mayors (who
are allowed to run for a second mandate) and second term mayors (who are prohibited to run for
reelection) during electoral years.

Based on ﬁscal and electoral data of 3,393 Brazilian municipalities between 2001 and 2008, this
research has provided strong evidence in favour of signiﬁcant electoral ﬁscal diﬀerences between
ﬁrst term and second term mayors. As elections draw close, ﬁrst term mayors reduce local taxes and
change their budget composition by reducing current expenditures and increasing capital investments.
Importantly, they seem to do so in a ﬁscally responsible manner, as budget balances and total
expenditures remain unchanged during elections. The results also indicate that the average ﬁscal
performance delivered by ﬁrst term mayors during non-electoral years does not signiﬁcantly diﬀer
from those of ﬁnal term mayors. In this sense, diﬀerent levels of competence between ﬁrst and ﬁnal
term mayors do not seem to have any speciﬁc eﬀect on the ﬁscal choices implemented throughout
their terms in oﬃce. In fact, ﬁscal diﬀerences between both types of mayors are mostly restricted to
electoral periods, a time when the accountability and signalling eﬀects of elections reach their peak.
Finally, the results remained practically unchanged when we compared ﬁrst term mayors who do in
fact choose to run for reelection to second term mayors.

These ﬁndings are consistent with recently developed signalling models of PBC and with the con-
ditional political budget cycles literature: incumbents aiming at maximizing their reelection chances
subject to institutional restrictions on ﬁscal deﬁcits seek to signal their competence levels or policy
preferences by changing the composition of the budget in electoral years through the provision of
more visible expenditures to rational and heterogeneous voters who may (or may not) be averse to
higher spending in general, but have a preference for targeted expenditures(Drazen & Eslava (2010)).
Our ﬁndings indicate that reducing term limitations - such as changing from a one-term term
limit system to a two-terms term limit system, as Brazil did recently - is a welcome institutional
mechanism for enhancing electoral accountability and improving voters’ ability to select competent
incumbents. The accountability and selection eﬀects of reduced term limits seem to become even
stronger when combined with other institutional limitations on ﬁscal proﬂigacy. To better assess
how these conditions aﬀect electoral results, future studies should investigate whether voters respond
positively to such opportunistically targeted, although ﬁscally responsible, electoral strategies.

Acknowledgements: The authors wish to thank participants at the 2013 Meeting of the European
Public Choice Society, KOF ETH Zurich, Switzerland, 3rd-6th April, 2013. We also acknowledge the
careful text revision provided by Natalie Skerritt. The second author would like to thank ﬁnancial
support provided by Fapesp and CNPq.

References
Aidt, Toke S. & Julia Shvets. 2012. “Distributive politics and electoral incentives: Evidence from

seven US state legislatures.” American Economic Journal:Economic Policy 4(3):1–29.

23This is close to the ideas present in Alt, Mesquita & Rose (2011). However, the authors focus on performance

diﬀerences over the whole term rather than diﬀerences during elections.

17

Aidt, Toke S., Francisco Jos´e Veiga & Linda Gon¸calves Veiga. 2010. “Election results and op-
portunistic policies: A new test of the rational political business cycle model.” Public Choice
148(1-2):21–44.

Alesina, Alberto. 1987. “Macroeconomic policy in a two-party system as a repeated game.” The

Quarterly Journal of Economics 102(3):651–678.

Alesina, Alberto & Nouriel Roubini. 1992. “Political Cycles in OECD Economies.” The Review of

Economic Studies 59(4):663–688.

Alesina, Alberto, Nouriel Roubini & Gerald D. Cohen. 1997. Political cycles and the macroeconomy.

MIT Press.

Alt, James E. & David Dreyer Lassen. 2006. “Transparency, political polarization and political

budget cycles in OECD countries.” American Journal of Political Science 50(3):530–550.

Alt, James, Ethan Bueno de Mesquita & Shanna Rose. 2011. “Disentangling accountability and
competence in elections: evidence from U.S. term limits.” The Journal of Politics 73(1):171–186.
Ames, Barry. 1987. Political survival: politicians and public policy in Latin America. University of

California Press.

Arvate, Paulo Roberto, George Avelino & Jos´e Tavares. 2009. “Fiscal conservatism in a new democ-

racy: “sophisticated” versus “naive” voters.” Economics Letters 102(2):125–127.

Barberia, Lorena Guadalupe & George Avelino. 2011. “Do political budget cycles diﬀer in Latin
American democracies?” Journal of the Latin American and Caribbean Economic Association -
Economia 11(2):101–146.

Beck, Nathaniel. 1982. “Parties, administrations, and American macroeconomic outcomes.” The

American Political Science Review 76(1):83–93.

Berry, Christopher R., Barry C. Burden & William G. Howell. 2010. “The president and the distri-

bution of federal spending.” American Political Science Review 104(4):783–799.

Besley, Timothy & Anne Case. 1995. “Does political accountability aﬀect economic policy choices?
Evidence from gubernatorial term limits.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(3):769–798.
Blundell, Richard & Stephen Bond. 1998. “Initial conditions and moment restrictions in dynamic

panel data models.” Journal of Econometrics 87:115–143.

Brender, Adi. 2003. “The eﬀect of ﬁscal performance on local government election results in Israel:

1989-1998.” Journal of Public Economics 87:2187–2205.

Brender, Adi & Allan Drazen. 2008. “How do budget deﬁcits and economic growth aﬀect reelection
prospects? Evidence from a large panel of countries.” The American Economic Review 98(5):2203–
2220.

Brender, Adi & Allan Drazen. 2005. “Political budget cycles in new versus established democracies.”

Journal of Monetary Economics 52:1271–1295.

Castro, Vitor & Rodrigo Martins. 2013. “Running for oﬃce again: evidence from Portuguese munic-

ipal elections.” Public Choice 156(3-4):677–702.

De Haan, Jakob & Jeroen Klomp. 2013a. “Conditional political budget cycles: a review of recent

evidence.” Public Choice 157(3-4):387–410.

De Haan, Jakob & Jeroen Klomp. 2013b. “Political budget cycles and election outcomes.” Public

Choice 157(1-2):245–267.

Drazen, Allan & Marcela Eslava. 2010. “Electoral manipulation via voter-friendly spending: Theory

and evidence.” Journal of Development Economics 92:39–52.

Fair, Ray C. 1978. “The eﬀect of economic events on votes for president.” The Review of Economics

and Statistics 60(2):159–173.

Ferraz, Cl´audio & Frederico Finan. 2011. “Electoral accountability and corruption: evidence from

the audits of local governments.” American Economic Review 101(4):1274–1311.

Ferreira, Ivan F. S. & Mauricio S. Bugarin. 2007. “Transferˆencias Volunt´arias e Ciclo Pol´ıtico-

Or¸cament´ario no Federalismo Fiscal Brasileiro.” Revista Brasileira de Economia 61(3):271–300.

Franzese, Robert J. & Karen Long Jusko. 2008. “Political-Economic Cycles.”In The Oxford Handbook

of Political Economy, ed. B.R.Weingast and D.A. Wittman,545–564. Oxford University Press.

Frey, Bruno S. & Friedrich Schneider. 1978a. “An empirical study of politico-economic interaction

in the United States.” The Review of Economic and Statistics 60(2):174–183.

Frey, Bruno S. & Friedrich Schneider. 1978b. “A politico-economic model of the United Kingdom.”

The Economic Journal 88(350):243–253.

18

Heckman, James J. 1979. “Sample Selection Bias as a Speciﬁcation Error.” Econometrica 47(1):153–

161.

Hibbs Jr., Douglas A. 1977. “Political parties and macroeconomic policy.” The American Political

Science Review 71(4):1467–1487.

Jones, Mark. P., Osvaldo Meloni & Mariano Tommasi. 2012. “Voters as ﬁscal liberals:

incentives

and accountability in federal systems.” Economics & Politics 24(2):135–156.

Johnson, Joseph M. & W. Mark Crain. 2004. “Eﬀects of term limits on ﬁscal performance: Evidence

from democratic nations.” Public Choice 119:73–90.

Kramer, Gerald H. 1971. “Short-Term Fluctuations in U.S. Voting Behavior, 1896-1964.” The Amer-

ican Political Science Review 65(1):131–143.

Larcinese, Valentino, Leonzio Rizzo & Cecilia Testa. 2006. “Allocating the U.S. Federal Budget to

the States: The Impact of the President.” Journal of Politics 68(2):447–456.

Lema, Daniel & Jorge M. Streb. 2013. “Party alignment and political budget cycles: the Argentine

provinces.”Universidad Del Cema Documentos de Trabajo No 520.

Lindbeck, Assar. 1976. “Stabilization Policy in Open Economies with Endogenous Politicians.” The

American Economic Review 66(2):1–19.

List, John A. & Daniel M. Sturm. 2006. “How elections matter: theory and evidence from environ-

mental policy.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(4):1249–1281.

Meneguin, Fernando B. & Maur´ıcio Soares Bugarin. 2001. “Reelei¸c˜ao e pol´ıtica ﬁscal: um estudo

dos efeitos nos gastos p´ublicos.” Economia Aplicada 5(3):600–622.

Mizuca, Humberto Dantas de. 2007. Coliga¸c˜oes em elei¸c˜oes majorit´arias municipais: a l´ogica do alin-
hamento dos partidos pol´ıticos brasileiros nas disputas de 2000 e 2004. PhD thesis Departamento
de Ciˆencia Pol´ıtica - Faculdade de Filosoﬁa, Letras e Ciˆencias Humanas - Universidade de S˜ao
Paulo.

Nakaguma, Marcos Yamada & Siegfried Bender. 2006. “A emenda da reelei¸c˜ao e a Lei de Respon-
impactos sobre ciclos pol´ıticos e performance ﬁscal dos estados (1986-2002).”

sabilidade Fiscal:
Economia Aplicada 10(3):377–397.

Nogare, Chiara Dalle & Rober Ricciuti. 2011. “Do term limits aﬀect ﬁscal policy choices?” European

Journal of Political Economy 27(11):681–692.

Nordhaus, William D. 1975.

“The political business cycle.” The Review of Economic Studies

42(2):169–190.

Peltzman, Sam. 1992.

“Voters as ﬁscal conservatives.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics

107(2):327–361.

Porto, Alberto & Natalia Porto. 2000. “Fiscal Decentralization and Voters’ Choices as Control.”

Journal of Applied Economics 3:135–167.

Rodrigues, Leˆoncio Martins. 2002. Partidos, ideologia e composi¸c˜ao social: um estudo das bancadas

partid´arias na Cˆamara dos Deputados. Edusp.

Rogoﬀ, Keneth & Anne Sibert. 1988. “Elections and macroeconomic policy cycles.” The Review of

Economic Studies 55(1):1–16.

Rogoﬀ, Kenneth. 1990. “Equilibrium political budget cycles.” The American Economic Review

80(1):21–36.

Rose, Shann. 2006. “Do ﬁscal rules dampen the political business cycle?” Public Choice 128(3-

4):407–431.

Rosenberg, Jacob. 1992. “Rationality and the political business cycle: The case of local government.”

Public Choice 73(1):71–81.

Rumi, Cecilia. 2008. “National electoral cycles in transfers to subnational jurisdictions. Evidence
from Argentina.” In Finanzas p´ublicas bajo competencia pol´ıtica. Marco federal y evidencia de
Argentina, Rumi, Cecilia. Editorial de la Universidad Nacional de la Plata.

Sakurai, Sergio Naruhiko & Na´ercio Aquino Menezes Filho. 2008. “Fiscal policy and reelection in

Brazilian municipalities.” Public Choice 137(1-2):301–314.

Sakurai, Sergio Naruhiko & Na´ercio Aquino Menezes Filho. 2011. “Opportunistic and partisan

election cycles in Brazil: new evidence at the municipal level.” Public Choice 148(1-2):233–247.

Schneider, Cristina J. 2010. “Fighting with one hand tied behind the back: political budget cycles

in the West German states.” Public Choice 142(1-2):125–150.

Sheﬀrin, Steven M. 1989. “Evaluating rational partisan business cycle theory.” Economics & Politics

1(3):239–259.

19

Shi, Min & Jakob Svensson. 2006. “Political budget cycles: Do they diﬀer across countries and why?”

Journal of Public Economics 90(8-9):1367–1389.

Smart, Michael & Daniel M. Sturm. 2006. “Term limits and electoral accountability.”LSE CEP

Discussion Paper No 770.

Streb, Jorge M., Daniel Lema & Gustavo Torrens. 2009. “Checks and Balances on Political Budget

Cycles: Cross-Country Evidence.” Kyklos 62(3):426–447.

Tufte, Edward R. 1975. “Determinants of the Outcomes of Midterm Congressional Elections.” The

American Political Science Review 69(3):812–826.

Tufte, Edward R. 1978. Political control of the economy. Princeton University Press.
Veiga, Francisco Jos´e & Linda Gon¸calves Veiga. 2007. “Political business cycles at the municipal

level.” Public Choice 131:45–64.

Vergne, Cl´emence. 2009. “Democracy, elections and allocation of public expenditures in developing

countries.” European Journal of Political Economy 25:63–77.

Windmeijer, Frank. 2005. “A ﬁnite sample correction for the variance of linear eﬃcient two-step

GMM estimators.” Journal of Econometrics 126:25–51.

A Appendix

Table A.1: Descriptive statistics

Variable

Mean

Standard deviaton

Budget balance (per capita)
Tax revenues (per capita)
Total expenditures (per capita)
Current expenditures (per capita)
Personnel expenditures (per capita)
Capital investments (per capita)
Current Transfers / Total Revenues
Current Transfers Grants (per capita - sum over the local mandate)
Capital Transfers Grants (per capita - sum over the local mandate)
Share of votes - State deputy
Share of votes - Federal Deputy
Fractionalization of votes
Alignment with State government
Alignment with Federal government
Left
Right
Elderly
Young
Total population
Age
University degree
Male
Public servant

33.28
82.75

1,216.61
1,048.75
519.79
145.33

0.83
77.14
119.91

0.12
0.13
0.52
0.24
0.10
0.20
0.41
0.08
0.29

39,769.84

47.68
0.43
0.94
0.17

Source: Own authors

112.40
110.15
676.88
551.02
265.65
172.83
0.11
101.07
194.68
0.07
0.09
0.12
0.42
0.30
0.40
0.49
0.02
0.05
244,028.00
9.39
0.49
0.24
0.37

20

