Macrodynamic Implications of Employee Profit Sharing as Effort Elicitation Device 

 

Gilberto Tadeu Lima 

Department of Economics 

University of São Paulo, Brazil 

giltadeu@usp.br 

and 

Jaylson Jair da Silveira 

Department of Economics and International Relations 

Federal University of Santa Catarina, Brazil 

jaylson.silveira@ufsc.br 

 

 

Abstract: We elaborate a macrodynamic model where the distribution of factor income is affected by 
the possibility of profit sharing with workers. Firms choose periodically to compensate workers with 
only  a  real  base  wage  or  a  share  of  profits  in  addition  to  this  real  base  wage  as  alternative  effort-
elicitation strategies. As validated by empirical evidence, labor productivity is higher in profit-sharing 
firms  than  in  non-sharing  firms.  The  frequency  distribution  of  effort-elicitation  strategies  and  labor 
productivity  across  firms  are  co-evolutionarily  time-varying,  which  then  affects  the  dynamics  of  the 
distribution  of  income  between  profits  and  wages  and  therefore  the  savings-determined  growth  rate. 
Heterogeneity  in  effort-elicitation  strategies  across  firms  (and  hence  earnings  inequality  across 
workers)  can  be  a  stable  long-run  equilibrium.  In  such  a  polymorphic  equilibrium,  the  frequency  of 
profit-sharing firms varies positively (negatively) with the real base wage (profit-sharing coefficient). 
As shown analytically and with numerical simulations, the micro- and macrodynamics of the economy 
are  crucially  affected  by  the  profit-sharing  coefficient  and  the  real  base  wage  as  bifurcation 
parameters. 

Keywords:  Macrodynamics;  profit  sharing,  coevolutionary  dynamics,  income  distribution,  economic 
growth. 
 
Resumo:  Elaboramos  um  modelo  macrodinâmico  no  qual  a  distribuição  da  renda  dos  fatores  de 
produção é afetada pela possibilidade de compartilhamento de lucros com os trabalhadores. As firmas 
escolhem periodicamente entre duas estratégias alternativas de elicitação de esforço: compensar seus 
trabalhadores  somente  com  um  salário  real  base  ou  com  uma  parcela  salarial  adicionalmente  a  esse 
salário  real  base.  Como  validado  pela  evidência  empírica,  a  produtividade  do  trabalho  é  maior  nas 
firmas que compartilham lucros que naquelas que não compartilham. A distribuição de frequência das 
estratégias de elicitação de esforço e da produtividade do trabalho entre as firmas variam no tempo de 
maneira coevolucionária, afetando, assim, a dinâmica da distribuição de renda entre salários e lucros e, 
portanto,  do  crescimento  econômico,  a  qual  é  determinado  pela  poupança.  A  heterogeneidade  nas 
estratégias de elicitação de esforço do trabalho entre as firmas (e, logo, a desigualdade de rendimentos 
entre os trabalhadores) pode ser um equilíbrio de longo prazo estável. Nesse equilíbrio polimórfico, a 
frequência de firmas que compartilham lucros varia positivamente (negativamente) com o salário real 
base  (coeficiente  de  compartilhamento  de  lucros).  Como  mostrado  analiticamente  e  com  simulações 
numéricas, a micro e a macrodinâmica da economia são crucialmente afetadas pelo salário real base e 
o coeficiente de compartilhamento de lucros como parâmetros de bifurcação. 

Palavras-chave:  Macrodinâmica,  compartilhamento  de  lucro,  dinâmica  coevolucionária,  distribuição 
de renda, crescimento econômico. 
 
JEL Codes: E11, E25, J33, O41. 

Classificação Anpec: Área 4 – Macroeconomoa, Economia Monetária e Finanças. 

1. Introduction 
Employee  profit-sharing  arrangements  have  experienced  rising  (albeit  fluctuating)  incidence 
in formal labor contracts in advanced economies  in the last few decades (D’Art  and Turner, 
2004,  Kruse,  Blasi  and  Park,  2010).  From  a  long-term  standpoint,  however,  the  presence  of 
employee  profit  sharing  in  (in)formal  labor  contracts  has  gone  through  several  waves  since 
profit sharing was first conceived and introduced during the industrial revolution (Mitchell et 
al., 1990, D’Art and Turner, 2006, Blasi et al., 2013). 

On theoretical grounds, connecting workers’ earnings to the profit performance of the 
firm can be seen as potentially stimulating workers to increase commitment and effort, which 
would  result  in  a  rise  in  their  productivity.  On  empirical  grounds,  meanwhile,  surveys  find 
that  both  employers  and  employees  interpret  profit  sharing  arrangements  as  contributing  to 
enhance firm performance along several dimensions (Weitzman and Kruse, 1990, and Blasi et 
al.,  2010).  Arguably,  profit  sharing  as  a  worker  incentive  device  is  subject  to  the  free-rider 
problem, given that the rewards from individual effort are usually shared with other workers. 
Yet,  there  is  evidence  that  such  free-riding  problem  often  appears  to  be  overcome  to  some 
extent  by  worker  co-monitoring  and  reciprocity  (Freeman,  Kruse  and  Blasi,  2010).  In  fact, 
Carpenter et al. (2016) provide experimental evidence that, although profit sharing may not be 
an effective enough device to  elicit more labor effort by itself, it may  nonetheless suffice to 
stimulate reciprocity-minded peers to report free riders given the cost imposed on them when 
others shirk. As a result, teams with peer reporting and profit sharing may exert more effort at 
work than those with profit sharing (or peer reporting) alone. 

In  practice,  profit-sharing  plans  vary  a  great  deal,  and  the  major  ways  in  which  they 
differ usually involve what is shared (e.g., total profits or profits above some threshold level), 
when and how sharing happens (e.g., in a deferred or non-deferred way, in cash or company 
stocks) and with whom sharing is implemented (e.g., directly to workers or to some workers’ 
retirement or pension plan). Nevertheless, as there is survey evidence that the combination of 
non-deferred  and  in-cash  profit  sharing  is  ranked  first  by  employees  as  a  motivation  device 
(Blasi et al. 2010), we draw on this evidence to specify the model set forth in this paper. 

There is  considerable empirical evidence that profit sharing raises labor productivity. 
Albeit the estimated  size of the respective  productivity  gain  varies from  study to  study, it is 
often non-negligible. Weitzman and Kruse (1990) apply meta-analysis to sixteen studies and 
discover  that  the  productivity  gain  associated  with  profit  sharing  is  positive  at  infinitesimal 
significance levels. Doucouliagos (1995) applies meta-analysis to forty-three studies and also 
find that profit sharing is positively associated with productivity. Cahuc and Dormont (1997) 
use French data and find that profit sharing firms outperform other firms in both productivity 
and profitability. Conyon and Freeman (2004) use U.K. data and discover that profit-sharing 
firms  usually  outperform  other  firms  in  both  productivity  and  financial  performance.  D’Art 
and Turner (2004) use data for 11 European countries and find that profit sharing is positively 
associated  with  productivity  and  profitability.  Magnan  and  St-Onge  (2005),  using  data  for 
Canada,  find  that  firms  adopting  profit  sharing  enhance  their  profitability  in  comparison  to 
their  own  prior  performance  and  to  firms  that  are  not  adopting  profit  sharing.  Meanwhile, 
Robinson and Wilson (2006), employing U.K. data, and Kato et al. (2010), using Korean data, 
find  that  profit  sharing  has  a  positive  effect  on  productivity.  Kraft  and  Ugarkovic  (2006), 
using data for Germany, find that profit sharing has a positive effect on profitability, although 
Dube and Freeman (2010) use U.S. data and discover that profit sharing has a positive effect 
on  productivity  only  when  accompanied  by  shared  modes  of  decision-making.  In  a  field, 
quasi-experimental  investigation,  Peterson  and  Luthans  (2006)  could  randomly  assign  profit 
sharing  at  three  of  twenty-one  establishments  within  a  U.S.  company,  having  detected  that 
productivity and profits rose in the profit-sharing establishments relative to the control group. 

 

1 

Motivated by all these suggestive pieces of empirical evidence, this paper sets forth a 
macrodynamic model of capital accumulation and economic growth, in which the distribution 
of income between wages and profits can feature profit sharing with workers. Firms are (and 
remain) technologically heterogeneous with regard to the output to capital ratio. In attempting 
to elicit effort (and hence productivity) from labor more effectively and profitably, firms can 
behave heterogeneously regarding the adoption of employee compensation strategy. Workers 
are (and remain) homogeneous skill- and qualification-wise, and firms periodically choose to 
compensate  workers  with  either  a  base  wage  or  a  share  of  profits  on  top  of  this  base  wage. 
Also, consistent with the empirical evidence reported above, workers in sharing firms exhibit 
higher productivity than workers in non-sharing firms. 

Even though firms can behave differently as to employee compensation strategy, any 
existing heterogeneity in effort-elicitation strategies across firms (as well as the productivity 
differential  gained by sharing firms and the ensuing earnings inequality across workers), are 
not time invariant, but instead co-evolve endogenously towards the long run as driven by an 
evolutionary protocol. Therefore, our suggested evolutionary approach provides an alternative 
framework  for  addressing  what  has  been  dubbed  in  the  literature  ‘the  fixed  wage  puzzle’, 
according to which, basically, the potential benefits of profit sharing in theory suggest that it 
should be  adopted in practice more  frequently  than it is normally found in  empirical  studies 
(Jerger  and  Michaelis,  2011).  In  fact,  our  evolutionary  framework  seems  appropriate  to 
explore  potentially  testable  explanations  for  evidence  such  as  that  U.K.  firms  often  switch 
strategies of employee compensation, with the respective gross changes (which include profit 
sharing)  being  far  more  numerous  than  the  net  changes  (Bryson  and  Freeman,  2010).  On  a 
general note, although our suggested evolutionary learning framework is applied in this paper 
to an exploration of dynamics of choice of employee compensation strategy, we would invite 
readers to  contemplate the possibility that other instances of  strategy  (or, more broadly still, 
behavior) switching are also subject to evolutionary learning.1 

From  a  macrodynamic  perspective,  we  explore  the  implications  of  the  evolutionarily 
coupled dynamics of the frequency distribution of effort-elicitation strategies across firms and 
the  labor  productivity  differential  obtained  by  profit-sharing  firms  for  the  distribution  of 
income between  profits  and  wages and  thereby  the  savings-determined  capital  accumulation 
and economic growth.2 Hence, this paper joins a recent revival of interest on the determinants 
of changes in factor (especially capital and labor) shares in aggregate income and the ensuing 
implications  of  such  changes  for  macroeconomic  dynamics.3  In  fact,  although  at  least  since 
Kaldor (1961) the constancy of the labor share in income has been often regarded as one of 

                                                           
1 For instance,  Lima and Silveira (2015) offer evolutionary  foundations to the nominal adjustment of the price 
level to a monetary shock by introducing the notion of ‘boundedly rational inattentiveness’. A firm either pays a 
cost (featuring a random component) to update its information to establish the optimal price or use costless non-
updated information to set a lagged optimal price. Instead of the standard replicator dynamic used herein, Lima 
and Silveira (2015) use an asymmetric evolutionary protocol (only firms that choose not to pay the information-
updating cost rely on random pairwise comparisons of losses). 
2  Weitzman  (1985)  use  a  Keynesian  model  to  claim  that  profit  sharing  can  deliver  full  employment  with  low 
inflation.  If  part  of  workers’  total  compensation  is  shared  profits,  so  that  the  base  wage  is  lower,  the  marginal 
cost  of  labor  is  lower  and  firms  will  be  willing  to  hire  more  workers.  As  the  marked  up  price  is  lower,  a  real 
balance effect creates a  higher aggregate demand and hence  a higher desired output. In our model,  in contrast, 
the fraction of sharing firms and the average productivity are endogenously time-varying. Also, we explore the 
implications  of  profit  sharing  for  long-run  economic  growth  in  a  supply-led  dynamic  model,  in  which  the 
distribution of factor income plays a key role as a source of savings. 
3 For instance, Walsh (2016) develops a sticky-price, sticky-wage model with workers and capitalists where the 
distribution of  factor income  matters because  wage income affects aggregate demand. Meanwhile, Broer et al. 
(2016)  set  forth  a  two-agent  version  of  the  standard  New  Keynesian  model  (featuring  a  worker  who  receives 
only labor income and a capitalist who receives only profit income) to explore how income inequality affects the 
monetary transmission mechanism. 

2 

 

the key stylized facts underlying macroeconomic models, there is compelling recent evidence 
on  factor  shares  documenting  otherwise.  For  instance,  Piketty  (2014),  Piketty  and  Zucman 
(2014) and Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) find a global decline in the labor share in the 
last decades. In this context, an interesting question that arises is whether (and to what extent) 
the broader sharing of profits by firms may eventually help reduce factor income inequality. 
In our model, a broader sharing of profits can be formally represented by a greater proportion 
of  profit-sharing  firms  (for  a  given  uniform  profit-sharing  coefficient)  or  a  higher  uniform 
profit-sharing coefficient (for a given proportion of profit-sharing firms), or both together. As 
a result, our model provides precise predictions about the implications of a broader sharing of 
profits so represented in terms of factor income distribution and economic growth, in both the 
short and the long run. One such prediction is that heterogeneity in effort-elicitation strategies 
across  firms  (and  the  resulting  earnings  inequality  across  workers)  can  be  a  stable  long-run 
equilibrium.  In such a polymorphic equilibrium,  the frequency of profit-sharing firms  varies 
positively (negatively) with the real base wage (profit-sharing coefficient). Also, when there 
is convergence to a long-run equilibrium, the average net profit rate and the growth  rate  are 
both  at  their  highest  possible  long-run  equilibrium  values.  As  shown  analytically  and  with 
numerical simulations, however, the long-run dynamics of the economy are crucially affected 
by the profit-sharing coefficient and the real base wage as bifurcation parameters. 

In the model, one key feature of the evolutionarily coupled dynamics of the frequency 
 
distribution of effort-elicitation strategies across firms and the productivity differential gained 
by sharing firms is that there is strategic substitutability in the choice of compensation mode: 
a firm’s decision to share profits has a negative payoff externality on potential sharing firms. 
The  reason  is  that  this  reduces  the  effort-enhancing  earnings  differential  represented  by  the 
excess of the compensation of workers in sharing firms over the compensation of workers in 
non-sharing firms, which lowers the labor productivity differential obtained by a sharing firm. 
Therefore, such externality differs considerably from the externality emphasized by Weitzman 
(1985) when speculating about the obstacles to the conversion of all  (or almost all) firms to 
profit  sharing.  In  Weitzman’s  model,  as  briefly  described  in  footnote  2,  if  one  firm  alone 
converts to profit sharing it will hire new workers, but at the expense of driving down the pay 
of its original workers. Hence, such a positive externality of a tight labor market may require 
coordination to encourage people to convert to profit sharing. One possibility, in Weitzman’s 
view, is to have the government reward profit-sharing workers, by preferential tax treatment 
of share income, for their part in creating the positive externality of a tight labor market.4 

The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 lays out the structure of the 
model  as  it  describes  the  behavior  of  the  economy  in  the  short  run.  Section  3  specifies  the 
evolutionarily coupled dynamics of the distribution of effort-elicitation strategies across firms 
and  the  productivity  differential  accruing  to  sharing  firms.  This  section  also  explores  the 
implications  of  the  specified  evolutionary  dynamics  for  the  macrodynamics  of  the  factor 
shares in  income and  so  the savings-driven  capital  accumulation and  economic growth. The 
final section summarizes the main conclusions reached along the way. 

2. Structure of the model and its behavior in the short run 

The economy is closed and without government activities, producing a single (homogeneous) 
good for both investment and consumption purposes. Production is carried out by a large (and 
fixed)  population  of  firms,  which  use  two  (physically  homogeneous)  factors  of  production, 
                                                           
4  Although  the  externality  in  our  model  differs  from  the  one  in  Weitzman’s  (1985)  model,  one  similar  issue 
worth exploring is whether coordination is also needed in our model to induce the conversion to profit sharing. 
Analogously,  one  possibility  would  be  to  have  the  government  reward  sharing  firms  by  preferential  tax 
treatment.  However  worth  exploring  this  possibility  might  be,  especially  in  light  of  the  evidence  that  several 
countries use tax incentives to stimulate the adoption of profit sharing, we leave it for future research.  

 

3 

capital and labor, by means of a fixed-coefficient technology. Firms produce (and hire labor) 
without  facing  any  demand  constraints,  thereby  being  able  to  sell  profitably  all  its  output 
production at the prevailing price level. However, the model is cast in real terms. 

In attempting to elicit effort from labor more effectively and profitably, an individual 
firm  chooses  periodically  between  two  employee  compensation  strategies:  it  compensates 
 (non-sharing effort-elicitation compensation strategy) 
workers with only a base real wage 
 (profit-sharing effort-elicitation 
or a base real wage and a share of total profits 
compensation strategy). In a given period there is a proportion 
 of profit-sharing 

(or type s) firms, while the remaining proportion, 
, is composed by non-sharing (or type 
n)  firms.  Consistent  with  the  empirical  evidence  on  profit  sharing  reported  in  the  preceding 
section,  a  profit-sharing  firm  is  willing  to  play  such  effort-elicitation  compensation  strategy 
because  the  resulting  labor  productivity  gain  is  strictly  higher  than  otherwise.  Meanwhile, 
productivity is homogeneous across workers in firms playing a given employee compensation 
strategy.  Given  that,  for  simplicity,  the  real  base  wage  is  taken  to  be  the  same  under  both 
effort-elicitation  compensation  strategies,  a  worker  hired  by  a  profit-sharing  firm  does  receive  a 
higher  total  compensation  than  a  worker  hired  by  a  non-sharing  firm  along  the  economically 
meaningful domain given by strictly positive profits for sharing firms.5 

, and the profit-sharing coefficient, 

To keep sharp focus on the dynamics of the frequency distribution of effort-elicitation 
compensation strategies and their implications for the distribution of factor income and hence 
the rates of capital accumulation and economic growth, we simplify matters by assuming that 
, remain constant  over time. The 
the real base wage, 
distribution  of  effort-elicitation  compensation  strategies  across  firms, 
,  which  is 
given in the short run as a result from previous dynamics, may change beyond the short run as 
driven by an evolutionary dynamic (the replicator dynamic). In the short run, for given values 
of  the  base  wage,  profit-sharing  coefficient,  productivity  differential,  distribution  of  effort-
elicitation strategies and, then, individual and average profit shares, the short-run equilibrium 
value of the growth rate is determined. As the economy evolves towards the long run, the co-
evolution of the distribution of effort-elicitation strategies and the productivity differential, by 
leading to changes in the average net profit share, causes changes in the short-run equilibrium 
value of the economic growth rate. Formally, we define the labor productivity differential as: 

(1) 

 

, 

where 

 denotes labor productivity in firms of type 

, 

 is the total output of 

firms of type 

, and 

 is the total employment of firms type 

. For simplicity, we 

normalize  labor  productivity  in  non-sharing  firms, 

,  to  one,  so  as  to  obtain 

  in 

(1). Profit-sharing firms can be intuitively portrayed as firms willing to bet on the possibility 
of  attaining  a  productivity  differential, 
,  which  is  high  enough  to  allow  them  to  have  a 
lower (higher) total unit labor cost (unit net profit) than non-sharing firms. In fact, a sharing 
firm  envisages  that  such  a  productivity  differential  will  be  high  enough  so  as  to  allow  it  to 
have a higher net profit rate (i.e., net of shared profits) than a non-sharing firm. However, as 
addressed in the next section, due to the presence of strategic substitutability in the choice of 

                                                           
5 Empirical evidence shows that profit sharing has a meaningful effect on worker total compensation (Long and 
Fang, 2012). As found in Capelli and Neumark (2004), total labor costs exclusive of the sharing component do 
not fall significantly in pre/post comparisons of firms that adopt profit sharing, which suggests that profit sharing 
tends to come on top of, rather than in place of, a base wage. 

 

4 

v(0,1)[0,1]1v(,1)snaa/iiiaXL,isniX,isniL,isnna1saemployee compensation strategy, the extra productivity  gain accruing to  profit-sharing firms 
may fall short of the minimum level needed for the profit-sharing bet to prove successful. 

 

Using (1), the total profits of sharing and non-sharing firms are, respectively: 

(2) 

and: 

(3) 

 

 

; 

, 

which requires further assuming (to ensure economically meaningful values for the two factor 
income shares) that 
. Using (2) and (3), the shares of profit in output of sharing 

and non-sharing firms in the short run are given, respectively, by: 

(4) 

and: 

(5) 

 

 

; 

. 

The  profit  share  expression  in  (4)  denotes  the  proportion  of  gross  profits  in  the  output  of 
sharing  firms,  since  an  exogenously  given  fraction  of  such  profits, 
,  is  shared 
with workers. Using (4), the unit net return of sharing firms in the short run is given by: 

(6) 

 

, 

Using (5) and (6), the short-run value of the average net profit share can be expressed as: 

(7) 

 

. 

As  for  capital  productivity,  to  keep  sharp  focus  on  our  main  issue  of  interest  of  the 
 
effect of profit sharing on the rates of capital accumulation and economic growth, we simplify 
matters by assuming that the maximum output that can be produced by fully utilizing one unit 
of capital, 

, is an exogenously given constant common to all firms: 

(8) 

 

where 

type 

. 

, 

 is the output to capital ratio (and 

 is the total capital stock) of firms of 

Using (2)-(5) and  (8), the (gross) profit rates of  sharing and non-sharing firms  in  the 

short run can then be expressed as follows: 

(9) 

and: 

(10) 

 

 

; 

. 

Using (6) and (9), the net profit rate of sharing firms in the short run is then given by: 

(11) 

 

 

. 

5 

1ssssvRXvLX(1)nnnnRXvLvX1nsvaa1sssRvX1nnnRvX(0,1)(1)(1)1csssRvX(1)(1)1(1)(1)csnvvksnkkk/iiikXKiK,isn1ssssssRXvrkKK(1)nnnnnnRXrvkKK(1)(1)1ccssssssRXvrkKKThus, using (10) and (11), the short-run value of the average net profit rate is given by: 

(12) 

 

. 

Therefore, a comparison between (7) and (12) shows that the average net profit share and the 
average net profit rate always move in the same direction. 

As assumed earlier, the population of firms, the base wage, 

in  non-sharing  firms, 

,  the  profit-sharing  coefficient, 

, the labor productivity 
,  and  the  output  to  capital  ratio 

(which is  common to  all firms), 
defined  as  a  time  frame  in  which  the  aggregate  capital  stock, 

, all remain constant over time. The short run period 

,  the  labor  supply, 

 is 
,  the 

productivity differential of profit-sharing firms, 

, the frequency distribution of effort-

elicitation  compensation  strategies  across  firms, 

,  and  therefore  the  distribution  of  factor 

income  as  given  by  the  average  net  profit  share, 
previous dynamics.6 

,  can  all  be  taken  as  predetermined  by 

The  model  economy  is  populated  by  firm-owner  capitalists  and  workers.  The  latter 
inelastically provide labor and receive solely a base wage when they are hired by non-sharing 
firms. Meanwhile, workers in sharing firms also receive a share of the latter’s profit income, 
which is the entire surplus over the respective base wage bill. We assume that workers’ total 
compensation is entirely spent on consumption, and capitalists save a fraction, 
, 
of  their  net  profit  income.  Capitalists  save  in  order  to  finance  capital  accumulation,  and  all 
their net profit income not consumed is automatically and immediately invested. Thus, firms 
manage  to  sell  all  their  output  production  at  the  current  price,  given  that  aggregate  demand 
automatically and immediately adjust to remove any excess aggregate (and individual) supply 
in the product market. In the short-run product market equilibrium, aggregate investment, 
, 

is then identically equal to net aggregate saving, 

. 

Using (8)-(11), the net aggregate saving as a proportion of the capital stock in period 

 

can be expressed as follows: 

(13) 

. 

By substituting (13) in the product market equilibrium identity given by 

, and 

assuming that capital does not depreciate, we obtain the short-run equilibrium growth rate: 

(14) 

 

. 

In the short-run equilibrium, the growth rate depends on parametric constants in conjunction 
with the productivity differential and the frequency distribution of effort-elicitation strategies, 
which are predetermined in the short run and co-evolve evolutionarily towards the long run. 
Given  that  economic  growth  is  driven  by  capital  accumulation  from  capitalists’  saving,  the 
short-run equilibrium growth rate varies positively with the saving propensity and the average 
net profit share. Thus, given the frequency distribution of effort-elicitation strategies and the 
productivity differential, a higher profit-sharing coefficient, by virtue of lowering the average 
net profit share, reduces the growth rate in the short-run. 

 

                                                           
6 As in the next section we explore the behavior of the economy in the transition from the short to the long run, 
thereafter we attach a subscript 

 to the short-run value of all variables (be they endogenous or predetermined). 

 

6 

(1)(1)1(1)(1)ccsnvrrrkvvnakttKtN,sttatct(0,1)tItSt,,,,(1)(1)(1)stntccttssttnntsttnttRRSkkkKK//ttttIKSK*,(,)(,)(1)cttttsttttngkt3. Behavior of the model in the long run 

In the long run we assume that the short-run equilibrium value of the rate of economic growth 
is  always  attained,  with  the  economy  moving  towards  the  long  run  due  to  changes  in  the 
aggregate  stock  of  capital, 
 

,  coming  from  changes  in  the  individual  stocks  of  capital, 

and 

,  the  supply  of  available  labor, 

,  the  labor  productivity  differential, 

,  and  the 

distribution of effort-elicitation compensation strategies, 
that can be produced by fully utilizing one unit of capital is an exogenously given constant 
common to all firms, it follows from (8) that 

. Given that the maximum output 
 
. Meanwhile, to sharpen focus on 

the evolutionarily coupled dynamics of the distribution of effort-elicitation strategies and the 
productivity differential as state variables, and their resulting macrodynamic implications, we 
further assume, for convenience, that the supply of available labor grows endogenously at the 
same rate as the aggregate capital stock.7 

Let us derive the dynamics of the labor productivity differential. In a given short-run 
  of  firms,  which  may  vary  from  one  period  to  the 

  there  is  a  fraction 

period 

next one, using the profit-sharing strategy. The complementary fraction 

 is made up of 

firms  that  compensate  workers  with  solely  the  base  wage.  Let 

  be  the 

average earnings of workers in period 

, where 

 and 

 represent the 

earnings of a worker in a profit-sharing firm and a worker in a non-sharing firm in period 
, 
respectively. Hence, the differential between the higher earnings and the average earnings can 
be written as 
. As suggested by the empirical 

 for all 

evidence  recalled  reported  earlier,  we  assume  that  the  extent  to  which  labor  productivity  in 
profit-sharing  firms  is  greater  than  labor  productivity  in  non-sharing  firms  varies  positively 
with  the  relative  earnings  differential  represented  by 
.  In  implicit  form,  we  consider 

the following effort-elicitation differential function: 

(15) 

 

, 

where we assume that 

 and 

 for all earnings differential 

. We 

further  assume  that 

.  Thus,  in  accordance  with  the  empirical  evidence 

that the productivity gains arising from profit sharing are not unlimited, the  effort-elicitation 
differential  in  (15)  rises  at  a  non-increasing  rate  and  tends  to  become  insignificant  for  very 
large values of the relative earnings differential.8 We can use (2) to re-write (15) as follows: 

(15-a)   

. 

As  re-written  in  (15-a),  the  effort-elicitation  differential  function  has  an  intuitive 
  is  the 

  is  the  output  per  worker  of  a  profit-sharing  firm  and 

interpretation.  Given  that 

                                                           
7 Consequently, the constancy of the productivity differential and the distribution of  effort-elicitation strategies 
in  the  long-run  equilibrium  guarantee  the  constancy  of  both  the  average  labor  productivity  and  the  average 
employment  rate.  In  fact,  using  (1)  and  (8)-(9),  the  average  employment  rate  in  the  short-run  equilibrium  is 

, where the expression in square brackets is the weighted average of the 

inverse of the individual productivities 

 and 

. 

8 In the meta-analyses in Weitzman and Kruse (1990) and Doucouliagos (1995), the magnitude of the estimated 
effect of profit sharing on labor productivity is usually around 3 to 7 percent. 

7 

 

KsKnKNk,,/stntKKkt[0,1]t1t,(1)ttsttnyyyt,,,stststyvRLnyvt,,,(1)stttststyyRL[0,1]t,sttyy1,,,()(1)tstttststfyyfRL()0f()0f,()sttyy()lim()0ssyyfyy1(1)()tttfvtv**,,*(1)stnttttttttLLKeNNk,stta,1ntarespective unit cost of labor, it follows that 

 is the profit per worker of a profit-sharing 

firm and 

 is the amount of profit per worker of a profit-sharing firm which is shared 

with  its workers. Thus, given 

 and 

, the next-period effort-elicitation differential  varies 

positively with the profit-sharing coefficient and negatively with the base wage. Meanwhile, 
, 
given 

, the next-period effort-elicitation differential varies positively with 

 and 

, 

the proportion of non-sharing firms in a given period, which is an indicator of the prospects of 
not  receiving  any  shared  profits  in  the  next  period.  Since  an  increase  in 
 so  acts  as  an 

incentive on workers in profit-sharing firms in the next period to exhibit a higher productivity 
differential, it follows that 
 can be interpreted as reflecting how valuable it is 

to work for a profit-sharing firm. 

In fact, it follows from (15-a) that 

 for all 

  and  for  any 

,  where  the  latter  condition  was  assumed  earlier  to  ensure 

strictly  positive  gross  profits  for  profit-sharing  firms  in  (2).  The  greater  the  proportion  of 
sharing firms in a given period, the smaller the effort-elicitation differential between sharing 
and  non-sharing  firms  in  the  next  period.  The  substance  of  this  result  is  that  one  individual 
firm’s  decision  to  follow  the  profit-sharing  effort-elicitation  strategy  in  a  given  period,  by 
 and consequently making it less valuable to workers 
reducing 

 for a given 

to be employed by a sharing firm in the next period, has a negative payoff externality on all 
other sharing firms. Therefore, there is strategic substitutability in the firms’ choice of effort-
elicitation  compensation  strategy.  Meanwhile,  if  all  firms  choose  to  adopt  the  profit-sharing 
, it follows that the relative earnings differential represented 
effort-elicitation strategy 

by 

  vanishes.  In  this  case  with  all  firms  sharing  profits,  given  that 

productivity is uniform across firms, and should be higher than the average productivity when 
  (recall  that  productivity  in  non-
all  firms  pay  only  the  base  wage,  we  assume  that 

sharing firms was normalized to one). When all firms play the non-sharing strategy 

, 

the  potential  relative  earnings  differential  given  by 

  takes  its  maximum 

value. In this case, a non-sharing firm switching strategy to the profit-sharing mode reaps the 
largest  possible  extra  effort-elicitation  gain,  since 
  for  all 

 and for any 

. 

To facilitate the derivation of analytical results on the existence and stability of long-
run  equilibrium  solutions  and  to  implement  numerical  simulations,  in  what  follows  we 
assume a specific functional form for (15-a) given by: 

(16) 

 

, 

where 

 is a parameter ensuring that 

 in (15-a). 

Some intuitive rationales can be suggested for the extra effort-elicitation gain in (15)-
(16). First, the average earnings can be reasonably interpreted by workers as a rule-of-thumb, 
conventional estimate of their fallback position or outside option under uncertainty. It follows 
that  workers  who  are  shared  profits  in  addition  to  receiving  a  base  wage  generate  an  extra 
effort-elicitation gain (comparatively to the effort-elicitation gain they would generate if paid 
solely a base wage) which varies positively with the excess of the higher earnings over their 
fallback position or outside option. Besides, the average earnings can be plausibly construed 
by workers as a reasonable reference point against which a compensation package featuring a 
base wage and shared profits should be compared when they are resolving how much above-

 

8 

tv()tvtttv1t1t(1)()ttv1()(1)()0tttttvfv[0,1]ttv(1)()ttvt(1)t,(1)()sttttyyv(0)1f(0)t,()stttyyv()(1)()tttfvfv(0,1]ttv1(1)()tttv1(0)1fnormal productivity to fairly generate in return. Consequently, above-average earnings can be 
plausibly interpreted by workers as fairly warranting the generation of above-normal levels of 
productivity. Interestingly, Blasi, Kruse and Freeman (2010) suggest an intuitive rationale for 
profit-sharing  compensation  based  on  reciprocity  and  gift  exchange  (as  these  notions  are 
articulated in Akerlof (1982)): a “gift” of higher worker compensation through profit sharing 
increases worker morale, and workers reciprocate with a “gift” of greater productivity. More 
broadly, a “gift” of profit-sharing compensation over and above a standard base wage can be 
intuitively seen as assisting to create and reinforce a sense of shared interests and the value of 
a reciprocal relationship. 

While the frequency distribution of  effort-elicitation compensation strategies is given 
in the short run, an individual firm revises periodically its choice of compensation strategy in 
a way described by the following replicator dynamic:9 

(17) 

 

where 

, 

 is the average net profit rate, which is given by (12), and the latter 

equality  is  obtained  using  (10)  and  (11),  so  that 

  and 

  are  given  by  (5)  and  (6), 

respectively.  According  to  the  replicator  dynamic  represented  in  (17),  the  frequency  of  the 
profit-sharing effort-elicitation strategy across firms increases (decreases) exactly when it has 
above-average (below-average) payoff. 

Using (5) and (6), the replicator dynamic in (16) becomes: 

(17-a)   

. 

Thus, the state transition of the economy is determined by the system of difference equations 
(16) and (17-a), whose state space is 

. 

 
We can show that the dynamic system represented by (16) and (17-a) has two long-run 
equilibria  featuring  survival  of  only  one  effort-elicitation  strategy  in  each.  These  are 
.  We  can  also  show 
monomorphic  (pure-strategy)  equilibria  which  we  denote  by 

  and 

the  possible  existence  of  a  third  long-run  equilibrium,  now  featuring  the  survival  of  both 
effort-elicitation  strategies.  This  is  a  polymorphic  (mixed-strategy)  equilibrium  which  we 
denote by 

. 

Note that 

 for any 

 satisfies (17-a) for any state 

. 

In  this  case,  it  follows  that 

  for  all 

  in  (16)  if,  and  only  if,  the 

(potential) effort-elicitation differential is given by: 

(18) 

 

, 

where 
Therefore, one of the two monomorphic long-run equilibria of the system, 

 is implied by our assumptions about the magnitude of the respective parameters. 
, is given by the 

state 
strategy as the only survivor. 

,  which  nonetheless  features  the  non-sharing  effort-elicitation  compensation 

                                                           
9 This replicator dynamic can be derived from a model of (social or individual) learning as in Weibull (1995, sec. 
4.4). 

 

9 

11,,()(1)()cccttsttttstnrrk,(1)ccttsttnrrr,cstn11(1)(1)1(1)ttttvvk2{(,):01,}ttttv1E2E3E10tt{0,1,2,...}t(,0)t1tt{0,1,2,...}t11ttv11E(,0)Meanwhile, if 

 for any 

, the difference  equation  in  (17-a) is 

satisfied  for  any  state 

  and,  given  (16),  it  follows  that 

  for  all 

 if, and only if, the value of the effort-elicitation differential is given by: 

(19) 

 

. 

Therefore, the other monomorphic long-run equilibrium of the system, 

, is represented by 

the state 
, which features the profit-sharing effort-elicitation compensation strategy 
as the only survivor. However, due to the existence of strategic substitutability in the choice 
of employee compensation strategy, it follows that 

. 

 

Finally,  if 

  for  any 

,  the  difference  equation  in 

(17-a) is satisfied if, and only if, the individual profit shares in (5) and (6) (and therefore the 
profit rates in (10) and (11)) are equalized. Given that the effort-elicitation differential (which 
is equal to the level of effort-elicitation in profit-sharing firms) is the only adjusting variable 
among the determinants of the profit shares in (5) and (6), the latter become equalized if, and 
only if, the value of the effort-elicitation differential is given by: 

(20) 

 

, 

where  we  assume  that 
substitutability in the choice of employee compensation strategy, it follows that 

.  Furthermore,  due  to  the  existence  of  strategic 
. 

,  so  that 

Meanwhile,  given  that 

  for  all 

,  it  follows  that 

  for  all 

 in (17-a) if, and only if: 

(21) 

 

. 

Given  that 
that 
(20) in it, is satisfied when the following inequality holds: 

,  the  denominator  in  (20)  is  strictly  positive.  Hence,  in  order  to  ensure 
. The latter inequality, upon substitution of 

, we assume that 

(22) 

 

. 

Note  that  our  assumptions  on  the  magnitude  of  the  respective  parameters  imply  that 
that 

.  Now, 

assume 

,  we 

ensure 

order 

that 

in 

to 

. The latter inequality, upon substitution of (20) in it, is satisfied 

when the following inequality holds: 

(23) 

 

. 

Note  that  our  assumptions  on  the  magnitude  of  the  respective  parameters  imply  that 
. Therefore, if the conditions in (22)-(23) are satisfied, there exists a 

 and 

third  long-run  equilibrium  represented  by  the  state 

,  denoted  by 

,  which 

features  the  survival  of  both  effort-elicitation  compensation  strategies  in  the  long  run.  The 
existence  of  a  long-run  equilibrium  of  the  dynamic  system  given  by  (16)  and  (17-a)  is 
summarized in the proposition that follows. 

Proposition 1: For a given vector of parameters 
by 

(17-a)  has 

(16)  and 

two  monomorphic 

, the dynamic system represented 
equilibria  given  by 

long-run 

 

10 

11tt{0,1,2,...}t(,1)t1tt{0,1,2,...}t12E(,1)*1(0,1)tt{0,1,2,...}t*(1)vvv*1**1tt{0,1,2,...}t1tt{0,1,2,...}t***(1)()vv*1v*0*(1)0v(1)vv(0,1)*1**(1)()vv2(1)2vvv(0,1)**(,)3E(,,,)vk  and 

.  And  if 

,  there  is  also  a 

polymorphic  long-run  equilibrium  given  by 

, 

where 

. 

 
It  can  be  checked  that  the  productivity  differential  in  the  polymorphic  equilibrium 
varies negatively (positively) with the profit-sharing coefficient (real base wage). In the same 
equilibrium, the proportion of sharing firms varies with these parameters as follows: 

     and     

, 

where it can be checked that the numerator of the second expression is positive for any 
and 

. 

 

Meanwhile, the stability properties of the evolutionary long-run equilibria identified in 

 
Proposition 1 are established in the following proposition. 

Proposition  2:  For  a  given  vector  of  parameters 
dynamic system represented by (16) and (17-a) exhibit the following stability properties: 

,  the  long-run  equilibria  of  the 

i. 

If 

, the monomorphic equilibrium given by 

repulsor  and  the  monomorphic  equilibrium  given  by 

 is a 

  is  an 

attractor; 
If 

ii. 

,  the  monomorphic  equilibria 

  and 

  are  repulsors,  whereas  the 

polymorphic  equilibrium  given  by 

,  where 

, is an attractor; and 

iii. 

If 

,  the  monomorphic  equilibrium  given  by 

  is  an 

attractor and the monomorphic equilibrium 

 is a repulsor. 

Proof: See Appendix. 

 
bifurcation  at 
monomorphic  equilibrium  given  by 

Interestingly,  the  dynamic  system  given  by  (16)  and  (17-a)  also  undergoes  a 
.  This  bifurcation  features  a  change  in  both  the  stability  property  of  the 
  and  the  existence  status  of  the  polymorphic 

  is  crossed  from  below 
equilibrium  given  by 
(above), the bifurcation features the monomorphic equilibrium given by 
 ceasing to 
be  an  attractor  (a  repulsor)  to  become  a  repulsor  (an  attractor),  and  by  the  polymorphic 
equilibrium  given  by 
,  which  is  an  attractor,  coming  (ceasing)  to  exist.  The 

.  If  the  threshold  given  by 

dynamic  system  given  by  (16)  and  (17-a)  also  undergoes  a  bifurcation  at 
.  This 
bifurcation  features  a  change  in  both  the  stability  property  of  the  monomorphic  equilibrium 

 

11 

1(,0),01vE2(,1)(,1)E****3*(1)(,),()vEv*(1)(,)vv*210(1)v*2222(1)0(1)vvvvv1(0,)v(,,,)vk01(,0),01vE2(,1)(,1)E1E2E****3*(1)(,),()vEv*(1)vvv1,01vE2(,1)E(,1)**(,)(,1)**(,)given  by 

  and  the  existence  status  of  the  polymorphic  equilibrium  given  by 

.  If  the  threshold  represented  by 

  is  crossed  from  below  (above),  the 
bifurcation is characterized by the monomorphic equilibrium given by 
 ceasing to 
be  a  repulsor  (an  attractor)  to  become  an  attractor  (a  repulsor),  and  by  the  polymorphic 
equilibrium represented by 

, which is an attractor, ceasing (coming) to exist. 

In  order  to  appropriately  complement  the  analytical  results  derived  above  about  the 
dynamics of the system, we now perform some illustrative numerical simulations. In Figure 1, 
the  parameters  of  the  model  are  given  by  the  following  empirically  plausible  values: 
; 
capitalists’  propensity  to  save, 
and output to capital ratio, 
 
and the real base wage at 

. We typically set the profit-sharing coefficient at 

;  minimum  labor  productivity  differential, 

.10 

  

  

 

 

Figure 1. Single bifurcation and trajectory diagrams. 

 (top) and the real base wage, with 

In Figure 1, the left panels picture limit sets for the frequency of profit-sharing firms 
by  means  of  parameter  basins  with  respect  to  the  profit-sharing  coefficient,  with 
. The right panels, meanwhile, 
describe  the  trajectory  over  time  of  the  frequency  of  profit-sharing  firms  (top)  and 
productivity differential (bottom), with an emphasis on their transitional dynamics. We avoid 
detecting only local dynamics by specifying initial conditions at some distance from the long-
, and set 
run equilibria. In the left panels, we set initial values given by 

 and 

                                                           
10 All these  numerical simulations (along  with the respective graphical representations)  were obtained with the 
open-source  software  iDMC,  version  2.0.10,  available  at  https://code.google.com/archive/p/idmc/downloads. 
Meanwhile, the  source code used to generate the numerical results presented in this  section is obtainable upon 
request to the authors. 

 

12 

(,0)**(,)(,0)**(,)0.41.050.3k0.050.6(0,0.6)(0,1)v1.10.015000  transient  iterations  (i.e.  the  number  of  iterations  omitted  before  plotting  begins)  and 
5000 iterations to be plotted. 

In Figure 1, two single parameter bifurcation diagrams and two trajectory diagrams are 
shown  to  illustrate  the  dynamics  of  the  system  given  by  (16)  and  (17-a)  with  numerical 
simulations. In the top left panel, the bifurcation undergone by the system at 
 and 

 is shown. The phase transition from the monomorphic equilibrium given by all 
firms playing the sharing strategy  to the monomorphic equilibrium with no firm playing the 
sharing strategy occurs as the profit-sharing coefficient rises from zero. The transition as such 
takes  place  along  the  range  of  values  of  the  profit-sharing  coefficient  for  which  the 
polymorphic equilibrium exists and is an attractor. In the bottom left panel, meanwhile, it is 
shown  the  bifurcation  undergone  by  system  at  two  different  values  of  the  real  base  wage, 
which  are  associated  with  the  respective  bifurcation  values  of  the  profit-sharing  coefficient 
according  to  (22)  and  (23).  In  any  case,  as  the  real  base  wage  rises  from  zero,  the  phase 
transition  now  occurs  from  the  monomorphic  equilibrium  given  by  no  firm  following  the 
sharing strategy to the monomorphic equilibrium with all firms following the sharing strategy. 
The transition as such occurs  along the corresponding range of values of the real base wage 
for which the polymorphic equilibrium exists and is an attractor. 

  to 

  with  a  change  of 

In the right panels, multiple trajectories of the state variables are displayed. In the top 
panel, the value of the initial condition for the frequency of profit-sharing firms is increased 
from 
  in  each  variation.  Simulations  are  color-
indicated and the number next to each color identifies which simulation is represented by that 
color.  In  the  bottom  panel,  the  labor  productivity  differential  varies  from  its  assumed  initial 
condition  also  in  response  to  the  respective  variation  in  the  profit-sharing  coefficient  from 
each  of  its  assumed  initial  conditions,  as  these  two  state  variables  co-evolve  over  time.  The 
convergence  of  the  dynamic  system  to  the  polymorphic  long-run  equilibrium  (we  set  the 
profit-sharing coefficient at 
 so as to ensure it; see top left panel) takes place close to 
the end of the 1250 iterations that we set to be plotted. 

Let  us  now  compute  the  long-run  equilibrium  values  of  the  distribution  of  factor 
income  and  the  growth  rate  in  each  one  of  the  three  economically  relevant  ranges  of  the 
profit-sharing coefficient specified in Proposition 2. We can use (7) to establish: 

(24) 

and: 

(25) 

, 

, 

where the first equality in (24) follows from the fact that 

 is defined implicitly by 

the condition given by 

 (recall from (5) that the profit share of non-sharing 

firms is exogenously given). Hence, the value of the average net profit share is the same in the 
 and in the polymorphic equilibrium given by 
monomorphic equilibrium given by 

.  When 

,  given  that 

,  it  follows  that 

verified using the Appendix, so that, using (14), we then obtain that 

,  as  can  be 

. When 

,  since 

,  we  have 

,  so  that  (14)  yields 

.  Meanwhile,  when 

,  it  follows  that 
,  as  can  again  be  verified  using  the  Appendix,  so  that,  using  (14),  we  then 
. Therefore, if the economy converges to a long-run equilibrium 

,  since 

13 

obtain that 

 

0.070.140.10.90.20.1**(,0)(,)1nv(,1)()(1)1csv**3(,)E**(,)0csn1(,0)E**3(,)E(,0)(,1)(,0)(,1)gg***(,0)(,)(,1)**(,0)(,)(,1)ggg*(,0)(,1)(,0)(,1)gg, given that the condition in (A.8) in the Appendix may 
(which may not occur when 
not  be  satisfied),  the  coupled  evolutionary  dynamics  of  profit-sharing  adoption  and 
productivity  gain  takes  the  economy  to  a  position  in  which  the  average  net  profit  share,  the 
net  profit  rate  and  the  rate  of  economic  growth  are  all  at  their  highest  possible  long-run 
equilibrium levels. 

 
Finally,  although  it  is  possible  the  emergence  of  a  stable  long-run  equilibrium  with 
strategic dualism, the evolutionary dynamic in (17) ensures that the (net) rates of profit of the 
coexisting  effort-elicitation  strategies  become  equalized.  However,  in  our  one-sector  model, 
net  profit  rate  equalization  is  brought  about  in  the  long  run  not  by  market  competition  with 
capital  mobility across sectors, but  by evolutionary competition with  firms  (along with  their 
capital stock) mobility across alternative effort-elicitation compensation strategies. 

4. Conclusions 

This paper is motivated by various pieces of suggestive empirical evidence. First, from 
a  long-term  historical  perspective,  there  has  been  persistent  heterogeneity  in  worker 
compensation  strategies  across  firms,  and  profit-sharing  arrangements  have  experienced  an 
oscillating  popularity.  Second,  profit  sharing  arrangements  are  productivity-enhancing,  and 
attitude surveys find that employers and employees perceive profit sharing as contributing to 
improve  firm  performance  in  several  dimensions.  Third,  there  is  survey  evidence  that  non-
deferred  and  in  cash  profit  sharing  is  ranked  first  by  workers  as  motivation  device.  Fourth, 
firms  switch  modes  of  worker  compensation  (which  include  profit  sharing)  with  reasonable 
frequency, with the gross changes in modes being more numerous than the net changes. Fifth, 
earnings  inequality  across  observationally  homogeneous  workers  does  exist,  is  of  a  non-
negligible magnitude and is persistent over longer time spans. 

In this paper, firms are modeled as periodically choosing to compensate workers with 
solely  a  base  wage  or  a  share  of  profits  in  addition  to  this  base  wage.  The  frequency 
distribution of effort-elicitation compensation modes and labor productivity in the population 
of firms are modeled as co-evolutionarily time-varying. The paper also investigates how such 
co-evolution  at  the  micro  level  affects  and  the  macrodynamics  of  the  distribution  of  factor 
income and economic growth. 

When the profit-sharing coefficient is relatively low, there are two long-run equilibria, 
one featuring all firms sharing profits and the other with no firm sharing profits. The former is 
an  attractor,  while  the  latter  is  a  repulsor.  When  the  profit-sharing  coefficient  is  relatively 
high, the economy has the same two evolutionary long-run equilibria. However, the long-run 
equilibrium with all firms sharing profits is a repulsor, while the long-run equilibrium with no 
firm  sharing  profits  is  an  attractor.  When  the  profit-sharing  coefficient  is  at  a  relatively 
intermediate  level,  there  is  a  third  long-run  equilibrium,  one  that  features  heterogeneity  in 
employee  compensation  strategies  across  firms,  and  therefore  earnings  inequality  across 
workers.  In  this  case,  the  long-run  equilibria  featuring  survival  of  only  one  strategy  are 
repulsors, while the long-run equilibrium  with  coexistence of both  compensation  modes can 
be  an  attractor.  In  fact,  as  shown  analytically  and  with  numerical  simulations,  the  long-run 
dynamics  are  crucially  affected  by  the  profit-sharing  coefficient  and  the  real  base  wage  as 
bifurcation parameters. 

Meanwhile,  when  there  is  convergence  to  a  long-run  equilibrium,  the  average  net 
profit rate and the growth rate are both at their highest possible long-run equilibrium values. 
Moreover,  there  is  net  profit  rate  equalization  even  in  the  long-run  equilibrium  with 
coexisting effort-elicitation strategies across firms and the resulting earnings inequality across 
workers.  This  equalization  is  an  outcome  of  the  evolutionary  competition  involving  the 

 

14 

alternative effort-elicitation employee compensation modes between which firms periodically 
choose. 

References 

Akerlof, G. (1982) ‘Labor contracts as partial gift exchange’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 
87, 543-69. 
Blasi, J., R. Freeman, C. Mackin and D. Kruse (2010) ‘Creating a bigger pie? The effects of 
employee  ownership,  profit  sharing,  and  stock  options  on  workplace  performance’,  in 
Douglas  Kruse,  Richard  Freeman  and  Joseph  Blasi  (eds.),  Shared  Capitalism  at  Work, 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Blasi,  J.,  D.  Kruse  and  R.  Freeman  (2010)  ‘Epilogue  (and  Prologue)’,  in  Douglas  Kruse, 
Richard Freeman and Joseph Blasi (eds.), Shared Capitalism at Work, Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. 
Blasi, J., R. Freeman and D. Kruse (2013) The Citizen’s Share: Putting Ownership Back into 
Democracy, New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Broer,  T.,  N.-J.  H.  Hansen,  P.  Krusell  and  E.  Öberg  (2016)  ‘The  New  Keynesian 
Transmission  Mechanism:  A  Heterogeneous-Agent  Perspective’,  NBER  Working  Paper  No. 
22418, July. 
Bryson, A. and R. Freeman (2010) ‘How does shared capitalism affect economic performance 
in the United Kingdom?’, in Douglas Kruse, Richard Freeman and Joseph Blasi (eds), Shared 
Capitalism at Work, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Cahuc,  P.  and  B.  Dormont  (1997)  ‘Profit-sharing:  does  it  increase  productivity  and 
employment?  A  theoretical  model  and  empirical  evidence  on  French  micro  data’,  Labour 
Economics, 4, 293–319. 
Capelli,  P.  and  D.  Neumark  (2004)  ‘External  churning  and  internal  flexibility:  Evidence  on 
the functional flexibility and core-periphery hypotheses’, Industrial Relations, 43(1), 148-82. 
Carpenter,  J.  P.,  A.  Andrea  and  P.  Akbar  (2016)  ‘Profit  sharing  and  peer  reporting,’  IZA 
Discussion Papers 9946, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA). 
Caselli, F. (2005) ‘Accounting for cross-country income Differences,’ in Phillipe Aghion and 
Steven  Durlauf  (eds.),  Handbook  of  Economic  Growth,  Amsterdam:  North-Holland  Press, 
679–741. 
Caselli,  F.  and  J.  Feyrer  (2007)  ‘The  marginal  product  of  capital’,  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Economics, 122(2), 535–568. 
Conyon, M. and R. Freeman (2004)  ‘Shared modes of compensation and firm  performance: 
U.K.  evidence’,  in  Richard  Blundell,  David  Card  and  Richard  Freeman  (eds.),  Seeking  a 
Premier League Economy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
D’Art,  D.  and  T.  Turner  (2004)  ‘Profit  sharing,  firm  performance  and  union  influence  in 
selected European countries’, Personnel Review, 33(3), 335–350. 
D’Art,  D. and T. Turner (2006) ‘Profit sharing and employee share ownership in  Ireland: A 
new departure?’, Economic and Industrial Democracy, 27(4), 543–564. 
Doucouliagos,  C.  (1995)  ‘Worker  participation  and  productivity  in  labor-managed  and 
participatory capitalist firms: A meta-analysis’, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 49(1), 
58–77. 
Dube,  A.  and  R.  Freeman  (2010)  ‘Complementarity  of  shared  compensation  and  decision-
making  systems:  evidence  from  the  American  labor  market’,  in  Douglas  Kruse,  Richard 
Freeman and Joseph Blasi (eds.), Shared Capitalism at Work, Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. 
Farebrother  (1973)  ‘Simplified  Samuelson  conditions  for  cubic  and  quartic  equations’,  The 

 

15 

Manchester School, 41(4), 396–400. 
Freeman,  R.,  D.  Kruse  and  J.  Blasi  (2010)  ‘Worker  responses  to  shirking  under  shared 
capitalism,’ in Douglas Kruse, Richard Freeman and Joseph Blasi (eds.), Shared Capitalism at 
Work, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Jerger,  J.  and  J.  Michaelis  (2011)  ‘The  fixed  wage  puzzle:  why  profit  sharing  is  hard  to 
implement?’, Economics Letters, 110(2), 104-106. 
Kaldor,  N  (1961)  ‘Capital  accumulation  and  economic  growth,’  in  F.  A.  Lutz  and  D.  C. 
Hague (eds.), The Theory of Capital, New York: St. Martin’s Press, pp. 177–222. 
Karabarbounis,  L.  and  B.  Neiman  (2014)  ‘The  global  decline  of  the  labor  share’,  Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, 129(1), 61–103. 
Kato, T., J.H. Lee and J.-S. Ryu (2010) ‘The productivity effects of profit sharing, employee 
ownership,  stock  option  and  team  incentive  plans:  Evidence  from  Korean  panel  data’,  in  T. 
Eriksson  (ed.),  Advances  in  the  Economic  Analysis  of  Participatory  and  Labor-Managed 
Firms, Volume 11, Bingley: Emerald, pp. 111–135. 
Kraft,  K.  and  M.  Ugarkovic  (2006)  ‘Profit  sharing  and  the  financial  performance  of  firms: 
evidence from Germany’, Economics Letters, 92, 333–338. 
Kruse, D., J. Blasi and  R. Park (2010)  ‘Shared  capitalism  in  the U.S.  economy:  Prevalence, 
characteristics,  and  employee  views  of  financial  participation  in  enterprise’,  in  Douglas 
Kruse,  Richard  Freeman  and  Joseph  Blasi  (eds.),  Shared  Capitalism  at  Work,  Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 
Kruse, D., R. Freeman and J. Blasi (2010) ‘Do workers gain by sharing? Employee outcomes 
under employee ownership, profit sharing, and broad-based stock options’, in Douglas Kruse, 
Richard Freeman and Joseph Blasi (eds.), Shared Capitalism at Work, Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. 
Lima,  G.  T.  and  J. J.  Silveira  (2015)  ‘Monetary  neutrality  under  evolutionary  dominance  of 
bounded rationality,’ Economic Inquiry, 53(2), 1108–1131. 
Long,  R.  J.  and  T.  Fang  (2012)  ‘Do  employees  profit  from  profit  sharing?  Evidence  from 
Canadian panel data’, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 65(4), 899–927. 
Magnan,  M.  and  S.  St-Onge  (2005)  ‘The  impact  of  profit  sharing  on  the  performance  of 
financial services firms,’ Journal of Management Studies, 42(4), 761–791. 
Mitchell,  D.  B.,  D.  Lewin  and  E.  E.  Lawler  (1990)  ‘Alternative  pay  systems,  firm 
performance,  and  productivity’,  in  Alan  S.  Blinder  (ed.),  Paying  for  Productivity, 
Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 15–88. 
Peterson,  S.  and  F.  Luthans  (2006)  ‘The  impact  of  financial  and  nonfinancial  incentives  on 
business-unit outcomes over time’, Journal of Applied Psychology, 91(1), 156–165. 
Piketty, T. (2014) Capital in the Twenty-First Century, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 
Piketty,  T.  and  G.  Zucman  (2014)  ‘Capital  is  back:  Wealth-income  ratios  in  rich  countries 
1700–2010’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3), 1255–1310. 
Robinson,  A.  M.  and  N.  Wilson  (2006)  ‘Employee  financial  participation  and  productivity: 
An empirical reappraisal’, British Journal of Industrial Relations, 44(1), 31–50. 
Walsh,  C.  E.  (2016)  ‘Workers,  capitalists,  wages,  employment  and  welfare’,  Department  of 
Economics, University of California, Santa Cruz, mimeo. 
Weibull, J. W. (1995) Evolutionary Game Theory, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 
Weitzman,  M.  (1985)  ‘The  simple  macroeconomics  of  profit  sharing’,  American  Economic 
Review, 95, 937–953. 
Weitzman, M. and D. Kruse (1990) ‘Profit sharing and productivity’, in Alan S. Blinder (ed.), 

 

16 

Paying for Productivity, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 95–140. 

Appendix – Proof of Proposition 2 on the stability properties of the long-run equilibrium 

The Jacobian matrix evaluated around the monomorphic equilibrium 

 is: 

(A-1) 

, 

where 

 and 

. 

  be  an  eigenvalue  of  the  Jacobian  matrix  in  (A.1).  The  eigenvalues  of  the  Jacobian 

Let 
matrix in (A.1) are given by: 

(A.2) 

     and     

Given that 

, it follows that 

. 

. 

Let  us  investigate  the  absolute  value  of 

.  We  want  to  find  out  under  what  condition(s)  it 

follows  that 

.  Per  (A.2),  it  follows  that 

  obtains  if,  and  only  if, 

. 

Given  that 

  and 

,  we  find  that 

.  Since  the  output  to 

capital  ratio, 
and  Caselli  and  Feyrer,  2007), 

,  typically  satisfies  the  condition  given  by 

it  follows 

that 

  (see,  e.g.,  Caselli,  2005, 
that 

.  Note 

  is  increasing  in 

.  Given  (20),  it  then  follows  that 

.  Since 

  at 

  and 

  for  all 

  and 

,  if 

,  we  then  obtain 

,  so  that 

  and  hence 

.  Thus,  it  follows  from 

that 

.  Meanwhile,  if 

,  so  that 

,  it  follows  that 

  and  hence 

.  Thus,  it  follows  from 

 that 

. As it turns out, at 

 the system undergoes a bifurcation characterized 

by a change in both the stability property of the monomorphic equilibrium 

 and the 

existence status of the polymorphic equilibrium 
 
is  crossed  from  below  (above),  the  bifurcation  is  characterized  by  the  monomorphic 
equilibrium 
  ceasing  to  be  a  repulsor  (an  attractor)  to  become  an  attractor  (a 

. If the threshold given by 

repulsor), and by the polymorphic equilibrium 
 ceasing (coming) to exist. In any 
case, this completes the demonstration that the long-run equilibrium with no firm playing the 

profit-sharing strategy, 

, is an attractor if 

 and a repulsor if 

. 

The Jacobian matrix evaluated around the monomorphic equilibrium 

 is: 

(A.3) 

, 

 

17 

(,0)()(,0)01()csnvJk()(1)1csv1nv121[()]csnk011122112112[()]0csnk0()1cs01n1()1csnk01k2[()]csnkk()(1)1(1)csnvv*()0csn*0*233()(2)0(1)()vvvvv(0,1)v1*()0csn[()]0csnk21*()0csn[()]0csnk21(,0)**(,)(,0)**(,)(,0)(,1)0()(,1)01()csnvJkwhere

 and 

. 

 be an  eigenvalue of the Jacobian matrix in  (A.3).  In this case, the eigenvalues of the 

Let 
Jacobian matrix is (A.3) are also easily computed: 

(A.4) 

     and     

. 

Therefore, the local stability of 

 depends on the absolute value of 

. Given (A.4), 

it follows that 

 obtains if, and only if, 

. 

Since 

 and 

, it follows that 

. Therefore, given that it is 

typically the case that 

, we can infer that 

. 

It can be seen that 

 is increasing in 

. Given (20), it follows 

that 

.  Given  that 

  at 

  and 

for  all 

 and 

, if 

, we then obtain 

, so that 

 and therefore 

.  Thus,  it  follows  from 

  that 

.  Meanwhile,  if 

,  so  that 

,  it  follows  that 

  and  hence 

.  Thus,  it  follows  from 

 that 

. As it turns out, at 

 the system undergoes a bifurcation characterized 

by a change in both the stability property of the monomorphic equilibrium 

 and the 

existence status  of the polymorphic  equilibrium 
by 

.  In fact,  if the threshold  given 
 is crossed from below (above), the bifurcation is characterized by the monomorphic 

equilibrium 

  ceasing  to  be  an  attractor  (a  repulsor)  to  become  a  repulsor  (an 

attractor), and by the polymorphic equilibrium 
 coming (ceasing) to exist. In any 
case, this completes the demonstration that the long-run equilibrium with all firms playing the 
profit-sharing strategy, 

, is an attractor if 

 and a repulsor if 

. 

The Jacobian matrix evaluated around the polymorphic equilibrium 

 is: 

(A.5)   

. 

 be an eigenvalue of the Jacobian matrix in (A.5). We can set the characteristic equation 

Let 
of the linearization around the equilibrium as: 

(A.6) 

, 

where 

, 

, and 

. 

We  can  use  the  Samuelson  stability  conditions  for  a  second  order  characteristic  equation  to 
determine  under  what  conditions  the  two  eigenvalues  are  inside  the  unit  circle.  Based  on 
Farebrother  (1973,  p.  396,  inequalities  2.4  and  2.5),  we  can  establish  the  following  set  of 
simplified Samuelson conditions for the quadratic polynomial in (A.6): 

 

18 

()(1)1(/)csv1nv1021()csnbk(,1)22110(0)2csnfk0()1cs01n1()1csn01k()2csnk()(1)1(1)csnvv*()0csn*0*2()(1)0()vvv(0,1)vv*()0csn()0csnk21*()0csn()0csnk21(,1)**(,)(,1)**(,)(,1)**(,)*******2(1)()(,)(1)(1)1()vJvk2(1)()01abJIaabcc*(1)0a*()0bv***2(1)(1)0()vck(A.7) 

   and   

. 

Let us prove that these conditions are satisfied if 

.  

First, note that 
and 

. 

 simplifies to 

, which is trivially satisfied given that 

 

Meanwhile, the second inequality, 

, can be expressed as follows: 

(A.8) 

. 

Substitution of (20) and (21) in the expression 

 yields: 

(A.8-a)     

Note that at 

 it follows that 

. Besides, we have that: 

(A.9)     

if we assume that the following condition is satisfied: 

(A.10)    

. 

. 

 

Thus, since 
all 

 at 

 and given (A.9), it follows that the inequality in (A.8) holds for 
. As a result, by assuming that (A.10) is satisfied, we can conclude that for all 

  the  stability  condition  in  (A.8)  is  satisfied  as  well,  so  that  the 

polymorphic equilibrium represented by 

 is an attractor. 

 

19 

1(1)1abcaa1abc1abc11abca0bc0b0c1abc****2(1)()(1)11()vvkabcabc22[(1)]{(1)()[(12)]}(1)(1)vvkvvvabcvvv1abc332222(1)()(1)(){[(2)1]}()(1)0(1)kvvkvvkvvkabcvv(2)vkvvk1abcv(0,)v(,)(0,)v**(,)