the role of Banks’ liquidity preference on credit supply in Brazil 

Authors: Ph.D. Fernanda Ultremare1, Ph.D. Olivia Bullio Mattos2, Ph.D. Robert Guttmann3 

Out of policymaker’s sight:  

Resumo 
A incorporação da preferência pela liquidez no comportamento dos bancos leva a uma compreensão da 
oferta de moeda como sendo definida de forma endógena. Nos modernos e sofisticados sistemas bancários, 
os  bancos  têm  a  capacidade  inovadora  de  contornar  as  restrições  de  suas  carteiras  e  aumentar  o  lucro 
potencial, atendendo, de acordo com suas expectativas de ganhos futuros, a demanda por crédito. A este 
respeito, a autoridade monetária influencia o fornecimento de crédito alterando a disponibilidade de ativos 
líquidos em comparação com todas as outras classes de ativos através de instrumentos de política monetária. 
Por meio da gestão da liquidez no mercado de reservas, o Banco Central pode modificar o preço do acesso 
à liquidez de curto prazo - a taxa de juros - e, assim, pode provocar ajustes na curva de rendimentos em 
operação, alterando a propensão dos bancos a expandir o crédito. Desvendar a função da oferta de crédito 
é,  entretanto,  uma  tarefa  intrinsecamente  difícil,  uma  vez  que  o  fornecimento  de  liquidez  pelos  bancos 
depende  das  expectativas  e  não  pode  ser  calculado  antecipadamente  de  maneira  inequívoca.  Nossa 
estratégia empírica foi a de estimar um modelo de painel dinâmico com dados cross-section dos balanços 
das cinquenta maiores instituições bancárias do país para o período de 1999 a 2016, ou seja, após a adoção 
do Regime de Metas de Inflação (IT), a partir da base do Banco Central do Brasil (BCB). A variável de 
crescimento do crédito foi combinada com variáveis construídas a partir do portfólio dos bancos, também 
combinadas com variáveis macroeconômicas do conjunto de dados BCB. Conectados ao quadro principal 
da  abordagem  Pós-Keynesiana  sobre  a  relação  entre  a  oferta  de  crédito  e  a  composição  do  balanço  dos 
bancos, nossos resultados sugerem que as mudanças na preferência pela liquidez desses agentes, refletidas 
nos ajustes de carteira dados os movimentos nos indicadores de flexibilidade e de alavancagem, determinam 
significativamente  a  oferta  de  crédito  no  Brasil.  Palavras-chave:  Preferência  pela  Liquidez;  Bancos; 
Crédito; Política Monetária; GMM. 

Abstract 
The incorporation of liquidity preference within bank’s behavior leads to an understanding of the money 
supply as being endogenously defined. In modern sophisticated banking systems, banks have the innovative 
ability to stretch their portfolios’ constraints and raise potential profit, fulfilling, in accordance with their 
expectations  of  future  gains,  the  demand  for  credit.  In  this  regard,  monetary  authority  influence  credit 
supply by changing the availability of liquid assets compared to all other classes of assets via monetary 
policy  instruments.  Through  the  management  of  liquidity  in  the  reserves  market,  the  central  bank  can 
modify  the  price  of  access  to  short-term  liquidity  –  the  interest  rate  –  and,  thereby,  it  may  provoke 
adjustments  on  the  yield  curve  in  operation,  transforming  banks  propensity  to  expand  credit.  Thus, 
unraveling  the  function  of  credit  supply  is  an  inherently  difficult  task,  since  liquidity  supply  by  banks 
depends  on  expectations  and  is  not  unequivocally  calculated  in  advance.  Our  empirical  strategy  was  to 
estimate a dynamic panel data model on a large cross-section bank-level dataset from the Brazilian Central 
Bank (BCB) on the balance sheet of the fifty largest banks operating in the country over the 1999-2016 
period, that is,  after the adoption of the  Inflation Targeting Regime (IT).  Credit expansion variable was 
matched with time-varying information on bank’s portfolio constructed variables and, finally, combined 
with macroeconomic variables also from the BCB dataset. Connected to the main framework of the Post-
Keynesian approach for the relation between credit supply and balance sheet composition of banks, our 
findings suggest that changes in the liquidity preference of banks, reflected on their portfolio adjustments 
throughout  movements  on  flexibility  and  leverage  indicators,  have  a  significant  determination  on  credit 
supply in Brazil. Keywords: Liquidity Preference; Banks; Credit; Monetary Policy; GMM. 

JEL codes: E51, E52, E47.  
 

 

                                                           
1 Research Assistant at Unicamp 
2 Research Assistant at Unicamp and Professor at Facamp 
3 Professor at Hofstra University and Université Paris XIII 

 

1 

Introduction 

The process of credit expansion reflects the combined action of banks and non-banks, according to 
preferences between more liquid and illiquid assets given their profit prospects (BERGER; BOUWMAN, 
2017;  CHICK,  1993).  Throughout  the  business  cycle,  banks  are  more  or  less  willing  to  increase  their 
lending activity and change the composition and size of their portfolios. In the ascending part of the cycle, 
the expectations of an increase in the price of assets held by banks turn them to create liquidity both on and 
off their balance sheets. After liquidity preference rises, and assets are sold, banks  become less and less 
inclined  to  fulfill  the  demand  for  credit  of  both  firms  and  households,  choosing  to  purchase  existing 
securities and stressing a procyclical movement. The incorporation of liquidity preference within bank’s 
behavior leads to an understanding of the money supply as being endogenously defined, where the monetary 
authority faces the challenge of fitting a “monetary collar” in the economy and is unable to have a sharp 
control on credit creation (GUTTMANN, 2016; MINSKY, 1986; PALLEY, 2008, 2013a). 

The  supply  of  liquid  funds  is  strongly  determined  by  its  demand  and  it  is  originated  inside  the 
economic  system  in  order  to  finance  and  fund  investment,  consumption  decisions,  and  speculative 
purchases of assets (DAVIDSON, 1965; KEYNES, 1937a; ROBERTSON; KEYNES, 1938). Therefore, 
the monetary authority has only the ability to influence credit supply by changing the availability of liquid 
assets compared to all other classes of assets via monetary policy instruments, i.e. reserve requirements, 
discount window, and open market operations. Through the management of liquidity in the reserves market, 
the Central Bank may modify the price of access to short-term liquidity – the interest rate – and, thereby, 
provoke adjustments on the portfolio of banks, reordering the comparable disposal of assets. The result is 
a modification in the yield curve in operation that transforms banks propensity to expand credit creation 
(ARESTIS; SAWYER, 2002; FONTANA; PALACIO-VERA, 2003). 

Unraveling  the  function  of  credit  supply  is  an  inherently  difficult  task  that  stems  from  several 
factors. Firstly, since liquidity supply depends on expectations, it is not unequivocally calculated in advance 
(and completely determined by monetary policy), i.e. we can only see the actual credit outcomes after they 
have happened. Secondly, there are some factors that also affect the demand for credit, which can or cannot 
be  fulfilled.  Hence,  the  identification  of  factors  determining  credit  creation  is  not  straightforward. 
Nevertheless, some progress in this area has been recently achieved through the use of matched bank-firm 
lending datasets and macroeconomic variables, which can be summarized in two distinct groups of work: 
i) the efforts that have been made on the construction of panel data models on bank specific information, 
such as the total liquid and illiquid assets, profitability and leverage, and macroeconomic variables (e.g. 
interest  rates, GDP  and  capital  requirements),  giving  a notorious  amount of information about  financial 
institutions over the last years (AWDEH, 2016; EVERAERT et al., 2015; IANAZE, 2011; LIMA, 2016; 
MENDONÇA; SACHSIDA, 2013; STEPANYAN; GUO, 2011; VINHADO, 2014; VINHADO; BELÉM, 
2013);  ii)  and  the  studies  based  on  structural  vector  autoregression  models,  especially  vector  error 
correction  models  that  analyze  the  impulse  and  response  of  macroeconomic  variables  endogenously 
determined in the system, in which aggregate information of credit is included (BUSCH; SCHARNAGL; 
SCHEITHAUER,  2010;  DIB,  2010;  GAMBETTI;  MUSSO,  2016;  GOODHART,  CHARLES; 
HOFMANN,  2008;  HOFMANN,  2004;  HRISTOV;  HULSEWIG;  WOLLMERSHAUSER,  2012; 
KOLLMANN;  ENDERS;  MÜLLER,  2011;  MUMTAZ;  PINTER;  THEODORIDIS,  2015;  TAMÁSI; 
VILÁGI, 2011). Our contribution relates to the first group of studies that aim to estimate the credit supply 
function of banks based on variables that capture their liquidity preference over the years reflected on their 
balance-sheets and the demand for credit.   

This  article  provides  some  empirical  evidence  for  the  analysis  of  credit  money  creation  in 
Brazil,  seeking  to  explain  how  credit  growth  has  been  determined  in  the  Brazilian  economy  after  the 
restructuring process that followed the adoption of the Real Plan, and, after that, the Inflation Targeting 
Regime.  Both  led  to  the  transformation  of  the  banking  system  into  a  complex  structure,  highly 
internationalized, concentrated and with the presence of large instruments of economic stabilization policy 
public banks. More specifically, we test the hypothesis that credit supply by banks are strongly determined 
by  their  liquidity  preference  and  it  is  reflected  on  their  portfolios  decisions.  To  this  end,  we  use  two 
complementary approaches: firstly, we revise the theoretical aspects of banks’ behavior and credit creation 

 

2 

in  modern  capitalist  economies,  exploring  the  origins  of  liquid  funds  demand  by  Keynes  and  Minsky’s 
cycle approach to characterize credit creation by banks in a balance sheet management outline; secondly, 
we  econometrically  investigate  the  responsiveness  of  bank’s  credit  creation  to  the  liquidity  preference 
indicators calculated based on the actual bank’s balance sheet lines. 

Our empirical strategy is to use the GMM estimator, based on the Arellano and Bond (1991) 
and Holtz-Eakin et.al. (1988), which accounts for the persistence over time of both autocorrelation, given 
the presence of lagged variables, and individual effects that controls for the heterogeneity between entities. 
For  these  estimators,  additional  instruments  are  created  by  the  differences  among  lagged  variables  and 
disturbances. Therefore, we can estimate the coefficients for the credit supply function with the generated 
regressors as instruments. We are then able to use a large cross-section bank-level panel dataset with data 
from  the  Brazilian  Central  Bank  (BCB)  on  the  balance  sheet  of  the  fifty  largest  banks  operating  in  the 
country over the 1999-2016 period, that is, after the adoption of the Inflation Targeting Regime in Brazil. 
Credit and bank’s financial variables are matched with time-varying information on bank’s ownership and, 
finally, combined with macroeconomic variables also from the BCB dataset. 

Connected to the main framework of the Post-Keynesian approach for the relation between credit 
supply and balance sheet composition of banks, our findings suggest that changes in the liquidity preference 
of  banks,  reflected  on  their  portfolio  adjustments  throughout  movements  on  flexibility  and  leverage 
indicators, have a significant determination on credit supply. For instance, when there is a decrease in the 
liquidity  preference  of  banks,  they  are  more  likely  to  increase  their  degree  of  financial  leverage,  which 
indicates a search for riskier passive positions in order to subsidize larger gains in riskier asset positions, 
such  as  credit.    Additionally,  in  such  situations,  the  willingness  of  more  flexible  portfolio  condition  is 
surpassed by the desire of more illiquid and profitable stance. Besides, but not less important, in line with 
the Post-Keynesian theory, demand for credit plays an important role on the determination of funds to be 
offered by banks in Brazil. We find evidences that monetary policy in Brazil, grounded on the Inflation 
Targeting Regime framework, is essentially imprecise: the desire to control the monetary base lays on a 
limited  view  of  money  as,  primordially,  means  of  payment  and  thus  intrinsically  loose,  as  it  does  not 
effectively control credit creation but only indirectly affects it.   

The article has five sections. After this introduction, we address the theoretical aspects of the 
incorporation of liquidity preference within banks’ behavior, which leads to an understanding of the credit 
supply  as being endogenously defined by their intent to  hold  more or less liquid  assets in  their balance 
sheets. Section 3 discusses the Brazilian monetary policy instruments used after the adoption of the Inflation 
Targeting Regime, which is set to influence the system liquidity preference in order to restraint demand 
excess over the potential output. Section 4 addresses the econometric appraisal for the credit money supply 
function in Brazil. This section highlights the importance of bank financial and ownership variables for the 
dynamics of credit growth, so as its responses to macroeconomic variables. Finally, the last section presents 
some concluding remarks. 

2. Banks liquidity preference 

The Post-Keynesian structuralist4 view resumes the analytical precedence of credit on deposits 
in  monetary  dynamics,  focusing  on  the  relationship  between  money,  credit,  and  liquidity  preference.  In 
fact,  the  credit  expansion  process  reflects  the  combined  action  of  banks  and  non-banks,  lying  in  the 
preferences  between more liquid  or illiquid  assets by  the non-bank public and in  the profit prospects  of 
financial institutions. Therefore, the lending expansion is not completely limited by the volume of existing 
reserves as financial institutions can develop new sources of funding both at national or international levels, 
besides the Central Bank’s reserves (CHICK, 1994). Actually, the money endogeneity becomes relevant to 
the extent that financial institutions have the capacity to expand credit, provided it is profitable, in order to 

                                                           
4  It  is  important  to  note  here  that  the  Post-Keynesians  view  money  as  essentially  endogenous.  However,  that  are  two  main 
‘subgroups’: the Horizontalist view states that banks create money endogenously, but they are able to accommodate the demand 
for  money  with  a  markup  on  the  CB  short-term  rate.  The  structuralist  view,  however,  sees  banks’  decision  and  liquidity 
preference as the central determinant of credit and money creation. 

3 

 

meet  the  demand  conditions,  despite  the  restrictions  placed  by  the  Central  Bank5.  Consequently,  in  the 
process of expansion of loans, banks create deposits, endogenously expanding money and quasi-money, 
and interfering in the state of liquidity in the economy (CHICK; DOW, 2002; MADI, 1993). 

In a liability management context, banks may increase the  lending power of its reserve base 
creating  funding  instruments  so  that  the  public  release  liquid  funds,  accepting  in  exchange  less  liquid 
financial securities. Since the reserve requirement on demand deposits is greater than on those less liquid 
securities,  management  of  liabilities  means  that  the  reserve  base  can  expand  endogenously  to  meet  the 
changes in the net demand for loans in case it is profitable for the financial institution. The expansion of 
financial intermediation  becomes dependent  on a positive differential  between the funding interest  rates 
and investing funds (GOODHART, CHARLES ALBERT ERIC, 2011). 

The credit creation movement follows the fluctuations in liquidity preference of agents, which 
entails  the  risk  perception  of  both  borrowers  and  lenders  in  conformation  with  Minsky’s  (1975,  1986) 
financial instability hypothesis. Throughout a cycle’s ascending movement, expectations on the increase of 
asset prices are confidently held, and thus, liquidity preference is low. Banks are more willing to exchange 
liquid for less liquid assets, as well as to increase their lending activity, changing the composition and the 
size of their portfolios. As productive expected returns reach a maximum, activity shifts towards speculative 
trading, which deepens the financial fragility of the economy. The moment liquidity preference rises, and 
assets  are  sold,  the  economy  may  move  into  a  downturn,  which  additionally  strengthens  liquidity 
preference, discouraging both spending and lending (GUTTMANN, 2016; MINSKY, 1986). Banks, thus, 
become less inclined to fulfill the demand for credit of firms and households, choosing to purchase existing 
securities  and  also  discriminating  among  potential  borrowers  by  risk  category.  The  adoption  of  a  more 
prudent  lending  behavior  progressively  confines  banks  into  financial  intermediaries  rather  than  lenders, 
redistributing  rather  than  creating  liquidity  (FONTANA,  2003,  2004).  This  process  characterizes  the 
downturn of a long wave in the cycle and reveals the procyclical behavior of banks (GUTTMANN, 2016). 
According  to  Keynes’  theory  of  liquidity  preference,  the  demand  for  liquid  funds  origins 
mainly6 from both the uncertainty about the future (speculative-motive) and the need to finance planned 
increases of spending. From the first motive perspective, the public anxiety to increase their hoards can 
only affect the aggregate amount of hoarding if banks are willing to acquire (or dispose of) additional assets 
beyond what is required to compensate changes in the active balances. If banks withstand, an increasing 
propensity to hoard pressures the rate of interest to rise, and thereby, the prices of capital assets other than 
cash to lower. This process may go on until agents cease the idea of selling these assets or of abstaining 
from buying them in order to expand their hoards. The rate of interest is the pecuniary sacrifice that the 
owner of a hoard thinks worth suffering in preference to other claims and assets with an equal present value 
(KEYNES, 1937a). 

The  latter  reason  to  hold  money,  in  its  turn,  relates  to  planned  investment  that  may  need  a 
financial provision before it takes place. There must be a technique to bridge this gap between the moment 
in  which  the  investment  decision  is  taken  and  the  time  at  which  the  correlated  investment  and  saving 
actually occur.  Keynes (1937a) called this advance provision of cash the finance required by the current 
decisions to invest. The ex-ante investment is the search for credit to carry out the investment, and as any 
other type of expenditure, may increase the demand for money for transactions7, because the entrepreneur 
wants to have at his disposal the money before the payment date. If the investment grows in a steady rate, 

                                                           
5  In  addition  to  the  reserves  requirements  and  the  interest  rate  policy  rules,  banking  activity  is  highly  regulated,  subject  to 
quantitative restrictions such as capital requirements (PALLEY, 2013b). 
6 The aggregate demand for money is a composite result of different motives in the General Theory: the Income-motive, meaning 
the  demand  for  cash  to  bridge  the  interval  between  the  receipt  of  income  and  its  disbursement;  the  business-motive,  where 
similarly,  money  is  held  to  fill  the  interval  between  the  time  of  incurring  business  costs  and  that  of  the  receipt  of  the  sale-
proceeds; the precautionary-motive, which mean to have the ways to provide for contingencies requiring sudden expenditure 
and for unforeseen opportunities of advantageous purchases; and finally, the speculative-motive, which is particularly important 
in transmitting the effects of a change in the quantity of money to the rates of interest when there  are changes in expectation 
affecting the liquidity function (KEYNES, 1936, p. 124–125). 
7 This is a special case of the finance required by any productive process and has similar characteristics to the demand for money 
from the transaction motive; nevertheless, it is subject to special fluctuations of its own and thus needs highlight. 

4 

 

this new demand for money (finance) can be supplied by a revolving fund of a more or less constant amount, 
i.e. while some entrepreneurs are having their finance replenished for the purpose of a projected investment, 
others are exhausting theirs on paying for completed investments. However, if the rate of investment grows, 
the extra finance involved will constitute an additional demand for money (DAVIDSON, 1965; KEYNES, 
1937a; KREGEL, 1986; ROCHON; SETTERFIELD, 2011). 

Even if the entrepreneur relies on financial provision previously arranged simultaneously with 
effective expenditure on investment, both by mobilizing installments regarding new market-issues precisely 
when desired or by arranging bank’s overdraft facilities, market's commitments will be in excess of actual 
saving up to the present time and there is a limit to the extent of the commitments which market will be 
willing to enter into in advance. Or if he accumulates a cash balance beforehand (which is more likely to 
occur  if  he  is  financing  himself  by  a  new  market-issue  than  if  he  is  depending  on  his  bank),  then  an 
accumulation of unexecuted or incompletely executed investment-decisions may cause, for the time being, 
an extra special demand for cash (MORANDI, 2004; WRAY, 1992). 

This finance bridge might be filled either by new issues in the market or by credit creation by 
banks. Nevertheless, a pressure to assure more finance than usual may certainly affect the rate of interest 
through its impact on the demand for money; and unless the banking system is ready to expand the supply 
of money, scarcity of finance will prove to be an important obstacle to investment decisions. As Keynes 
(1937b) stresses: 

… to the extent that the overdraft system is employed and unused overdraft ignored by the 
banking system, there is no superimposed pressure resulting from planned activity over and 
above the pressure resulting from actual activity. In this event the transition from a lower 
to a higher scale of activity  may be accomplished with less pressure on the demand for 
liquidity and the rate of interest (KEYNES, 1937a, p. 9) . 

It  is  the  banking  system  that  supplies  liquidity  both  to  the  entrepreneur,  before  his  actual 
expenditure, and to the recipients of this expenditure, before they have decided the way to employ it. Short-
term credit must finance an increase of planned investments, and once the expenditure starts, these credits 
flow into the revolving fund of finance and the appropriate level of income, over which an exactly sufficient 
amount of saving to the new investment will be generated. Therefore, banks, and the whole financial system 
accordingly,  hold  the  key  to  economic  expansion.  In  this  regard,  under  the  Post-Keynesian  structuralist 
view, finance has no correspondence with saving: at the financial stage of the events, the investment ex 
ante, no net saving nor its corresponding net investment has taken place on anyone's part (LAVOIE, 2014; 
SMITHIN,  2006;  WRAY,  1992).  Finance  and  commitments  to  finance  are  mere  credit  and  debit  book 
entries, which sanction entrepreneurs to  go forward with pledge (DAVIDSON, 1965; KEYNES, 1937a; 
ROBERTSON; KEYNES, 1938). 

A  growing  rate of spending financed by  credit  creation  would, thus, involve banks’ balance 
sheets expansion and its consequent reduction of liquidity, by leveraging equities, reserves, and a rage of 
safe assets. The continuity of this process leads banks to charge higher interest rates in order to compensate 
for  greater  perceived  risk  (CHICK;  DOW,  2002;  DOW,  1996).Therefore,  the  incorporation  of  liquidity 
preference within banking behavior leads to an upward-sloping money supply curve. Minsky (1975) points 
out that in the short run, for a state of liquidity preference, banks require higher interest rates for them to 
be  encouraged  to  expand  illiquid  positions  and  satisfy  the  demand  for  credit.  Nonetheless,  continuous 
financial  innovations  and  guidelines  revisions  regarding  the  appropriate  leverage  ratios  increase  money 
supply  potentials,  allowing  credit  expansion  with  no  pressure  on  interest  rates  for  a  while.  Eventually, 
however,  leverage  ratios  and  illiquid  positions  will  reach  some  point  beyond  any  expansion  would  be 
considered imprudent and a greater compensation for perceived risk will be demanded (MINSKY, 1975). 
As preference for liquid assets goes up, the entire price structure of financial assets must adjust: 
prices of less liquid financial assets may fall relative to those of more liquid ones until their yields encourage 
agents to hold them. Meanwhile, banks and other financial institutions reduce lending and the flow supply 
of highly liquid assets decelerate. With pessimistic expectations, demand prices of capital assets fall and 
their supply prices rise, since lenders increases loan rates of interest to compensate for greater lenders' risk. 
5 

 

Consequently, planned investment may fall together with the flow demand for money to satisfy the finance 
motive, which can lead to an interruption of the money supply growth. A rising demand for money against 
a fixed money supply drives rates of interest to even higher levels and prices of illiquid assets to even lower 
ones (MINSKY, 1975). 

Optimistic expectations about the future lead both borrowers and lenders to lower their risks’ 
estimations  (MINSKY,  1986).  This  causes  the  demand  price  borrowers  are  willing  to  pay  to  purchase 
investment goods to increase, just as supply prices are lowered as lenders reduce interest rates on loans. 
The increase reliance of borrowers on external finance raises their risk because default becomes more likely 
as net worth falls on debt. Lenders take this into consideration by incorporating a premium in the loan rate 
of interest. There are other practices taken by banks to mitigate risk such as the imposition of collateral 
requirements, the establishment of closer relations with borrowers, and imposition of quantity constraints 
on lending. Banks have also developed methods on liability management to enable them to satisfy credit 
demand by suitable customers and to permit them tolerate temporary interruptions of income flows when 
borrowers do not pay off commitments8. Even thought, competition for markets and innovations continually 
expands creditworthy activities and continually creates new financial instruments, acceptable both by banks 
and their customers and, gradually, experience with defaults will allow rates of interest to rise  (WRAY, 
1992).  

This does not imply, however, that banks will fully accommodate the increasing demand for 
money even though their expectations are in the same direction as those of borrowers. Banks are not passive 
lenders; instead, they balance their needs for earnings and liquidity so as to be active agents together with 
borrowers in the money supply process. They are actually able to choose between creating loans on one 
hand and buying securities, which also creates deposits, on the other. Through substitution between credit 
and investments, banks can manipulate the liquidity of their portfolios according to their needs for liquidity 
and  earning.  Also,  along  with  their  own  credit  ration  due  to  uncertainty  and  rises  on  interest  rates  with 
balance sheets increasingly illiquid, restraint by the Central Bank will also tend to thrust interest rates and 
reduce banks willingness and ability to increase the supply of money (CHICK; DOW, 2002; DOW, 1996). 
Nonetheless, structural market diffusion is by no means completed: the universal banking model preserves 
a full range of services inside a holding company, and is able to institutionally separate functions within 
the company structure. Hence, while a specific banking corporation might be willing to expand credit, this 
may tend to be applied only to a chosen market segment. Therefore, the extent which credit creation grows, 
given the specific monetary policy posture, depends on the strategic plans of banks (DOW, 2006). 

3. Monetary policy in Brazil: Instruments under the Inflation Targeting Regime 

The adoption of the inflation target regime a few years after the implementation of the Real 
Plan in Brazil can be understood as the submission of the entire economy to a well-defined objective, which 
is seen as a needed anchoring point to maintain price stability and enable economic growth. According to 
the decree 3,088 of June 1999, it is the responsibility of the Central Bank of Brazil (BCB)9 to design the 
proper monetary policy to achieve the stipulated target – the inflation target fixed by the National Monetary 
Council  (CMN),  upon  a  proposal  of  the  Minister  of  Finance10.  Under  the  Regime,  monetary  policy  is 
conducted to influence the level of the short-term interest rate by adjustments in the supply of bank reserves. 

                                                           
8 They can, for example, appeal to lines of credit on other banks and nonbank financial institutions; they have also developed 
other "off-balance sheet" contingencies that enable them to obtain funds as necessary.  
9 The main functions of the BCB are set by the 10,214 law of the National Monetary Council (CMN). 
10 The targets are represented by annual variations of the National Extended Consumer Price Index (IPCA) and it is considered 
that it was achieved when the cumulative inflation variation – measured by the chosen price index, for the period from January 
to December of each calendar year – is inside the range of its respective tolerance intervals. Along with its intervals, the target 
must be fixed until the month of June of the previous year (only for the years of 1999, 2000 and 2001 the targets and intervals 
were  set  by  June  30  of  1999).  If  the  target  is  not  met,  the  President  of  the  BCB  will  publicly  disclose  the  reasons  for  the 
noncompliance, by means of an open letter to the Minister of Finance. The BCB is also responsible to disclose, until the last day 
of each quarter, the Inflation Report addressing the performance of the inflation targeting regime, the results of past monetary 
policy decisions and the prospective inflation assessment (Decree, 3.088). 

6 

 

In this regard, it manipulates three importantly different instruments: i)  the reserve requirements; ii) the 
liquidity discount window; and iii) the open market operations. Although the policy may not be understood 
as having  the sole purpose of fixing the interest  rate, this objective  constitutes an important  operational 
goal,  making  it  possible  to  achieve  the  final  goal  of  price  stability  (DE  PAULA;  SARAIVA,  2016; 
MISHKIN, 2011, 2012). 

The framework is grounded on the control of demand-based inflation, i.e. short-run excess of 
aggregate demand over the potential output, whereas cost inflation ought to be either accommodated, or the 
supply shocks, which come and go with time, on average will be equal to zero and will not have effect on 
the  rate  of  inflation.  In  other  words,  it  is  strongly  implied  that  inflation  can  be  controlled  through  the 
management of the interest rate to influence demand, bearing in mind the existence of an equilibrium rate 
of  interest  which  is  capable  of  balancing  aggregate  demand  and  supply.  This  may  be  interpreted  as  the 
capacity of the real interest rate to have a price effect on investment and consumer expenditure (CLARIDA; 
GALI; GERTLER, 1999). Accordingly, the ultimate interest rate effect on demand occur by six channels 
or transmission mechanisms: the narrow credit channel and the broad credit channel, which are distinct 
but complementary ways whereby imperfections in financial markets might affect real magnitudes in the 
economy on the assumption of credit market frictions – the narrow credit channel, or the banking lending 
channel,  refers  to  the  impact  of  reserve  requirements  change  on  the  supply  of  loans,  whereas  the  broad 
credit channel indicates the financial health of borrowers impacts on the supply of finance and ultimately 
aggregate  demand;  the  interest  rate  channel  and  the  monetarist  channel,  which  depend  heavily  on  the 
assumption made about the degree of substitutability between money and other assets – this can amplify or 
diminish  the  speed  by  which  interest  rate  changes  impact  the  level  and  pace  of  economic  activity,  also 
affecting the amount of change on monetary base needed to set the interest target; the wealth effect channel, 
where consumption function is hypothesized to depend on consumer wealth; and finally, the exchange rate 
channel, operating through import prices and net external demand. 

Hence,  BCB  conducts  monetary  policy  by  choosing  a  target  for  the  interest  rate  for  the 
overnight  interbank loans collateralized by  domestic federal  securities registered with  and traded on the 
“Sistema Especial de Liquidação e Custódia” (SELIC)11. More specifically, the Central Bank sets the target 
for the Selic rate, which is defined as the “adjusted average rate of daily financings determined in the SELIC 
for federal securities” (BCB, 2017b). It includes, consequently, all exchange operations of reserves for a 
day between financial institutions – the secondary/interbank market – and between these and the Central 
Bank in its calculation – the primary market 12 (ARAÚJO, 2002).  

SELIC  is,  thus,  part  of  the  bank  reserves  market  (or  the  federal  securities  market),  i.e.  the 
institutional  arrangement  dedicated  for  the  negotiation  of  bank  reserves.  If  exchange  reserves  are  not 
collateralized  in  public  securities,  they  will  be  made  and  registered  at  the  “Central  de  Custódia  e  de 
Liquidação Financeira de Títulos Privados” (CETIP)13, currently “Organized Markets”, and will then be 
remunerated by a DI-Cetip rate (Interbank Deposit). These transactions stand for changes on the reserve 
account of banks, which is the cash deposit account that all banks maintain on the Central Bank balance 
sheet  in  order to  meet  the reserve requirements and to  settle the clearing  of payments  and receipts with 
other banks (interbank transactions) (BCB, 2016b).  

In this sense, reserve requirements are deposits made in cash (bank reserves) or in securities 
that  each  bank  is  legally  obliged  to  maintain  at  the  Central  Bank  and  are  calculated  as  a  percentage  of 
deposits – demand deposits, time and saving deposits and additional requirements14. Reserve requirements 
were extremely high at the beginning of the Real Plan, in order to contain a possible surplus demand from 
the initial  success  of price stabilization, and in  accordance with  the BCB intent  to  control the monetary 
base. Consequently, in order to meet its required reserve balance  – i.e., the net sum of the BCB reserve 
requirements  and the  economy’ daily transactions  – banks can either lend directly from  the  BCB at  the 

                                                           
11 Special System for Settlement and Custody. 
12 For more on Selic legislation and norms, go to http://www.bcb.gov.br/htms/demab/circular3587-english.pdf 
13 Custody and Financial Settlement Center for Private Securities. 
14 The additional requirements applies to savings, demand deposits and time deposits (BCB, 2016a). 

7 

 

discount rate or go the interbank market, where the lower bond rate for borrowed reserves is the interest 
rate BCB pays on some types of reserve requirements15. 

Reserve borrowings from the BCB are then negotiated at the liquidity discount window, where 
loans are priced at the discount rate in order to diminish liquidity problems for banks, also fetching some 
stability to financial markets. Nonetheless, the access to liquidity assistance operations in Brazil is restricted 
to financial institutions holding bank reserve accounts and the operations can be settled by the use of reverse 
repurchase commitments,  which are revolving loans against guarantees up to  the borrower's withdrawal 
limit  set  by  the  BCB,  or  by  the  actual  rediscount  of  eligible  securities.  Moreover,  charges  over  these 
transactions  can  be  either  fixed,  being  more  or  less  favorable  depending  on  the  behavior  of  the  reserve 
market interest rate, or anchored to the Selic rate but with an additional rate, which maintains a constant 
differential. BCB is, thus, able to limit the access of financial institutions to these liquid funds, operating a 
balance between its function as a lender of last resort and a guarantor of the payment system fluidity. 

The  system,  therefore,  requires  a  more  active  role  of  open  market  operations  in  liquidity 
management.  In  other  words,  the  rediscount  operations  act  only  as  an  auxiliary  instrument  in  reserve 
management by the BCB, which provides banks with a liquidity assistance line that helps to solve individual 
cash  problems  that  may  occur  at  the  end  of  the  day  or  at  the  end  of  the  period  of  movement  of  the 
compulsory collection, avoiding the existence of overdrafts in the bank reserves account (FIGUEIREDO; 
FACHADA; GOLDENSTEIN, 2002). 

Therefore, in order to  guarantee the level  and the  desired behavior of the short-term interest 
rate, BCB works to estimate the liquidity need of the interbank market. With that estimation, it operates the 
volume of reserves, adding or withdrawing money on/of the system. Thus, changes in reserves are a result 
of both BCB's actions to manage liquidity and autonomous variations in the Central Bank balance sheet 
accounts  of  net  external  assets16,  loans  to  Government,  paper  money  in  circulation  and  deposits  in  the 
Treasury account17. In this sense, liquidity forecasting is the initial stage  towards the implementation of 
monetary policy; it is the baseline for the decisions on the volume, frequency and maturity of operations 
designed to balance the reserve market (FIGUEIREDO; FACHADA; GOLDENSTEIN, 2002). 

In this regard, the authority estimates can point either to a generalized deficiency in the reserve 
market  or  to  a  widespread  excess  of  bank  reserves  in  the  market.  In  the  first  case,  the  Central  Bank  is 
oversold and the volume of bank reserves available in the market is lower than the stock of public securities 
issued and held in banks’ portfolios – i.e. the outflow of resources from the reserve account of all institutions 
is larger than the inflow. In the second, the Central Bank is undersold and the inflow of resources into the 
bank  reserves  account  is  greater  than  the  outflow.  Hence,  if  the  Central  Bank  does  not  want  greater 
fluctuations  in  the  market  interest  rate,  it  must  act  accordingly,  either  providing  the  necessary  funds  to 
banks or purchasing excess reserves. These compensatory adjustments are, thus, mainly made through open 
market  operations,  given  their  greater  versatility  in  accommodating  daily  variations  on  market  liquidity 
(CARVALHO et al., 2015). 

From  this  perspective,  BCB  may  also  choose  between  definitive  operations  or  repurchase 
agreement operations. On the one hand, outright operations usually are chosen in the case that the central 
bank intends to make a lasting withdrawal from the reserves market or when it wishes to intervene at the 
level of the prevailing interest rate over a medium or long-term horizon. Thus, this way of acting is usually 

                                                           
15 The liquidations of these operations are processed through the entries in the accounts maintained by the participants in the 
Central Bank and occur through the Reserve Transfer System (STR), which is the heart of the National Financial System 
(NFS). For more on the STR, go to http://www.bcb.gov.br/htms/novaPaginaSPB/str.asp?IDPAI=STR. 
16 The changes in the net external assets account result both from the balance between exports and imports and from financial 
operations. In Brazil, the Central Bank operates in the foreign exchange market, buying or selling foreign currency (to banks) 
through auctions, in order to maintain the quotation at the considered appropriate level, and these operations can directly sensitize 
the bank reserves account. These auctions are of two types: spot market or swap. In 2002, the BCB and the Treasury began to 
carry out foreign exchange swap operations in conjunction with primary offers of LFT - Treasury Financial Letters. The use of 
this instrument enables the market itself, more than the Central Bank, to offer foreign exchange hedge to companies. The new 
system also made it possible to reduce the issue of securities indexed to the exchange rate (CARVALHO et al., 2015). 
17 The Treasury on BCB is called “Conta Única” and it keeps all government spending and collection information, such as tax 
collection, public bond auctions, and server payment. 

8 

 

associated with active intervention type by the monetary authority. On the other hand, repurchase operations 
are the main option  when the need is  of managing  short-term or very  short-term  conditions  in  the bank 
reserve market. These operations, also known as repo or reverse repo18, are related to the fine-tuning of 
liquidity  conditions  that  permit  the  neutralization  of  unwanted  changes  in  the  level  of  bank  reserves, 
whether resulting from an unexpected behavior of the agents, as sudden reversal on expectations, or from 
seasonal  occurrences.  For  this  reason,  they  are  regularly  preferable  when  dealing  with  defensive 
interventions (ALMEIDA, 2014).  

BCB thus chooses the target for the interest rate for the overnight interbank loans – the Selic 
rate  target  –  by  the  use  of  a  set  of  tools  that  go  from  small-scale  structural  models  of  the  transmission 
mechanism  of  monetary  policy  and  short-term  inflation  forecasting  models  to  surveys  of  market 
expectations of inflation  and economic growth (BOGDANSKI; TOMBINI; WERLANG, 2000). In fact, 
given the temporal lag between the monetary authority action and its effect on macroeconomic variables 
and on prices, the Central Bank takes monetary policy decisions in accordance with the movements in the 
expected inflation (forward looking) in an attempt to anticipate future price pressures and volatility on GDP. 
One of the main features of the monetary policy adopted in Brazil based on inflation targets is, therefore, 
to look at t market’s expectations of future inflation to decide the interest rate in the present (LIMA; SILVA, 
2011). 

According to the latest essay on the Inflation Target regime in Brazil by the BCB – Dez Anos 
de  Metas  para  a  Inflação  no  Brasil:  1999-2009  (BCB,  2011)  –  and  according  to  the  view  of  the  BCB 
working  paper  series  opening  article  on  the  same  subject  –  Implementing  Inflation  Targeting  in  Brazil 
(BOGDANSKI; TOMBINI; WERLANG, 2000) – the system of equations BCB estimates (and calibrates) 
in order to identify the mechanism of monetary policy transmission is, thus, a combination of an IS type 
equation,  a  Phillips  curve,  an  exchange  rate  passthrough  specification,  and  a  Taylor  rule.  The  models 
currently in use for this system can, therefore, be divided into the following five categories: i) antecedent 
indicators  and  core  inflation  indexes;  ii)  vector  autoregressive  models  (VAR)  for  inflation  trajectory 
projection; iii) small-scale semi-structural models for inflation forecast; iv) medium semi-structural models 
for  the  analysis  of  alternative  economic  scenarios  (PAGODE);  and  v)  a  micro  model  of  medium  size 
(SAMBA) – whose structure is similar to that of general equilibrium stochastic models (DSGE models) 
(DSGE models) (BCB, 2011; BOGDANSKI; TOMBINI; WERLANG, 2000; LIMA; ARAUJO; SILVA, 
2011). 

Under  this  system,  thus,  changes  on  the  interest  rate  will  respond  to  the  market's  ability  to 
absorb  securities.  Accordingly,  conducting  the  auction  on  days  of  oversold  may  increase  the  liquidity 
premium  required  by  the  participants  or  even  decrease  the  demand  for  papers;  both  tending  to  rise  the 
interest rate. On its turn, in moments when expectations and liquidity are more stable, and the total amount 
of securities issued is lower than the quantity maturing, there is no pressure on the interest rate. Conversely, 
in times of great volatility in expectations, the Central Bank has a major difficulty in defining the cut price 
for securities, taking the risk of sending misleading signals about the direction of the interest rate. So, in 
summary, this process ultimately depends on the monetary flow defined in the liquidity management, and 
on the balance between securities to be issued and the ones on the date of maturity (CARVALHO et al., 
2015). 

This,  in  fact,  corroborates  with  the  Post-Keynesian  perspective  of  a  credit  money  economy 
where  monetary  policy  does  not  affect  the  economy  by  exclusively  (or  even  mainly)  increasing  or 
decreasing the supply of means of payment, but rather by changing the availability of liquid assets compared 
to all other classes of assets. Using the short-term interest rate as an instrument, the Central Bank acts on 

                                                           
18 Repurchase agreements may also be conducted under the liquidity or rediscount assistance and consist in the purchase and 
sale of securities in which the seller undertakes to repurchase the security at an agreed price on a specified date. When central 
banks perform this operation as temporary buyers of these government bonds, they are injecting liquidity into the economy, thus 
operating what we call repos. When, on the contrary, they temporarily give up the securities they hold in the portfolio, they are 
withdrawing liquidity from the economy, doing what we call reverse repos. In Brazil, the increasing use of repurchase agreement 
has been specially associated, though, with the rise of international reserves balances by the Central Bank in the period between 
2006 and 2009, and to net redemptions of securities by the National Treasury after 2010, which had established a strategy to 
change the profile of public debt. For more on reverse repos operations in Brazil see De Conti (2016) and Macedo e Silva (2016). 
9 

 

the financial circulation through open market operations in which bank reserves are exchanged for public 
securities, in general. Thereby, the first impact of the effort to change the interest rate is on the portfolio of 
banks that will be adjusted according to the yield curve in operation, reordering the comparable disposal of 
assets19,  as  it  alters  the  expectation  of  banks  carrying  government  bonds  in  their  portfolio  about  future 
capital  gains  (MODENESI  et  al., 2013).  It  is  this impact  on the portfolio of banks that will (hopefully) 
reverberate on demand to finally affect inflation. 

In  fact,  the  initial  adjustment  of  banks’  portfolio  resounds  on  the  financial  relationships 
described by the  yield curve: agents  are induced to  adapt  to  the new situation by  changing their  assets’ 
positions, causing asset price movements that reestablishes a new relation between rates. This is because 
the change on the very short-run rate of interest by the central bank alters the offsetting between risk and 
interest for all the range of assets with different maturities, which leads investors to realign their portfolios 
by selling and/or buying assets with the new preferred maturity. These operations on the assets’ markets, 
either on the pressure for sale in the case of a policy to increase the basic interest rate or for buying with a 
policy in the opposite direction, would realign all asset prices (and interest rates), shifting the yield curve. 
From the non-banking stand point, it may change the willingness to increase spending, both investment and 
consumption, which can or cannot be fulfilled, depending on the reliance on credit. Credit fulfillingness (or 
credit creation), on the other hand, will depend on banks willingness to lend, which is also connected to its 
new yield curve in operation and, therefore, depend on the calculation of expected gains by the alteration 
in their portfolio position (CARVALHO et al., 2015). 

Financial  capitalism  is  mainly  driven  by  the  prospects  of  future  earnings  in  the  way  that 
uncertainty and conventions play a crucial role in decisions of spending and investing. Money is the base 
institution of the capitalist economy, and the price of access to short-term liquidity, the rate of interest, is 
negotiated by a series of institutional, political, and even cultural factors. Considering that the behavior of 
agents depends on conventional evaluations subject to abrupt changes, the Central Bank seeks, in its daily 
management,  to  set  limits  to  such  volatility  in  financial  markets,  signaling  the  behavior  of  short-term 
interest rate, while the long-term interest rate is determined by the profits on capital, which, in turn, depend 
on the productivity and the relative abundance of the existing capital (MODENESI et al., 2013). 

Accordingly, the Central Bank is not empowered to, through the management of interest rate, 
fully control the structure of demand and asset prices, in order to facilitate the stable growth of the system, 
ensuring a relative pricing structure compatible with the scarcity of assets and with full employment. The 
active monetary policy refers to the administration of the nominal interest rate and short-term by the central 
bank. Real interest rates are a result (ex post). However, the ex post real rate may differ from the actual rate 
ex  ante,  which  is  relevant  for  decision-making.  In  other  words,  the  monetary  interest  rate  incorporates 
expectations  about  the  evolution  of  future  prices.  Thus,  an  increase  in  the  monetary  interest  rate  may 
indicate a rise in inflation forecast. However, the forecast can be frustrated and the actual ex post rate be 
below the ex-ante real rate (PALLEY, 2008). 

In a context of uncertainty, agents try to anticipate the decisions of the monetary authority, in 
order to obtain arbitrage gains.  In this movement, although the  Central  Bank cannot prevent the sudden 
change  of  expectations,  manifested  in  changes  in  asset  prices  independently  of  monetary  policy,  it  can 
influence the behavior of financial institutions, through interest  rate policy  and the use of reserves. The 
influence of the Central Bank depends on the impact of its short-term interest rate policy, and the policy 
reserves associated with it, on the expectations of financial institutions (PALLEY, 1993, 2006). 

                                                           
19 Commercial banks have in deposit creation their most important passive account, and even term deposits tend to have relatively 
short maturity when compared to other forms of fundraising. As a consequence, the possibility to held assets with longer maturity 
can only occur in the existence of organized and activated secondary market where these assets have a stronger liquidity attribute. 
For instance, loans made by the industry, in particular, must have maturities compatible with the maturities of their liabilities. 
This implies that, for the monetary policy instrument to have the desired effect on the economy, a sufficiently diversified financial 
system,  both  in  terms  of  markets  and  institutions,  must  exist  so  that  the  induced  portfolio  adjustments  are  transmitted  to  the 
longer  maturity  segments  –  and  not  entirely  translated  into  the  simple  replacement  of  short-term  assets.  In  other  words,  it  is 
necessary to have a yield curve that defines stable relations between interest rates (and therefore, prices) of securities of different 
maturities (CARVALHO, 2005). 

10 

 

4. Credit money supply function: an econometric appraisal 

From  the  Post-Keynesian  interpretation  on  the  credit  supply  in  a  monetary  economy  of 
production,  in  which  the  balance  sheet  composition  of  the  banks  is  guided  by  the  degree  of  liquidity 
preference assumed by these institutions at a given moment, we analyze the determinants of credit growth 
by using a large cross-section bank-level panel dataset.  In this regard, data from the BCB on credit and 
bank  financial  variables  were  matched  with  time-varying  information  on  bank  ownership.  The  sample 
included 50 banks20 with activities in the country and covers the period from 1999 to 2016, i.e. from the 
year of the inflation targeting regime’ adoption to the last data available. These quarterly data were, finally, 
combined with macroeconomic variables also from the BCB dataset. 

The estimation strategy was to use the GMM estimator, based on the Arellano and Bond (1991) 
and Holtz-Eakin et.al. (1988), which counts on the persistence over time of both autocorrelation, given the 
presence of lagged variables, and individual effects that controls for the heterogeneity between entities. For 
these  estimators,  additional  instruments  are  created  by  the  differences  among  lagged  variables  and 
disturbances. Therefore, we can estimate the coefficients for the credit supply function with the generated 
regressors as instruments. 

The basic regression uses the following specification, where credit in bank 𝑖, at time 𝑡, is given 

by: 

 
𝑐𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑖,𝑡 = 𝑐𝑖 +  𝛼 ∙ 𝑐𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑖,𝑡−1 + 𝛽  ∙   𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜𝑡 +  𝛾 ∙ 𝑏𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑖,𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖,𝑡                  (1) 
 
Bank-specific fixed effects, 𝑐𝑖, the, credit in the previous period, 𝑐𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑖,𝑡−1, macroeconomic 
variables at time 𝑡, 𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜𝑡, and bank-specific balance sheet variables at time 𝑡, 𝑏𝑎𝑛𝑘𝑖,𝑡. Hence, according 
to the literature on bank credit in the Post-Keynesian perspective, a set of typical variables are included to 
control  for  the  macroeconomic  conditions  and,  most  importantly,  some  bank  indicators  were  created  in 
order to capture banks specific portfolio arrangements that affects their decision to lend. The following box 
gives the summary of the variables characteristics and the expected sign. 

 

 

                                                           
20 BCB (2017a) provides information of the balance sheet of the entire NFS, covering data from banks and their conglomerates. 
In this thesis, we have opted to work with bank data in an intent to capture more specific balance sheet composition changes. 
Also, in order to build the panel data sample with the less possible missing data as well as with a sufficient large number of 
information (giving the fact that some institutions have merged or stopped activities over time), we have taken as base the fifty 
largest banks in activity in the year of 2016. In addition, monthly data for these banks were transformed in average quarterly data 
to diminish extreme variation on errors in the model. 

11 

 

Box 1. Description of input variables and expected signals 

Source: own elaboration based on BCB (2017c), Oliveira (2009) and Everaert et al. (2015). 

 

The domestic demand was included among the macroeconomic variables in order to capture 
the prominent impact of demand for funds on credit supply. The reason is that, as stated in the first chapter, 
credit demand,  aside from  liquidity preference, determines the volume  of credit. Besides, it was chosen 
instead of GDP because of its critical role as a growth driver in the Brazilian last credit cycle. Finally, from 
the  perspective  of  an  individual  bank,  contemporaneous  domestic  demand  growth  is  assumed  to  be  an 
exogenous variable, i.e. not to depend on the banks’ own credit supply, and to have a positive impact on 
credit supply (EVERAERT et al., 2015). 

Moreover,  the  Selic  rate  and  the  inflation  rate  apprehend  the  generalized  expectations  of 
macroeconomic stability manipulated by the monetary authority. Additionally, while a rise in the Selic rate 
can indicate the possibility of more gains in concurrent and more liquid assets then credit, a higher inflation 
12 

 

Real domestic demand (+)Reflects the demand intensity and is expected to have a positive impact on credit supply. The domestic demand was used instead of GDP because it was a critical driver of the financial credit cycle in Brazil from 2004 to 2015. From the perspective of an individual bank, contemporaneous domestic demand growth is assumed to be an exogenous variable, and not to depend on the banks’ own credit supply. Hence, no lags are used for this variable.Selic (-)Apprehends the impact of the monetary policy intrument on credit supply. Selic changes alter the yield curve of banks that respond to it with balance sheets adjustments. The sign is expected to be negative as liquid assets become relatively more attractive than credit.Average inflation (-)Captures expactations on macroeconomic balance. The sign is expected to be negative as lack of price stability deters financial transactions and inflation erodes bank capital.Previous credit supply (+)It reflects  the preceding expectations and the antecipation of demand growth; both having a positive impact on future credit supply.Speculative position (-)It reflects how much the result of bank's normal operations is used to pay interest and other principal obligations. The expected sign of this indicator is negative because the lower the ratio between operating revenues and operating expenses, the lower the degree of liquidity preference, i.e. the more risk taker is the bank and, therefore, the greater the supply of credit.Leverage (+)Ratio between third-party resources and equity and measures the aggressiveness of banks. The higher the indicator, the higher the bank's speculative grade, the greater the credit supply.Assets flexibility (-)At times of declining liquidity preference, banks tend to increase their positions in assets whose monetary return is high and whose liquidity premium is low, such as credit operations, thereby reducing the ratio of more liquid assets, such as short-term public and private securities, to total assets.Liabilities flexibility (+)Ratio between the sum of resources with no incidence of reserves requirements and the total current and long term liabilities. The more the bank is able to raise non-reserve requirements, the greater the ability to offer credit.Risk exposure (-)Ratio between the lowest risk credit portfolio (A and AA) and the total credit portfolio. The lower this ratio, the more prone to risky operations is the bank, therefore, with a tendency to increase the supply of credit.Foreign currency exposure (+)Ratio between obligations and rights in foreign currency. The higher the indicator, the greater the risk assumed, the greater the funds for credit.Financial Independence (+)Ratio between shareholders 'equity and adjusted total assets (total assets less shareholders' equity). The higher, the higher the bank's independence degree to third-party capital, the greater the ability to offer credit.Return on Equity (+)Quotient between net income and shareholders' equity, indicating bank profitability. More profitable banks are expected to be in a better position to extend credit.Domestic macroeconomic variablesBank's balance sheet variablesrate erodes the reserve of value function of money  and augments the economic environment  instability. 
Therefore, the sign of the coefficients of both variables have been expected to be negative.  

Nevertheless,  in  addition  to  the  macroeconomic  variables21,  we  have  incorporated  several 
balances  of  payments  indicators  in  the  model.  The  inclusion  of  these  indicators  is  related  to  the  Post-
Keynesian  view  highlighted  from  the  beginning  of  this  thesis,  based  on  Minsky's  seminal  analytical 
contributions that banks, like all other agents, have a preference for liquidity and expectations regarding 
the future that guide the strategies they draw in their incessant search for valuation, which may or may not 
deter the supply of credit, and then the decisions of production (MINSKY, 1975). Accordingly, apart from 
a strictly accounting approach, the composition of a bank's balance sheet expresses its degree of liquidity 
preference at a given moment, confined to a context where forecasts based on probability calculations are 
not  sufficient  to  ensure  that  the  expected  scenario  will  be  effectively  verified  (OLIVEIRA,  2009). 
Consequently,  the  indicators  based  on  these  balance  sheets  reflect  the  institutions'  perception  of  the 
economic prospective scenario, that is, it captures the constant changes in the yield curves of these agents, 
including those caused by monetary policy. 

In  effect,  these  institutions  decide  not  only  to  allocate  their  resources  among  the  different 
classes of assets available at a given moment and  context of expectations, but also to have less or more 
flexibility  in  relation  to  the  amount  of  resources  they  will  be  willing  to  lend.  Banks  thus  decide 
simultaneously the magnitude and how to allocate their resources, i.e. how much flexibility and leverage 
their balance sheets will present. Hence, we have created most of the indicators based on the literature that 
connects balance sheets’ positions and credit creation, being the last three on the above box extracted from 
Oliveira (2009). 

The first measure of speculative position of banks, i.e. the ratio between operational revenue 
and expenses, has been expected to be negative. This reflects the fact that banks hedge financial positions 
tend to transform into speculative ones, and the speculative into Ponzi in the upward of a cycle. Therefore, 
the more speculative the position, the lower this indicator will be and the greater the credit expansion. For 
the same reasons, the contrary sign has been projected for the leverage indicator, which represents the ratio 
between  third-party  resources  and  equity,  and  measures  the  aggressiveness  of  banks.  Consequently,  the 
higher the indicator, the higher the bank's speculative grade and the greater the credit supply. 

The next two indicators are based on the need of banks to maintain flexible positions both in 
the assets and in liabilities side of their balance sheets. As stated by Oliveira (2009), the flexibility provided 
by liquidity is a fundamental condition for the balance sheet decisions of banks, being favored the greater 
the  perception  of  uncertainty,  the  bigger  the  degree  of  liquidity  preference.  In  moments  of  high 
macroeconomic  instability,  for  instance,  the  option  for  a  portfolio  of  more  liquid  assets  provides  the 
possibility  of  near-instant  equity  adjustments,  necessary  both  to  protect  wealth  and  to  benefit  from 
opportunities to expand it. Even more, flexibility is also related to speculative movements in relation to the 
expected changes in interest rates (money demand speculation), as well as unforeseen opportunities gains 
with several assets on the market, being, therefore, the ratio between liquid assets to total assets – the assets 
flexibility indicator – negatively related to credit expansion. 

On the other hand, the liabilities flexibility indicator stands for the quotient between the sum of 
resources that does not implicate in reserves requirements and short and long-term liabilities. Banks have 
before them a multiplicity of possibilities for raising funds, rather than just deposits. Thus, their needs of 
reserves, resulting from bold positions taking in the management of assets, can be compensated by either 
the  use  of  instruments  capable  of  influencing  depositors’  preferences  or  the  fundraise  from  different 
sources, different markets or from arbitration. In addition to the use of conventional liability management 
techniques,  banks  are  constantly  working  on  financial  innovations  that  are  not  subject  to  regulatory 
restrictions,  consolidating  different  operational  strategy.  Banks  are,  therefore,  active  players  in  what 
comprises the administration of their liabilities in the search for  the appreciation of their wealth. In this 
way,  the  greater  the  liabilities  flexibility  indicator,  the  greater  the  possibilities  of  offering  credit 
(HASTINGS, 2006; TUFANO, 2003). 

                                                           
21  The vast majority of GMM models that seek to identify factors that alter the supply of credit use these three macroeconomic 
variables: demand, inflation and interest rates. See for instance Everaert et al. (2015),  

13 

 

The next indicator is the risk exposure indicator, i.e. the ration between the lowest risk credit 
portfolio (A and AA) and the total credit portfolio, which refers to the inherent risk of credit supply given 
non-payment possibility by the borrower. Even though they may minimize this source of risk through a 
policy  of  customer  diversification,  loan  ceilings,  guarantees,  or  securitization  of  assets,  futures  markets 
operations,  options  or  swaps,  in  business  expansion  phases,  banks  tend  to  reduce  their  safety  margins, 
entering  the  region  of  increasing  risks  (GENNAIOLI;  SHLEIFER;  VISHNY,  2012;  SANTOMERO; 
TRESTER, 1998). In this sense, Kregel (1997) points that banks generally do not realize that their safety 
margins are being  reduced since, on the one hand, the very  expansion of business  tends to  increase the 
conviction of bankers that potential borrowers have sufficient financial conditions of payment; and, on the 
other  hand,  the  optimistic  state  positively  influences  the  borrower’s  risk  record,  which  in  other 
circumstances would inevitably have his claims rejected. Thus, the greater the risk exposure indicator, the 
greater the credit supply. 

We then have an indicator that is  related to  bank leverage in  external  resources:  the foreign 
currency exposure. This is the ratio between obligations and rights in foreign currency and stands for the 
risk  the  risk  of  exchange  rate  variation.  According  to  Saunders  (2000),  banks  can  mitigate  this  type  of 
through  in-  and  out-of-balance  hedging  strategies.  Among  the  strategies  on  the  balance  sheet  are  the 
attempts to match maturities and values of assets and liabilities in foreign currency and the diversification 
of  portfolio  positions  in  different  currencies,  since  the  correlations  between  exchange  rates  and  interest 
rates are not perfect between markets. Out of the balance sheet, the author points to the use of derivative 
transactions such as forward and futures contracts, swap transactions and options. Nonetheless, in the case 
of  expansion  prospects  of  the  economy,  these  institutions  tend  to  minimize  the  risks  of  currency 
mismatching  on  the  balance  sheet  and  increase  the  proportion  of  liabilities  in  foreign  currency  when 
compared to the volume of assets denominated in the same currency. In this way, the higher the indicator, 
the greater the risk assumed the greater the supply of credit (DAVANZO, 2004; HASTINGS, 2006). 

Finally, we have included three more bank specific variables, which are: i) the credit supply in 
the previous period; ii) the financial independence variable; and iii) the return on equity indicator. As for 
the first one, the greater lagged credit supply indicates both preceding optimistic expectations of banks and 
a reliable anticipation of future demand growth. The financial independence indicator, on its hand, which 
is  based  on  the  quotient  between  shareholders’  equity  and  adjusted  total  assets  (total  assets  less 
shareholders’ equity), reflects how much the banks can expand their lending operations based on its own 
resources. Lastly, the return on equity indicates bank’s profitability and stands for the fact that the more 
profitable the bank is, the more likely it is to expand credit supply. In summary, the bigger these indicators, 
the  greater  the  volume  of  credit;  that  is,  they  have  been  expected  to  present  positive  signs  in  their 
coefficients. Thereby, taking all these variables into account, we can see the estimation output for the first 
model in Table 1. 

 

 

 

14 

Table 1. Dynamic Panel Data Model 1 

Source: own elaboration based on Eviews 9.0 estimation output. 

 

One may see that roughly every variable presented coefficients with the expected sign, except 
for inflation, which didn’t exhibit a good significance level (less than 10%), the risk exposure and the return 
on equity. In Brazil, both last, though, can be partially explained by the existence of flexible instruments 
with  overnight  gain  to  protect  revenue  and  those  compete  with  credit  as  profitable  assets,  such  as  the 
Treasury reverse repos. The opposite sign on the risk exposure can also be explained by the outstanding 
characteristic of banks in the country of presenting a great majority of lower risk graded credits in their 
portfolios,  a  possibility  made  possible  by  the  institutional  changes  in  the  credit  market  presented  in  the 
previous section, i.e. the payroll-deducted credit for workers and pensioners. As for the opposite sign of the 
return on equity, it can also be related to the fact that among the leading banks of the expansion phase of 
the last credit cycle there was large public banks, such as Banco do Brasil and Caixa Econômica Federal, 
which started to perform credit expansionary policies after the crises in 2007. 

The Selic rate, as expected, presented a negative sign on its coefficient, meaning that policy 
rate has a negative effect on credit supply, whereas a up change on the short-term rate of interest stimulate 
gains in concurrent and more liquid assets then credit, which, as could be seen on the second chapter, alters 
the yield curves of these institutions. Banks in Brazil are, thus, effectively bounded by the monetary policy. 
As for the other variables, there is enough evidence that banks in Brazil respond in a very typical 
way to both liquidity preference and demand, i.e. as the more optimistic expectations about the future, the 
lower the urge for flexibility positions, the greater the propensity to leverage positions and, thus, the greater 
the volume of credit. In this regard, speculative position of banks, i.e. the ratio between operational revenue 
and expenses, exhibited a negative sign, while the coefficient for leverage – the ratio between third-party 
resources and equity – was positive. Also, assets flexibility and liability flexibility presented the expected 
signs, being banks in Brazil more likely to lend at times of declining liquidity preference, both increasing 
their  positions  in  assets  whose  monetary  return  is  high  and  whose  liquidity  premium  is  low,  thereby 
reducing  the  ratio  of  more  liquid  assets,  and  augmenting  the  proportional  sum  of  resources  with  no 
incidence of reserves requirements. 

The foreign currency exposure indicator presented positive sign on its coefficient,  capturing 
thus the appetite for balance sheet riskier positions in times of lower liquidity preference. This means that 
banks  in  Brazil,  for  the  period  under  analyses,  were  able  to  fund  themselves  in  external  currency  and 
increase  international  obligations,  compared  to  their  rights.  This  was  associated  to  the  growth  of  the 
domestic  market  and  the  financial  innovation  that,  before  the  international  financial  crises,  has  given  a 
second impulse to credit expansion with the internal offer of contracts linked to foreign exchange derivative 

15 

 

Dependent Variable: CreditMethod: Panel Generalized Method of MomentsTransformation: First DifferencesSample (adjusted): 2000Q1 2016Q2Periods included: 66Cross-sections included: 35Total panel (unbalanced) observations: 1180White period instrument weighting matrixWhite period standard errors & covariance (d.f. corrected)Constant added to instrument listCredit(-1)0.11770.04522.60280.0094DomesticDemand0.17470.12391.41000.1588Selic-0.00640.0023-2.83740.0046Inflation0.00090.00100.90190.3673SpeculativePosition-0.18770.0690-2.72000.0066Leverage1.06190.091811.56520.0000AssetsFlexibility-0.45460.0576-7.89510.0000LiabilitiesFlexibility0.04540.0185-2.45890.0141RiskExposure0.00900.00591.53610.1248ForeignCurrencyExposure0.04470.02571.73670.0827FinancialIndependence0.54460.06078.97790.0000ReturnOnEquity-0.01880.0066-2.86320.0043Mean dependent var0.0174    S.D. dependent var0.1889S.E. of regression0.2282    Sum squared resid60.8348J-statistic27.0498    Instrument rank36Prob(J-statistic)0.3021Instrument specification: @DYN(LNCREDIT,-2,-3) AD SELIC INFLATION SPECULATIVEPOSITION LEVERAGE ASSETSFLEXIBILITY LIABILITIESFLEXIBILITY RISKEXPOSURE FINANCIALINDEPENDENCE FOREIGNCURRENCYEXPOSURE RETURNONEQUITY @LEV(INFLATION)Effects SpecificationCross-section fixed (first differences)VariableCoefficientStd. Errort-StatisticProb.  operations, which guaranteed a reduction in the cost of credit while the  Real trajectory was appreciated. 
With the crises, the obscurity about the degree of exposure of the other agents led banks to withdrew credit 
and revise their portfolio positions. The indicator was, therefore, positively correlated with the supply of 
credit.  

Lastly, there is the financial independence ratio, which captures bank's independence degree to 
third-party capital. Given the fact that all the indicators are in percentage form of the same unit variables, 
we can highlight the relative importance of this indicator in explaining the credit supply. In Brazil, thus, 
banks ought to provide bigger amounts of funds to firms and households based on their notorious ability to 
fund  themselves;  a  characteristic  of  a  concentrated  and  exceptionally  cautious  system.  Accordingly,  the 
indicator coefficient was presented positive, meaning the higher the bank’s independence,  the greater its 
ability to offer credit. 

Therefore, connected to the main framework of the Post-Keynesian approach for the relation 
between credit supply and balance sheet composition of banks, aside with other macroeconomic variable, 
our  findings  suggest  that  changes  in  the  liquidity  preference  of  banks,  reflected  on  their  portfolio 
adjustments  throughout  movements  on  flexibility  and  leverage  indicators,  have  significant  relation  with 
credit supply. For instance, when there is a lowering on the liquidity preference of banks, banks are more 
likely to increase their degree of financial leverage, which indicates a search for riskier passive positions in 
order to subsidize larger gains in riskier asset positions, such as credit.  Additionally, in such situations, the 
willingness of more flexible portfolio condition is surpassed by the desire of more illiquid and profitable 
stance.  Besides, not  least  important, in  line with  the Post-Keynesian theory, demand  for  credit plays an 
important role on the determination of funds to be offered by banks in Brazil.  In conclusion, it is possible 
to say that banks in Brazil are effectively bounded by the monetary policy, but not entirely determined by 
it, once changes in the basic short-term interest rate alters banks’ yield curves and their liquidity preference, 
modifying their willingness to expand credit supply.  

Concluding Remarks 

In the particular form money assumes in modern economies, banks can create it endogenously 
based on their liquidity preference, which is strongly determined by demand for credit and is originated 
inside  the  economic  system  in  order  to  finance  investment  and  consumption  decisions  and  speculative 
purchases of assets. Therefore, the monetary  authority has only the ability to  influence credit supply by 
changing  the  availability  of  liquid  assets  compared  to  all  other  classes  of  assets  via  monetary  policy 
instruments,  i.e.  reserve  requirements,  discount  window  and  open  market  operations.    Through  the 
management of liquidity in the reserves market, the Central Bank may modify the price of access to short-
term liquidity – the interest rate – and, thereby, provoke adjustments on the portfolio of banks, reordering 
the comparable disposal  of assets. The resulting  modification in  the  yield curve in  operation transforms 
banks propensity to expand credit supply. 

In summary, connected to the main framework of the Post-Keynesian approach for the relation 
between credit supply and balance sheet composition of banks, aside with other macroeconomic variable, 
our  findings  suggest  that  changes  in  the  liquidity  preference  of  banks,  reflected  on  their  portfolio 
adjustments  throughout  movements  on  flexibility  and  leverage  indicators,  have  significant  relation  with 
credit supply. For instance, when there is a lowering on the liquidity preference of banks, banks are more 
likely to increase their degree of financial leverage, which indicates a search for riskier passive positions in 
order to subsidize larger gains in riskier asset positions, such as credit.  Additionally, in such situations, the 
willingness of more flexible portfolio condition is surpassed by the desire of more illiquid and profitable 
stance. Therefore, credit supply in Brazil is endogenously determined – as expected by the Post-Keynesian 
theory – by the liquidity preference of banks and the demand for funds, being, thus, only bounded by the 
monetary policy on its attempt to control inflation by managing the short-term interest rate. 

 
 
 

 

16 

Bibliography 
 

ALMEIDA, Luis Fernando Carnot Ribeiro De. A política monetária e a curva de rendimentos dos títulos 
públicos federais: a atuação do banco central do Brasil no período 2003-2012. 2014. 158 f. UFRJ, 2014.  
ARAÚJO, Carlos Hamilton Vasconcelos. Mercado de Títulos Públicos e Operações de Mercado Aberto 
no Brasil - Aspectos Históricos e Operacionais. , Notas Técnicas do Banco Central do Brasil., no 12. 
Brasília: [s.n.], 2002. 
ARELLANO, Manuel; BOND, Stephen. Some Tests of Specification for Panel Carlo Application to 
Data : Evidence and an Employment Equations. The Review of Economic Studies, v. 58, n. 2, p. 277–297, 
1991. 
ARESTIS, Philip; SAWYER, Malcolm. Can Monetary Policy Affect The Real Economy? Policy, 
Working Paper., no 355. Annandale-on-Hudson, NY: [s.n.], 2002. 
AWDEH, Ali. The Determinants of Credit Growth in Lebanon. International Business Research, v. 10, n. 
2, p. 9, 2016. Disponível em: <http://www.ccsenet.org/journal/index.php/ibr/article/view/65299>. 
BCB. Balancetes e demonstrações financeiras - contábeis. Disponível em: 
<http://www.bcb.gov.br/?id=BALANCETE&ano=2016>. Acesso em: 30 jan. 2017a.  
BCB. Depósitos Compulsórios. , Série Perguntas Mais Frequentes., no 12. Brasilia: [s.n.], 2016a. 
BCB. Modelos de Projeção : Atualização e Aperfeiçoamentos.  
BCB. Selic - Federal securities market. Disponível em: <http://www.bcb.gov.br/en/#!/n/fedsecurities>. 
Acesso em: 25 jan. 2017b.  
BCB. Time Series Management System (SGS). Disponível em: 
<https://www3.bcb.gov.br/sgspub/localizarseries/localizarSeries.do?method=prepararTelaLocalizarSeries
>. Acesso em: 23 jan. 2017c.  
BCB. Títulos Públicos e Gestão da Dívida Mobiliária. , Série Perguntas Mais Frequentes., no 6. Brasília: 
[s.n.], 2016b. Disponível em: <http://www.bcb.gov.br/conteudo/home-ptbr/FAQs/FAQ 06-Títulos 
Públicos e Gestão da Divida Mobiliária.pdf>. 
BCB - BANCO CENTRAL DO BRASIL (Org.). Dez Anos de Metas para a Inflação no Brasil: 1999-
2009. Brasília: [s.n.], 2011.  
BERGER, Allen N; BOUWMAN, Christa H S. Bank liquidity creation , monetary policy , and financial 
crises. Journal of Financial Stability, v. 30, p. 139–155, 2017. Disponível em: 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfs.2017.05.001>. 
BOGDANSKI, Joel; TOMBINI, Alexandre Antonio; WERLANG, Sérgio Ribeiro C. Implementing 
Inflation Targeting in Brazil. Working Paper Series do Banco Central, n. 1, p. 1–29, 2000. 
BUSCH, Ulrike; SCHARNAGL, Michael; SCHEITHAUER, Jan. Loan Supply in Germany During the 
Financial Crisis. Discussion Paper Series 1: Economic Studies, n. 5, p. 1–40, 2010. 
CARVALHO, Fernando J. Cardim De et al. Economia monetária e financeira: teoria e política. 3. ed. 
Rio de Janeiro: Elsevier, 2015.  
CARVALHO, Fernando J. Cardim De. Uma contribuição ao debate em torno da eficácia da política 
monetária e algumas implicações para o caso do Brasil. Revista de Economia Política, v. 25, n. 4 (100), p. 
323–336, 2005. 
CHICK, Victoria. A evolução do sistema bancário e a teoria da poupança, do investimento e dos juros. 
Ensaios FEE, v. 15, n. 1, p. 9–23, 1994. 
CHICK, Victoria. Sources of Finance, Recent Changes in Bank Behaviour and the Theory of Investment 
and Interest. In: ARESTIS, PHILIP (Org.). . Money and Banking: Issues for the Twenty-First Century. 
[S.l.]: Palgrave Macmillan UK, 1993. p. 55–74.  
CHICK, Victoria; DOW, Sheila C. Monetary policy with endogenous money and liquidity preference: a 
non-dualistic treatment. Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, v. 24, n. 4, p. 587–607, 2002. 
CLARIDA, Richard H.; GALI, Jordi; GERTLER, Mark. The Science of Monetary Policy: A New 
Keynesian Perspective. Journal of Economic Literature, v. 37, n. 4, p. 1661–1707, 1999. Disponível em: 
<http://www.ssrn.com/abstract=155910>. 
DAVANZO, Marcio Queiroz. Gestão de riscos em instituições financeira: a atuação da tesouraria. 

17 

 

2004. 113 f. Fundação Getúlio Vargas, 2004.  
DAVIDSON, Paul. Keynes’s Finance Motive. Oxford Economic Papers, v. 17, n. 1, p. 47–65, 1965. 
DE CONTI, Bruno Martarello. As relações entre o Tesouro e o Banco Central do Brasil. Relatório de 
Pesquisa IPEA, mimeo, p. 34, 2016. 
DE PAULA, Luiz Fernando; SARAIVA, Paulo J. A Review of the Research Program of the New 
Consensus Macroeconomics: An Assessment of the Mainstream Debate after the US Financial Crisis. 
2016, São Paulo: [s.n.], 2016. p. 1–19.  
DIB, Ali. Banks , Credit Market Frictions , and Business Cycles. Economic Analysis. [S.l: s.n.], 2010. 
DOW, Sheila C. Endogenous money: structuralism. In: ARESTIS, PHILIP; SAWYER, MALCOLM 
(Org.). . A Handbook of Alternative Monetary Economics. Northampton: Edward Elgar Publishing, Inc, 
2006. p. 35–51.  
DOW, Sheila C. Horizontalism : a critique. Cambridge Journal of Economics, v. 20, p. 497–508, 1996. 
EVERAERT, Greetje et al. Does Supply or Demand Drive the Credit Cycle? Evidence from Central, 
Eastern, and Southeastern Europe. IMF Working Paper WP/15/15, 2015. 
FIGUEIREDO, Luiz Fernando; FACHADA, Pedro; GOLDENSTEIN, Sérgio. Monetary Policy In Brazil 
- Remarks On The Inflation Targeting Regime, Public Debt Managment And Open Market Operations. 
Working Paper Series do Banco Central, Working Paper Series do Banco Central., no 37. Brasília: [s.n.], 
2002. 
FONTANA, Giuseppe. Post Keynesian Approaches to Endogenous Money: a time framework 
explanation. Review of Political Economy, v. 15, n. 3, p. 291–314, 2003. 
FONTANA, Giuseppe. Rethinking Endogenous Money: a constructive interpretation of the debate 
between horizontalists and structuralists. Metroeconomica, v. 55, n. 4, p. 367–385, 2004. 
FONTANA, Giuseppe; PALACIO-VERA, Alfonso. Is There an Active Role for Monetary Policy in the 
Endogenous Money Approach? Journal of Economic Issues, v. 37, n. 2, p. 511–518, 2003. 
GAMBETTI, Luca; MUSSO, Alberto. Loan Supply Shock and the Business Cycle. Journal of Applied 
Econometrics, p. 19, 2016. 
GENNAIOLI, Nicola; SHLEIFER, Andrei; VISHNY, Robert. Neglected risks, financial innovation, and 
financial fragility. Journal of Financial Economics, v. 104, n. 3, p. 452–468, 2012. 
GOODHART, Charles Albert Eric. The changing role of central banks. Financial History Review, v. 18, 
n. 2, p. 135–154, 2011. 
GOODHART, Charles; HOFMANN, Boris. House prices, money, credit, and the macroeconomy. Oxford 
Review of Economic Policy, v. 24, n. 1, p. 180–205, 2008. 
GUTTMANN, Robert. Finance-Led Capitalism: Shadow Banking, Re-Regulation, and the Future of 
Global Markets. [S.l: s.n.], 2016.  
HASTINGS, David F. Banking: gestão de ativos, passivos e resultados em instituições financeiras. 1. ed. 
São Paulo: Saraiva, 2006.  
HOFMANN, Boris. The determinants of private sector credit in industrialised countries : do property 
prices matter? International Finance, v. 7, n. 2, p. 203–234, 2004. 
HOLTZ-EAKIN, Douglas; NEWEY, Whitney; ROSEN, Harvey S. Estimating Vector Autoregressions 
with Panel Data. The Econometric Society, v. 56, n. 6, p. 1371–1395, 1988. 
HRISTOV, Nikolay; HULSEWIG, Oliver; WOLLMERSHAUSER, Timo. Loan supply shocks during the 
financial crisis: Evidence for the Euro area. Journal of International Money and Finance, v. 31, n. 3, p. 
569–592, 2012. Disponível em: <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jimonfin.2011.10.007>. 
IANAZE, Alexandre. Efeito da política monetária sobre a qualidade do crédito bancário no Brasil. 
2011. 51 f. Escola de Economia de São Paulo, 2011.  
KEYNES, John Maynard. Alternative Theories of the Rate of Interest. The Economic Journal, v. 47, n. 
186, p. 241–252, 1937a. 
KEYNES, John Maynard. The “Ex-Ante” Theory of the Rate of Interest. The Economic Journal, v. 47, n. 
188, p. 663–669, 1937b. 
KEYNES, John Maynard. The General Theory of Employment Interest and Money. London: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 1936.  
KOLLMANN, Robert; ENDERS, Zeno; MÜLLER, Gernot J. Global banking and international business 

18 

 

cycles. European Economic Review, v. 55, n. 3, p. 407–426, 2011. 
KREGEL, Jan A. A Note on Finance, Liquidity, Saving, and Investment. Journal of Post Keynesian 
Economics, v. 9, n. 1, p. 91–100, 1986. 
KREGEL, Jan A. Margins of Safety and Weight of the Argument in Generating Financial Fragility. 
Journal of Economic Issues, v. 31, n. 2, p. 543–548, 1997. 
LAVOIE, Marc. Post-Keynesian Economics: New Foundations. Northampton: Edward Elgar Publishing, 
Inc, 2014.  
LIMA, Eduardo José Araújo; ARAUJO, Fabio; SILVA, José Ricardo da Costa. Previsão e Modelos 
Macroeconômicos no Banco Central do Brasil. Dez Anos de Metas para A Inflação No Brasil • 1999-
2009, p. 353–399, 2011. 
LIMA, Daniel Guilherme De. Efeitos das Reformas Institucionais no Setor Bancário sobre a 
Produtividade dos Bancos Brasileiros. 2016. 41 f. Universidade de São Paulo, 2016.  
MACEDO E SILVA, Antonio Carlos. O que mostram as demonstrações? Balanços e resultados dos 
Bancos Centrais. Texto para discussão, Texto para Discussão., no 2224. Brasília: Rio de Janeiro: [s.n.], 
2016. 
MADI, Maria Alejandra Caporale. Política monetária no brasil: uma interpretação pós-keynesiana. 
1993. 220 f. Universidade Estadual de Campinas, 1993.  
MENDONÇA, Mário Jorge; SACHSIDA, Adolfo. Identificando a demanda e a oferta de crédito 
bancário no Brasil. , Texto para discussão IPEA., no 1837. Brasília: [s.n.], 2013. 
MINSKY, Hyman P. John Maynard Keynes. New York: Columbia University Press, 1975.  
MINSKY, Hyman P. Stabilizing an Unstable Economy. New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 
1986.  
MISHKIN, Frederic S. Central Banking After The Crisis. 2012, Santiago: [s.n.], 2012. p. 0–45. 
Disponível em: <http://www0.gsb.columbia.edu/faculty/fmishkin/papers/12chile.pdf>.  
MISHKIN, Frederic S. Monetary Policy Strategy: Lessons From the Crisis. NBER Working Paper, 
NBER working papers are. Cambridge: [s.n.], 2011. 
MODENESI, André de Melo et al. Convention, interest rates and monetary policy : a post-Keynesian – 
French-conventions-school approach. European Journal of Economics and Economic Policies: 
Intervention, v. 10, n. 1, p. 76–92, 2013. 
MORANDI, Lucilene. O sucesso de uma sobrevivente: a poupança de Keynes a nossos dias. 2004. 148 f. 
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, 2004.  
MUMTAZ, Haroon; PINTER, Gabor; THEODORIDIS, Konstantinos. What Do VARs Tell Us about the 
Impact of a Credit Supply Shock ? What do VARs tell us about the impact of a credit. Unpublished 
manuscript, n. 739, 2015. 
OLIVEIRA, Giuliano Contento De. Estrutura Patrimonial E Padrão De Rentabilidade Dos Bancos 
Privados No Brasil (1970-2008): Teoria, Evidências E Peculiaridades. 2009. Unicamp, 2009.  
PALLEY, Thomas I. A Post Keynesian Framework for Monetary Policy: Why Interest Rate Operating 
Procedures are Not Enough. In: ROCHON, LOUIS-PHILIPPE; GNOS, CLAUDE (Org.). . Post- 
Keynesian Principles of Economic Policy. Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar, 
2006. p. 78–98.  
PALLEY, Thomas I. Endogenous Money: Implications for the Money Supply Process, Interest Rates, and 
Macroeconomics. Political Economy Research Institute. [S.l: s.n.], 2008. 
PALLEY, Thomas I. Gattopardo economics : the crisis and the mainstream response of change that keeps 
things the same. European Journal of Economics and Economic Policies: Intervention, v. 10, n. 2, p. 
193–206, 2013a. 
PALLEY, Thomas I. Horizontalists, verticalists, and structuralists: the theory of endogenous money 
reassessed. Review of Keynesian Economics, v. 1, n. 4, p. 406–424, 2013b. 
PALLEY, Thomas I. Uncertainty, Expectations, and the Future: If We Don’t Know the Answers, What 
Are the Questions? Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, v. 16, n. 1, p. 3–18, 1993. 
ROBERTSON, Dennis Holme; KEYNES, John Maynard. Mr. Keynes and “Finance”. The Economic 
Journal, v. 48, n. 190, p. 314–322, 1938. 
ROCHON, Louis-Philippe; SETTERFIELD, Mark. Post keynesian interest rate rules and macroeconomic 

19 

 

performance: a comparative evaluation. In: GNOS, CLAUDE; ROCHON, LOUIS-PHILIPPE (Org.). . 
Credit, Money and Macroeconomic Policy: A Post-Keynesian Approach. New Direct ed. Northampton: 
Edward Elgar Publishing, 2011. p. 116–142.  
SANTOMERO, Anthony M.; TRESTER, Jeffrey J. Financial innovation and bank risk taking. Journal of 
Economic Behavior & Organization, v. 35, n. 1, p. 25–37, 1998. 
SAUNDERS, Anthony. Administração de instituições financeiras. São Paulo: ATLAS, 2000.  
SMITHIN, John. The theory of interest rates. In: ARESTIS, PHILIP; SAWYER, MALCOLM (Org.). . A 
Handbook of Alternative Monetary Economics. Northampton: Edward Elgar Publishing, Inc, 2006. p. 
273–290.  
STEPANYAN, Vahram; GUO, Kai. Determinants of Bank Credit in Emerging Market Economies. IMF 
Working Papers, IMF Working Paper., no 11/51. [S.l: s.n.], 2011. 
TAMÁSI, Bálint; VILÁGI, Balázs. Identification of credit supply shocks in a Bayesian SVAR model of 
the Hungarian Economy. . [S.l: s.n.], 2011. 
TUFANO, Peter. Financial Innovation. In: ARROW, KENNETH J.; INTRILIGATOR, MICHAEL D. 
(Org.). . Handbook of the Economics of Finance. 1. ed. New York: Elsevier, 2003. p. 307–335.  
VINHADO, Fernando da Silva. Evidências Empíricas sobre a Rentabilidade dos Ativos dos Bancos no 
Brasil antes da Crise Americana do Subprime. Revista Evidenciação Contábil & Finanças, v. 2, n. 3, p. 
73–87, 2014. 
VINHADO, Fernando da Silva; BELÉM, Vinícius Cintra. Preferência pela liquidez dos bancos no Brasil: 
uma instigação empíricacom dados em painel dinâmico. Revista de Gestão, Finanças e Contabilidade, v. 
3, n. 2, p. 24–38, 2013. 
WRAY, L. Randall. Alternative Approaches to Money and Interest Rates. Journal of Economic Issues, v. 
26, n. 4, p. 1145–1178, 1992. 
 

 

20 

