Do protests reach the ballots?

The electoral dividend of the Brazilian Spring∗

Caio de Holanda†

Rafael Costa Lima‡

Abstract: What are the electoral consequences of major protests? This paper presents empirical evidence that
the Brazilians cities that hosted demonstrations in the so called 2013 Brazilian Spring displayed different elec-
toral outcomes the following year. Using a diff-in-diff approach, we were able to conduct an empirical study of
panel data measuring the impact of those demonstrations in the 2014 elections. We observe that protests were
related to political renewal, an increase in the electoral competitiveness, and an increased use of the institutional
mechanisms for contesting an election. Also, we observe an increased rejection of candidates already known
by the electorate, especially those attached to the Executive Branch, and those afﬁliated with the incumbent
president’s party.
Keywords: Protests, Elections, Democracy, Politics, Brazil.
JEL Codes: C23, D72, D74.

Resumo: ´E poss´ıvel esperar resultados eleitorais diferentes ap´os o acontecimento de grandes protestos? Este
trabalho apresenta evidˆencias emp´ıricas de que as cidades brasileiras que presenciaram as manifestac¸ ˜oes de
2013 tiveram respostas eleitorais diferentes no ano seguinte. Usando uma abordagem de diff-in-diff, pude-
mos realizar um estudo emp´ırico de dados em painel mensurando os impactos desses protestos nas eleic¸ ˜oes de
2014. De uma forma geral, as respostas emp´ıricas sugeriram que os protestos tiveram relac¸˜ao com os resul-
tados eleitorais. Encontramos uma tendˆencia `a renovac¸˜ao pol´ıtica, um aumento da competitividade eleitoral,
e um crescimento no uso dos mecanismos institucionais de contestac¸˜ao eleitoral. Ainda, tamb´em observamos
um aumento na rejeic¸˜ao de candidatos j´a conhecidos pelo eleitorado, especialmente aqueles ligados ao Poder
Executivo, e um rep´udio crescente aos candidatos ﬁliados ao partido pol´ıtico do presidente da Rep´ublica em
exerc´ıcio durante a ´epoca das manifestac¸ ˜oes.
Palavras-chave: Protestos, Eleic¸ ˜oes, Democracia, Pol´ıtica, Brasil.
´Area ANPEC: ´Area 5 - Economia do Setor P´ublico.

∗We would like to thank Breno Sampaio, Caio Do Vale, Cleyton Farias, David Fracisco, Filipe Cavalcanti, Fl´avio Rodrigues,
Jaime Macedo, Maria Catarina Cunha, Robson Tigre and Thiago Mota for the helpful comments and discussions. We also thankful
to the seminar participants at UFPE for the comments and suggestions on previous versions of this paper. Caio de Holanda gratefully
acknowledges PET Economia for the incredible support and all of its members for the friendship.

†Undergraduate Student - Federal University of Pernambuco, Department of Economics. E-mail: deholandacaio@gmail.com
‡Federal University of Pernambuco, Department of Economics. Address: Av. dos Economistas, Recife - PE, 50740-580, Brazil.

E-mail: rﬂcoutinho@gmail.com

1 Introduction

Protests remain an important mean of political inﬂuence around the world. Being used as a mechanism for
participating in the political process, instead of just voting, citizens are demonstrating their preferences going
to the street and screaming their will. Whereas the political protest is a global phenomenon of the 21st century
(Ortiz et al., 2014)1, we will analyze whether the wishes expressed on the streets are also displayed on the
ballot box during the upcoming elections.

To do so, we study the 2013 Brazilian protests’ wave, referred to as the Brazilian Spring. The June 2013
Protests profoundly marked Brazil’s historiography (Scherer-Warren, 2014). They spread through all states,
and occurred regularly throughout that speciﬁc month. Since 1992, where massive popular protests in support
of President Collor’s impeachment, Brazil had not faced such important public demonstrations of discontent
with the political, social and economic situation.

Following the typical patterns of recent protests that was decentralized and relied on social media as an
organizing tool (Avritzer, 2016), the protests stood out not only for their geographical coverage but also for their
size. Organized by civil society, without the direct support of any formal political institution, such as unions or
political parties, the spontaneous acts were interesting events that elucidated the most distinct concerns present
in Brazilian society at the time.

In order to identify whether the wishes expressed on the streets were displayed on the ballot box during
the upcoming elections, we conduct an empirical study of panel data using a diff-in-diff approach. We admit
the occurrence of a protest as an event that signals different electoral preferences in the city in which it was
displayed. Then, we compare the results of the 2010 elections (pre protests) with the results of the 2014 election
(post protests). To be more accurate, there will be used as the cross-sectional units needed for this work the
electoral zones located in the cities observed.

The protest may impact the elections in many different ways. So we focus on four classes of dependent
variables. The ﬁrst class is electoral competitiveness. We use the Effective Number of Parties (ENP) and the
Effective Number of Candidates (ENC) following the usual political science literature (Laakso and Taagepera,
1979). Second, we look at the use of institutional mechanisms available for protesting by the voter. These
include the rates of abstention, blank and null votes. Third, we look at the distribution of votes among different
types of candidates and political parties. We observe the shares of the valid votes for candidates who are known
and candidates who are unknown by the electorate, such as the shares of the valid votes for the known and
unknown political parties. Lastly, we analyze the electoral performance of the Government and the Opposition
through the share of the valid votes for the presidential party, as well as the shares of the valid votes received
by its coalition and the Opposition coalitions.

The main results suggest that the dissatisfaction of the Brazilian population with the political system was
observed in the most different results of the 2014 elections. Some of these outcomes were the increased
number of candidates and parties with a chance of winning, the growth of aggregate blank and null votes, and
the decrease in the percentage of the votes for candidates and parties known by the electorate. The results are
also different according to the position in stake. Those of the Executive Branch found a greater relationship
with the demonstrations than those of the Legislative. In addition, the candidates afﬁliated with the incumbent
federal executive party faced greater voter discontent. Regardless of what angle we look at, the conjuncture
indicates discontent with the electoral scene and a clear tendency towards political renewal.

The present paper shows the impact of the 2013 demonstrations over the Brazilian political conﬁguration.

1Despite its heterogeneity for being present in many different societies around the globe, the new wave of unrest has character-
istics consistent with the globalized times. These peaceful demonstrations are organized by civil society, without an institution to
supervise or guide, and use social media to give internal cohesion to the movements and propagate their concerns internationally. The
protests of the new times not only follow a speciﬁc form but also call for a common demand: real democracy - a situation in which
people are allowed to participate in the decisions that affect their lives.

1

It is striking that with the exception of Rocha (2015), there are few studies on this important event. Although
there are seminal works that show the impact of the 21st century demonstrations in nations under undemocratic
regimes (Acemoglu et al., 2017; Kricheli et al., 2011; Campante and Chor, 2012), when it comes to countries
under democratic regimes there is a lack in the literature that measures how manifestations affect the change
of political conﬁguration (Mendonc¸a and Ercan, 2015; Machado et al., 2011; Aidt and Franck, 2015). Having
as support seminal works such as Passarelli and Tabellini (2017) that models the protest’s behavior and the
government response to the riots, and Madestam et al. (2013) that investigates whether protests cause political
change or they are merely symptoms of underlying shifts in policy preferences, this article aims to highlight
the inﬂuence that protests have on democratic regimes.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the Protest of June 2013. Section 3 elucidates
the electoral process of the 2010 and 2014 elections. Section 4 describes the data and Section 5 discuss our
empirical strategy. The results are presented in Section 6 and Section 7 concludes the paper.

2 The protests of June 2013 in Brazil
The 2013 protests that occurred in Brazil2 were a set of civil protests that began in response to an increase in
bus and metro fares. Beginning in the state capitals and spreading throughout the country’s inner, the protests
initially had the support of small activists groups for free public transportation and ended approved by 84% of
the Brazilian population3.

The demonstrations began as small acts for the reduction in public transportation fares and obtained great
popular adhesion after severe police repression during the middle of June. While the ﬁrst phase of the mani-
festations was dedicated especially to urban mobility affairs, the second was conducted by thousands of people
who were not engaged solely in combating the increase in bus and metro fares. New guidelines that bothered
Brazilian society were appearing on the streets.

While social media were widely used in both moments to organize the daily acts (Campante et al., 2017),
the ﬁrst phase had the largest presence of social movements organizing the events, such as the ”Movimento
Passe Livre” (Free Fare Movement) in S˜ao Paulo. Focusing on solving the increasing public transportation
fares, the initial phase had reduced popular participation, not all of its acts were broadcast by the media, and
constantly violent conﬂicts between demonstrators and police. On the other hand, the second phase had great
media support, massive popular participation, very low police repression, and politicians willing to solve the
protesters’ demands.

S˜ao Paulo was the city in which the June protests began. Having been readjusted on June 2 by the city hall
of S˜ao Paulo, bus, urban trains, and subways fares increased from R$ 3.00 to R$ 3.20, triggering a series of
protests that were growing along on June 6, 7, and 11. Clashes with the police resulted in the wounding of
demonstrators and police ofﬁcers. On June 13, the protests occurred again in S˜ao Paulo and spread to other
cities, such as Natal, Porto Alegre, Teresina, Rio de Janeiro, and Fortaleza. In S˜ao Paulo, the police response
was excessive, resulting in protesters and journalists injured, and more than 300 people detained.

Four days later, on June 17, the new phase begins after a brief pause. On Monday, approximately 300,000
people were protesting in the 12 Brazil’s largest cities according to the Military Police. Despite small police
reprisals and some outbreaks of vandalism4, the demonstrations were peaceful in general. Occurring daily
between the June 17 and 21 in several cities in Brazil, the motto for reducing the public transportation fare
began to lose focus for other demands. Due to the revocation of the increasing fares in cities like S˜ao Paulo and

2The protests are known as the Brazilian Spring, the 2013 Demonstrations, the 2013 Protests, or even the 20 cents Manifestations.
3Survey conducted by IBOPE on August 6, 2013. Source: https://noticias.r7.com/brasil/manifestacoes-agradam-a-84-dos-

brasileiros-diz-pesquisa-ibope-06082013 (accessed January 3, 2019).

4The outbreaks of vandalism were led by groups that became known as Black Blocs.

2

Rio de Janeiro5 on June 19, the demonstrations reach their peak the next day. On June 20, 1.4 million people
went to the streets in more than 100 Brazilian cities according to the Military Police6.

Turning now to issues less tied to public transportation, very diffuse and wide-ranging guidelines are emerg-
ing in the acts. There was a very explicit discontentment with the PEC 377, the ”Gay Cure”8, the public spend-
ings on the 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup, the 2014 FIFA World Cup, and the Rio 2016 Olympic Games.
However, the discontent with the ruling class and the entire political conﬁguration (Scherer-Warren, 2014) ap-
peared to be similar among the demonstrators. Within this common dissatisfaction were the calls to put an
end on corruption, the criticism on the quality of public services, the repudiation of the party ﬂags presence in
the protests, the generalization of politicians occupying elective ofﬁces and requests for their resignation9. In
addition, slogans in favor of the political system reform were widely spread10 (Singer, 2013).

From June 21 to the end of the month, the protests begin to fragment and weaken. After the Brazilian Spring
had ended, its only results left were the revocation of the increase in public transportation fares and promises
from the politicians to attend the other demands of the demonstrators. From political reform to eradicating
corruption and mismanagement of public services, everything else but the fares had become 2014 campaign
promise.

3 The Elections of 2010 and 2014

The elections in Brazil occur every two years on the ﬁrst Sunday of October. If there is a need of a second
round, it is held on the last Sunday of October. The federal elections and the state elections are carried out
together, and the voter chooses at the same time president, senator11, governor, federal deputies, and state
deputies. After two years, the municipal elections are held, electing mayor and city councils.

The Brazilian electoral system is divided into two categories depending on the positions available to the
election: proportional system or majority system. The use of the proportional system is restricted only to the
federal deputies, state deputies, and city councilors. The system works through an open list, in which voters
directly choose their candidates.

As determined by the Federal Constitution, the majority system shall be applied to elect senators, as well
as to all members of the Executive Branch (president, governor, and mayor12). For president, governors, and
mayors of municipalities with more than two hundred thousand voters, it is required that the candidate obtains
an absolute majority of the votes13 in order to be elected. If the candidate with the largest number of votes

5A total of 104 cities located in 17 states had an increase in public transportation fare canceled according to the news from G1.
Source: http://g1.globo.com/brasil/noticia/2013/07/veja-em-quais-cidades-houve-reducao-da-tarifa-do-transporte-em-2013.html (ac-
cessed January 3, 2019).

6Source: http://g1.globo.com/brasil/protestos-2013/infograﬁco/platb/ (accessed January 30, 2019).
7Proposed Constitutional Amendment (Proposta de Emenda Constitucional) 37/2011, or shortly PEC 37, was a Brazilian legisla-
tive project that sought to amend the Brazilian Constitution to include the criminal investigations as a private activity of the judicial
police. It became known as the ”PEC of Impunity” among its opponents.

8Known as the ”Gay Cure”, the draft Legislative Decree 234/2011 approved by the Human Rights Commission of the Cham-
ber of Deputies on June 18, 2013, supported the effects of the 1999 resolution of the Federal Council of Psychology prohibiting
psychologists from collaborating with services aimed at the treatment and cure of homosexuality.

9Similar to ”¡Que se vayan todos!” (Let everyone go!) seen in the Crises of December 2001 in Argentina.
10Due to the protest, Datafolha conducted a survey that pointed to a 27% fall in the Government’s positive assessment after the
third week of protests in June. Source: http://www1.folha.uol.com.br/poder/2013/06/1303541-popularidade-de-dilma-cai-27-pontos-
apos-protestos.shtml (accessed January 3, 2019).

11The only elective position with an eight-year term, while all others are four-year term elective positions.
12Source:http://www.tse.jus.br/o-tse/escola-judiciaria-eleitoral/publicacoes/revistas-da-eje/artigos/revista-eletronica-eje-n.-4-

ano-4/sistemas-eleitorais-brasileiros (accessed January 3, 2019).

13More than half of the votes cast, excluding the blank and the null votes.

3

does not obtain an absolute majority, a second round must be held between the two most voted candidates.
For senators and for mayors of municipalities whose electorate is equal to or less than two hundred thousand
voters14, the candidate who has reached the simple majority of the votes is elected15.

The voting process occurs through the use of the electronic voting machine, a microcomputer that records
voters’ votes without their identiﬁcation. And logistically, the elections are organized in electoral zones. They
are geographically deﬁned regions within a state, not necessarily corresponding to the limits of a municipality.
The electoral zones can be composed of more than one municipality, or of the municipalities’ parts.
It is
managed by an electoral registry, which centralizes and coordinates voters who have their homes in the locality,
and usually follows the division of Electoral Justice Counties16 17.

It is noteworthy that in the elections of 2010 and 2014 analyzed in this work, the only elective position that
had a number of vacancies available not equal from one election to another was the senator. The Senate renews
its House alternately: in 2010, the election of 2/3 of its seats opened new vacancies for 54 senators; and in
2014, only 1/3 of its seats was available for 27 new senators. All other positions had the same number of seats
in each election analyzed: 513 federal deputies, 27 governors, 1 president. The position of state deputy has
different amounts of vacancies according to the state, but they are always the same in each election.

In Brazil, electoral enlistment and voting are mandatory for voters over the age of 18, being optional for
illiterates, those over 70, and those over 16 and under the age of 1818. Although the voters are required to
be at the polling place or to justify their absence, they are free to choose their candidate or not to choose any
candidate by voting blank or null. The blank vote is the type of vote that the voters do not express a preference
for any of the candidates19. The null vote is the type of vote that the voters manifest their will to annul the
vote20 21.

If the voters do not justify their absence, they will have to pay a R$ 3.51 ﬁne for each round they did not vote
and did not present justiﬁcation, and it can be increased by up to 10 times if the electoral judge considers the
value ineffective by virtue of the economic situation of the offender. If the ﬁne is not paid, the voter is prevented
from applying for civil service examination, obtaining loans from government ﬁnancial institutions, receiving
remuneration from a public function or job, obtaining a passport or identity card, renewing enrollment in an
educational establishment or practice any act for which discharge of military service or Income Tax is required.
If the voter does not justify the absence in three consecutive elections, he or she will have the electoral title
canceled22.

14Source:http://www.tse.jus.br/o-tse/escola-judiciaria-eleitoral/publicacoes/revistas-da-eje/artigos/revista-eletronica-eje-n.-1-

ano-3/a-legitimidade-das-eleicoes-majoritarias-no-brasil (accessed January 3, 2019).

15Source: http://www.tre-sc.jus.br/site/eleicoes/eleicoes-majoritarias-e-proporcionais/index.html (accessed January 3, 2019).
16Source: http://www.tse.jus.br/eleitor/servicos/cartorios-e-zonas-eleitorais (accessed January 3, 2019).
17Source:http://www.tre-sc.jus.br/site/institucional/justica-eleitoral/divisao-administrativa/index.html (accessed January 3, 2019).
18Source:http://www.tse.jus.br/imprensa/noticias-tse/2018/Abril/eleicoes-2018-saiba-para-quem-o-voto-e-facultativo-e-

obrigatorio (accessed January 3, 2019).

19To carry out this type of vote, simply press the ”blank” key in the electronic voting machine and then the ”conﬁrm” key.
20To carry it out, they must enter a nonexistent candidate number and then press the ”conﬁrm” key.
21Source: http://www.tre-es.jus.br/imprensa/noticias-tre-es/2014/Outubro/voto-branco-x-voto-nulo-saiba-a-diferenca (accessed

22Source:https://noticias.bol.uol.com.br/ultimas-noticias/eleicoes/2018/10/03/eleicoes-2018-o-que-acontece-se-eu-nao-votar.htm

January 3, 2019).

(accessed January 3, 2019).

4

4 Data

We used data provided by 4 different sources. The electoral information comes from the Superior Electoral
Court (TSE, Tribunal Superior Eleitoral)23, which stores data about the electorate characteristics and the results
of the 2010 and 2014 elections per electoral zone. We also have data from the Brazilian Telecommunications
Agency (ANATEL, Agˆencia Nacional de Telecomunicac¸ ˜oes)24. This agency provides the followings telecom-
munications parameters per month: the number of accesses of the concessionaires of Fixed Telephony Service
(ﬁxed telephony) per municipality; the number of accesses in service of the providers of the Multimedia Com-
munication Service (ﬁxed broadband) per municipality; and the number of accesses in operation of the Personal
Mobile Service providers (mobile telephony and mobile broadband) per state.

To identify the municipalities that did or did not host protests, according to the criterion that will be ex-
plained in detail in Section 5, we used the information available on the news website G125. Being aware of the
failures to measure the number of demonstrators present in the protests, we will not take into account the size
of the demonstrations in our analysis.

Finally, the last source of data was the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE, Instituto
Brasileiro de Geograﬁa e Estat´ıstica), to obtain the information of the other controls used in our analysis:
the municipality’s GDP for the years in which the elections took place26, as well as the population in each
municipality27 28.

5 Empirical Framework

In order to identify whether the wishes expressed on the streets were displayed on the ballot box during the
upcoming elections, we conduct an empirical study of panel data using a diff-in-diff approach. We admit
the occurrence of a protest as an event that signals different electoral preferences in the city in which it was
displayed. Then, we compare the results of the 2010 elections (pre protests) with the results of the 2014 election
(post protests).

At ﬁrst, our identiﬁcation strategy begins understanding the behavior of demonstrations. Realizing that
voter dissatisfaction might be prior to the events of the protests, we understand that the protests analyzed
behaved as an endogenous event. The Brazilians were dissatisﬁed with the efﬁciency of the Government, the
high level of corruption, the poor quality of public services. The increasing public transportation fares and the
police violence against the ﬁrst demonstrators worked like a trigger encouraging the population to go to the
streets. As a consequence, the June 2013 Protest signaled the discontentment with the current rulers that would
be seen in the next elections of 2014.

We cannot say that the Brazilian spring caused new electoral patterns, but we veriﬁed that there is a corre-
lation between them. If protests occur in circumstances similar to those observed in Brazil, some consequences
can already be expected.

According to data from opinion polls conducted by the Datafolha Research Institute29, the assessment of
the Dilma Rousseff’s administration, the current president of Brazil during the period of the protests, underwent
signiﬁcant changes during the weeks in which the demonstrations took place.

23Source:http://www.tse.jus.br/eleitor-e-eleicoes/estatisticas/repositorio-de-dados-eleitorais-1/repositorio-de-dados-eleitorais

(accessed January 3, 2019).

24Source: http://www.anatel.gov.br/dados/ (accessed January 3, 2019).
25Source: http://g1.globo.com/brasil/protestos-2013/infograﬁco/platb/ (accessed January 3, 2019).
26Source: https://sidra.ibge.gov.br/pesquisa/pib-munic/tabelas (accessed January 3, 2019).
27Source: https://ww2.ibge.gov.br/home/estatistica/populacao/censo2010/default.shtm (accessed January 3, 2019).
28Source: https://ww2.ibge.gov.br/home/estatistica/populacao/estimativa2014/estimativa dou.shtm (accessed January 3, 2019).
29Source: http://media.folha.uol.com.br/datafolha/2014/12/08/avaliacao-dilma.pdf (accessed January 3, 2019).

5

Figure 1: Evolution of the evaluation of Dilma Rousseff’s administration (%)

Notes: Question: ”In your opinion is President Dilma making a great, good, regular, bad or terrible government?”. Graph built by the
authors based on Datafolha polls. The date representation is the all-numeric format DAY/MONTH/YEAR.

Figure 1 suggests that from the beginning of 2012 until the ﬁrst week of the demonstrations (6 and 7/6/13),
the evaluation of the Rousseff’s administration as Great/Good was stable, as well as Bad/Terrible. After the
weeks of demonstrations (27 and 28/6/13), the Government’s positive assessment fell by 27 percentage points,
while the negative assessment rose by 16 percentage points. After the protests, the positive assessment of the
Rousseff’s administration fell to an unprecedented level and remained there until the elections; as well as the
negative evaluation, which rose to a level never seen in the current management and remained there until the
2014 elections.

As a result, Figure 1 suggest that the population’s perception of her administration changed noticeably
during the weeks of demonstrations, and remained stable until the 2014 elections held in October. According
to the opinion polls, the Brazilian Spring was an event that would have inﬂuenced the perception of the people
about the quality of the current rulers.

Having available from the TSE Electoral Data Repository30 the results of the 2010 elections (pre protests)
and the 2014 election (post protests), and admitting the occurrence of a protest as an event that signals different
electoral preferences in the city in which it was displayed (Winters and Weitz-Shapiro, 2014), we will use the
electoral zones as the cross-sectional units needed for the work. They will be in the treatment group if the city
in which they are located hosted demonstrations on June 2013, and they will be in the control group otherwise.

30Source:http://www.tse.jus.br/eleitor-e-eleicoes/estatisticas/repositorio-de-dados-eleitorais-1/repositorio-de-dados-eleitorais

(accessed January 3, 2019).

6

Before we continue, an observation deserves to be made. Although the electoral zones are geographically
delimited within a state, they do not necessarily correspond to the boundaries of a municipality. However, the
data of the electoral zones provided by the TSE distinguishes them by each municipality in which they are
located. Thus, if more than one municipality is part of the same electoral zone, the Repository separates by
each municipality the electoral data from that zone.

To identify the municipalities that did or did not host protests, we use as a criterion that there must be at least
one news on the news website G131 reporting some protest on June 2013 in that city and an ofﬁcial institute32
estimating the number of demonstrators in that riot33. Also, being aware of the failures to measure the number
of demonstrators present in the protests, we will not take into account the size of the demonstrations in our
analysis. To represent the existence of protest in the electoral zone, we used a dummy variable to indicate if
there was a demonstration in the city where the zone is located.

In order to minimize the effects of other variables different than the protests on the changes in the Brazilian
political conﬁguration, a range of control variables with speciﬁc characteristics that could also contribute to the
electoral changes were made. Along with the demonstrations themselves, changes in the political scene may
have occurred because of changes in the social and economic characteristics of the municipalities in which
the electoral zones are located. Consequently, we used as controls: the real GDP of the municipality34 and
its population; the telecommunication indexes of the city and state35; and the characteristics of the voters
registered to vote in each zone36.

We will elucidate in detail the 13 dependent variables used in this paper. It is worthwhile to highlight that
our analysis is made according to the elective positions and electoral rounds available in the Brazilian elections.
All the indexes were calculated separately according to these two mentioned guidelines.

5.1 Dependent Variables
5.1.1 Effective Number of Parties (ENP) and Effective Number of Candidates (ENC)

In order to measure the level of electoral competitiveness in the two analyzed periods, assessing if more or
less political actors entered the game because of the 2013 demonstrations existence, we will use two indexes
created by Laakso and Taagepera (1979). Guided by one of the main demands of the protests, political renewal,
popular dissatisfaction may have caused a greater fragmentation of votes.

As a symbol of this possible greater electoral competitiveness, the ENP and the ENC behave as good
indexes to measure the effective number of parties and candidates with chances of being elected in the elections
analyzed. These are calculated as follows:

ENPit =

1
∑K
k=1 p2
kt

(1)

31Source: http://g1.globo.com/brasil/protestos-2013/infograﬁco/platb/ (accessed January 3, 2019).
32Such as the Military Police, Military Brigade, DATAFOLHA, COPPE-UFRJ.
33This strategy was used to provide a double check on the existence of protest per city.
34The year 2010 was used as the base year, and the data for 2014 were deﬂated to maintain the comparison of the
The GDP deﬂator is available in:

economic performance, given the possible changes in price levels during the period.
https://seriesestatisticas.ibge.gov.br/series.aspx?t=pibvcodigo=scn54 (accessed February 6, 2019).

35The annual mean of the number accesses of the concessionaires of Fixed Telephony Service (ﬁxed telephony) per municipality;
the annual mean of the number of accesses in service of the providers of the Multimedia Communication Service (ﬁxed broadband)
per municipality; and the annual mean of the number of accesses in operation of the Personal Mobile Service providers (telephony
and mobile broadband) per state.

36The number of voters who are eligible to vote in each electoral zone according to their sex, age, marital status, and schooling

level.

7

ENCit =

1
j=1 s2
jt

∑J

(2)

where pkt and s jt are respectively the share of the votes for each political party k and for each candidate j in
relation to the total nominal votes in the electoral zone i in the year t; and K and J are respectively the total
number of parties and candidates in the electoral zone i in the year t. In order to identify the votes for the
political party k, we sum all the votes received by the candidates afﬁliated with that institution in the analyzed
electoral zone i in the year t.

5.1.2 Rates of Abstention, Blank Votes and Null Votes

In addition to the level of competitiveness of each election by electoral zone, it is also valid to analyze the
actions of the voter at the time that voting can be translated as an act of protest or discontent. The options
established institutionally by the Brazilian electoral system to supply the will of those who do not want to vote
for a candidate are the abstention, the blank vote, and the null vote.

Both blank vote and null vote are not counted to elect a candidate. The principle of an absolute majority of
valid votes is enforced in the Brazilian system. Considering for the electoral calculations only as valid those
votes that are nominal or for the party (in case of elective positions to the Legislative Branch), the blank and
the null votes are not counted in the accounting of the electoral results37.

Despite having different theoretical objectives, in practice, the three mechanisms consist of electors’ choice
to exclude themselves from the political game. However, they can not be equated. While abstention promotes
post-voter consequences for not voting, the blank vote and the null vote do not bring legal problems to the
voter. It will not be surprising that the protests promote different responses to them.

For the rate of abstention in the electoral zone:

Ait =

ait
qit

(3)

where ait is the number of people who did not attend the electoral zone i in the year t, and qit is the total number
of people eligible to vote in the electoral zone i in the year t.

The rate of null votes is given by the equation:

(4)
where nit is the number of null votes in the electoral zone i in the year t, and qit −ait represents the total number
of people who came to the electoral zone i in the year t to vote.

qit − ait

Nit =

nit

For the rate of blank votes in the electoral zone:

Bit =

bit

qit − ait

where bit is the number of blank votes in the electoral zone i in the year t.

Also, we aggregate the blank and null votes.

BNit =

bit + nit
qit − ait

(5)

(6)

37Source: http://www.tre-es.jus.br/imprensa/noticias-tre-es/2014/Outubro/voto-branco-x-voto-nulo-saiba-a-diferenca (accessed

January 4, 2019).

8

where bit + nit is the number of blank and null votes in the electoral zone i in the year t.

5.1.3 The share of valid votes for the types of candidates and political parties.

In addition to the mechanisms provided institutionally by the Brazilian electoral system, citizens may protest
even when they vote for a particular candidate. According to the pattern of their choice, and taking into
consideration that the June demonstrations aimed their discontent at the political class already established in
the electoral scene, it would be natural to suppose that the electorate rejected the candidates already known by
them.

In this paper, the candidate who will be considered a known candidate will be that competitor that is running
in the 2010 elections and in the 2014 elections for the same elective position. Any candidate who does not ﬁt
into this category will be considered an unknown candidate. For a political party, given the elective position
under analysis, the known political party by the electorate will be the institution that has a candidate afﬁliated
with it running in the 2010 and 2014 elections. Any political party that does not ﬁt into this category will be
considered an unknown party for that elective position.

Knowing which candidates and political parties ﬁt the deﬁnition explained before, we count the share of
valid votes for each type before and after the protests. Hence, if the discontent shown in June with the actors
already known by the population was translated into the pattern of voting, there would be plausible to assume
that the share of the valid votes for the known candidates and for the known political parties would be reduced
from one election to another.

The shares cited so far in this topic are calculated as follows:

VoteSharehit =

∑Z
z=1 vzit

qit − ait − bit − nit

(7)

where vzit is the amount of votes received by the individual z (being a candidate j or party k, according to
the category h) in the electoral zone i in the year t ; qit − ait − bit − nit represents the total valid votes in the
electoral zone i in the year t for the elective position under consideration; and Z is the total of individuals z in
the electoral zone i in the year t according to the category h. The h index represents what kind of share we
want to measure. Ranging from 1 to 4, h indicates, respectively, the share of valid votes received by unknown
candidates, known candidates, unknown political parties, and known political parties. To identify the votes
for the party, we sum all the votes received by the candidates afﬁliated with that institution in the analyzed
electoral zone i in the year t. Last but not least, the electoral zones used for the calculation of the VoteSharehit
are the electoral zones that have at least one individual of each type of interest. That is, if we are interested in
the categories h = 1 or h = 2, we will include only the electoral zone i that has unknown and known candidates.
If we are interested in the categories h = 3 or h = 4, we will include only the electoral zone i that has unknown
and known parties.

5.1.4 The share of valid votes for candidates afﬁliated with PT, candidates from the PT presidential

coalition, and candidates from the Opposition coalitions.

As already elucidated before, it is a viable hypothesis to conjecture that the discontent of the protests towards
the political class has addressed the candidates or political parties present in the two elections. However, it
would not be absurd to assume also that voter dissatisfaction could address those candidates who were part of
the Government at the time that the demonstrations occurred.

Thus, it was also calculated, in the same way as expressed by Equation 7, the share of the valid votes for the
candidates belonging to the political party of the president in ofﬁce during the two elections analyzed. Since it
was the same institution in 2010 and 2014, the Workers’ Party (PT, Partido dos Trabalhadores), we investigated

9

the mass of the votes for the various candidates afﬁliated with this institution. We also did the same analysis
for the candidates afﬁliated with the political parties belonging to the electoral coalition that supported the PT
president candidate, as well as the same analysis for those candidates afﬁliated with the Opposition coalitions.
As those coalitions that supported or opposed PT are different in the 2010 elections and the 2014 elections,
we consider a candidate member of these coalitions according to the election that was being disputed. For ex-
ample, in 2010, the votes for the PT coalition will be those directed to the candidates afﬁliated with the political
parties belonging to the PT presidential coalition in the year 2010. In 2014, the votes for the PT coalition will
be those directed to the candidates afﬁliated with the political parties belonging to the PT presidential coalition
in the year 2014.

The shares cited so far in this topic are calculated as follows:

VoteShareInstitutionwit =

∑J

j=1 v jit

qit − ait − bit − nit

(8)

where v jit is the amount of the votes received by the candidate j in the electoral zone i in the year t according
to the category w; qit − ait − bit − nit represents the total valid votes in the electoral zone i in the year t for
the elective position under consideration; and J is the total of candidates j in the electoral zone i in the year t
according to the category w. The w index represents what kind of share we want to measure. Ranging from 1 to
3, w indicates, respectively, the share of the valid votes received by candidates afﬁliated with PT, the candidates
afﬁliated with the PT presidential coalition, and those afﬁliated with the Opposition coalitions. Last but not
least, the electoral zones used for the calculation of the VoteShareInstitutionwit are the electoral zones that have
at least one candidate of each type of interest. That is, if we are interested in the category w = 1, we will include
only the electoral zone i that has candidates from PT and other parties. If we are interested in the categories w
= 2 or w = 3, we will include only the electoral zone i that has the PT coalition’s and the Opposition coalitions’
candidates.

5.2 Econometric Model
Having explained the control variables and the dependent variables, we will look at the equations that will be
used to identify whether protests can be related to the results of the elections. We will base ourselves on the
model developed by Rocha (2015).

We estimated regressions of the dependent variables mentioned before at the electoral zone level and con-
trolled by the independent variables previously cited. As seen in Table 5, the electoral zones that hosted protests
are different from those that did not host. It can be observed that the electoral zones that hosted protests are
in more populous municipalities, with larger real GDP, more telecommunication accesses, as well as a greater
number of voters in all categories analyzed. Thus, it is probable that the characteristics in which they differ
affect the probability of having a protest in the municipality and the variable of interest that we analyze in this
paper. Also, because the protests occurred in municipalities quite distinct from those that did not host demon-
strations, we will try to reduce this problem by adding ﬁxed effects to the electoral zone in the estimations of
the panel data (this panel consists of 2 periods, the elections of 2010 and the elections of 2014).

Thus, we test whether protests are related to the results of an election by the following equation:

yit = γPostt + β Postt × Protesti + θPopit + ωGDPit +

D

∑

d=1

δdCdit + αi + εit

(9)

where yit is one of the dependent variables mentioned before for the electoral zone i in the election t; Postt
is the dummy for the elections; Protesti is the dummy that indicates if there was protest in the municipality
where the electoral zone i is located; Postt × Protesti is the variable of interest that indicates the relationship

10

between the Protests and the elections; Popit is the logarithm of the Population in year t of the municipality in
which the electoral zone i is located; GDPit is the logarithm of real GDP in the year t of the municipality in
which the electoral zone i is located; Cdit represents the control variable d within the D control variables for
the telecommunication accesses and the characteristics of the electorate, in the electoral zone i in the period t.
The term αi indicates the ﬁxed effect for the electoral zone i, and the term εit represents the error term.

In sum, Equation 9 will be estimated for the 7 types of elective positions and electoral rounds available
in the Brazilian elections (State Deputy, Federal Deputy, Senator, Governor 1st Round, Governor 2nd Round,
President 1st Round, President 2nd Round) according to the dependent variables mentioned before.

6 Results

The results will be introduced in the next tables. According to our criteria stabilized along this paper, we ﬁnd
that 344 cities hosted a demonstration on June 2013. They are distributed in all states and concentrated more
intensely in the South and Southeast Brazil. The cities that testiﬁed protests are represented in Figure 2.

Figure 2: Distribution of the 2013 Protest throughout the Brazilian territory

Notes: Given the criteria established in Section 5, the dark spots correspond to the municipalities that hosted a demonstration on June
2013. In total, these correspond to 344 of the 5,570 Brazilian municipalities, distributed in all states, and concentrated more intensely
in the South and Southeast Brazil.

An observation deserves to be made about one of the elective positions analyzed. As elucidated in Section 3,
the senator position was the only elective position that had a different number of vacancies available in each
election. It is not surprising that the inﬂuence of the demonstrations on the electoral results of this position is
badly identiﬁed. So, we ﬁnd more convenient not to detail the results for the senator position, and we decided
to not consider them in the observations to be made below.

11

6.1 The Electoral Competitiveness
The columns 1 and 2 in Table 1 contain the results of Equation 9 for the Effective Number of Candidates (ENC)
and the Effective Number of Parties (ENP).

Table 1: Electoral Inﬂuence of Protests - The Electoral Competitiveness

State Deputy

Federal Deputy

Governor (1st Round)

Governor (2nd Round)

President (1st Round)

President (2nd Round)

Dependent Variables
ENC
ENP
(2)
(1)

0.753***
(0.256)
0.856***
(0.184)
0.159***
(0.026)
-0.0105
(0.028)

0.230**
(0.093)
-0.193**
(0.085)
0.159***
(0.026)
-0.0105
(0.028)

0.0447***

0.0447***

(0.013)
0.0132*
(0.007)

(0.013)
0.0132*
(0.007)

Notes: The table above presents, in its main values, the disposition of the answers obtained from the estimation of the parameter β
- responsible for indicating the inﬂuence of the interacted term Postt × Protesti on Equation 9 - for two of the dependent variables
analyzed in this work. The responses collected were also separated according to the Elective Position. The columns represent the
following dependent variables: (1) ENC represents the Effective Number of Candidates existing in the electoral zone; (2) ENP
represents the Effective Number of Parties existing in the electoral zone. All observations belong to the electoral zones used as units
monitored in our panel data analysis. Standard errors are in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Excepting the 2nd Round for Governor and the ENP for Federal Deputy, the estimation of the parameter
β - responsible for indicating the inﬂuence of the interacted term Postt × Protesti in Equation 9 - presents a
positive relationship for the others possibilities of elective positions and electoral rounds. Providing an increase
in the number of candidates and parties with any chance of getting elected, the discontent on the streets in June
2013 was displayed on the upcoming election. Looking for new alternatives, whether in the candidate or in
the political party, the people who protested during the Brazilian Spring chose for a greater renewal of the
political conﬁguration. Shredding the votes in a greater number of players, the demonstrations provided the
2014 elections with a panorama of greater electoral competition than the 2010 elections.

6.2 The use of institutional mechanisms
Columns 3, 4, 5 and 6 in Table 2 indicate the results of Equation 9 for the rate of abstention, the rate of null
votes, the rate of blank votes, and the aggregate rate of blank and null votes.

Observing the ﬁrst institutional mechanism to demonstrate voter dissatisfaction at the time of the elections,
abstention rates were shown to be uncorrelated with the event of the protests. In none of the situations studied,
including the positions and rounds observed, protests and voter abstention appear to be related. However, as
noted in Section 3, this behavior is not surprising. Because it promotes post-voter consequences for not voting,

12

Table 2: Electoral Inﬂuence of Protests - The use of institutional mechanisms

Dependent Variables

Rate of

Abstention Null Votes Blank Votes

Blank and Null

Votes
(6)

State Deputy

Federal Deputy

Governor (1st Round)

Governor (2nd Round)

President (1st Round)

President (2nd Round)

(3)

-0.00175
(0.002)
-0.0011
(0.002)
-0.0011
(0.002)
-0.00213
(0.007)
-0.0011
(0.002)
-0.00213
(0.002)

(4)

(5)

0.00754***

0.00189***

0.00943***

(0.002)
-0.00230*
(0.001)

(0.001)

0.00365***

(0.001)

(0.002)
0.00135
(0.002)

0.00880***

-0.00188**

0.00692***

(0.002)
0.000374
(0.003)

(0.001)

0.00834***

(0.001)

0.00848***

0.000901**

(0.001)

(0.000)

(0.002)

0.00871**

(0.004)

0.00938***

(0.001)

0.00359***

-0.000439*

0.00315***

(0.001)

(0.000)

(0.001)

Notes: The table above presents, in its main values, the disposition of the answers obtained from the estimation of the parameter β
- responsible for indicating the inﬂuence of the interacted term Postt × Protesti on Equation 9 - for four of the dependent variables
analyzed in this work. The responses collected were also separated according to the Elective Position. The columns represent the
following dependent variables: (3) the rate of abstention in the electoral zone; (4) the rate of null votes in the electoral zone; (5) the
rate of blank votes in the electoral zone; (6) the aggregate rate of blank and null votes in the electoral zone. All observations belong
to the electoral zones used as units monitored in our panel data analysis. Standard errors are in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05,
*** p < 0.01.

citizens have fewer incentives to demonstrate their discontent with the political scene in this way. In order to
avoid the legal consequences linked to their non-attendance, the voter seeks to protest in a way other than his
or her absence.

For the other two mechanisms available, the blank vote and the null vote, there is a very diffuse behavior
between them according to the position or the round. Null votes are shown to be positively related in all
scenarios, with the exception of the position of Federal Deputy and the 2nd Round for Governors. For all other
cases, from State Deputies until the 2nd Round for President, the null votes were shown to be positively related
to the demonstrations. Standing out among Executive positions, we highlight the increase of 0.880 percentage
points38 in the 1st Round for Governors and 0.848 p.p. for the 1st Round for President.

The demonstrations are signiﬁcantly related to the blank votes in all positions and rounds. However, they
do not relate in a homogeneous way to all scenarios. For the Governor in the 1st Round (-0.188 p.p.) and the
2nd Round for President (-0.0439 p.p.) the protests are shown to be negatively related to the blank votes. The
demonstrations positively related to the blank votes when it comes to the State Deputy (0.189 p.p.), Federal
Deputy (0.365 p.p.), the 2nd Round for Governor (0.834 p.p.), and the 1st Round for President (0.0901 p.p.).

When we analyze the blank and the null votes in an aggregate form, it can be observed that the demonstra-
tions were positively related to all positions and rounds, with the only exception for Federal Deputy, which was

38From now on, the abbreviation ”p.p.” for the expression ”percentage points” will be used.

13

insigniﬁcant. In other words, the protests are related to the increase of those voting options that indicate voter
dissatisfaction with the political conﬁguration.

6.3 The distribution of votes among types of candidates and political parties
In addition to the mechanisms provided institutionally by the Brazilian electoral system, such as the possibility
of abstaining or voting blank or null, citizens could be protesting even when they voted for a particular candi-
date. According to the pattern of their choice, and taking into consideration that the June demonstrations aimed
their discontent at the political class already established in the electoral scene, it would be natural to suppose
that the candidates and parties that were known by the electorate received fewer valid votes39 in the post protest
elections.

We expected that the percentage of valid votes for candidates already known from the 2010 elections would
be reduced due to the Brazilian Spring and the percentage for candidates who were not part of that group would
be increased. Nevertheless, this did not happen clearly. What was perceived was that depending on the type of
Branch the position is attached, Legislative or Executive, the results were less or more signiﬁcant.

From columns 7, 8, 9 and 10 in Table 3, it is noticed that there is a timid relationship between the protests
and the votes for the positions of Deputies. For Federal Deputy, there is no relation between the demonstrations
and the votes for the different types of candidates present in the election, as well as for the known political
parties. For the State Deputies, the behavior is diffuse. While known candidates lost 1.87 p.p. of the votes, the
newcomers did not prove to be beneﬁted by such displacement. For the political parties, the unknown parties
lost 1.91 p.p., and the known ones won 1.68 p.p. One justiﬁcation for this is that there is the party’s vote for
City Council, State Deputies, and Federal Deputies in the Brazilian electoral system.

For those positions, the valid votes40, obtained by subtracting the blank and the null votes from the total
votes in the election, are composed of two categories: nominal votes and party’s votes. The ﬁrst is when the
voter votes by name, typing in the electronic voting machine the speciﬁc numbering of a candidate. The second
and the reason for all this explanation is when the voter opts for the political party number, entering only the
numbers that symbolize the party of his or her preference.

Due to the existence of the party’s vote, it is not surprising that for the positions of State Deputy and Federal
Deputy the percentage of valid votes for the known candidates has not been impacted in the same proportion41
than that of the unknown candidates. The same observations are made for the political parties. Since Equation 7
only captures the nominal votes, it is easy to understand the no complementarity between the opposing indexes
calculated in this section due to the possibility of the party’s votes been receiving these displaced votes.

The protests also do not seem to be important to the 2nd Round for Governor. Being insigniﬁcant to the
votes for the candidates and parties, the behavior in this situation appears to corroborate with what was seen in
The Electoral Competitiveness.

For the other situations, especially for the candidate disputing the 1st Round for Executive positions, there
is an important relationship between the demonstrations and the what was previously theorized. For the 1st
Round for Governors, the protests promoted a reduction of 4.75 p.p. of votes for those candidates already
known by the electorate, while for the President the votes fell 3.59 p.p. in the 1st Round and 1.91 p.p. in the
2nd Round.

The statistical results showed that the demonstrations played an important role in the redistribution of the
mass of votes, especially among the positions attached to the Executive Branch. Whether for the Governors or
the President, the protests are mainly related to those positions that the personiﬁcation of the political agent is

39Those votes that are used to elect a candidate.
40Source:http://www.tse.jus.br/o-tse/escola-judiciaria-eleitoral/publicacoes/revistas-da-eje/artigos/revista-eletronica-eje-n.-3-

ano-4/aumento-de-remuneracao-no-funcionalismo-publico-em-ano-eleitoral (accessed January 4, 2019).

41In absolute value, seen that the signs would have to be different.

14

Table 3: Electoral Inﬂuence of Protests - The distribution of votes among types of candidates and parties

Dependent Variables

Share of the Valid Votes for

Unknown
Candidates

Known

Candidates

Unknown

Parties

(7)

0.0163
(0.010)
0.00699
(0.009)

(8)

-0.0187*
(0.010)
-0.0112
(0.009)

0.0475***

-0.0475***

(0.011)
-0.0392
(0.080)

(0.011)
0.0392
(0.080)

(9)

-0.0191**
(0.008)
-0.0145*
(0.007)
0.0198
(0.015)
-0.0392
(0.080)

Known
Parties
(10)

0.0168**
(0.008)
0.0103
(0.007)
-0.0198
(0.015)
0.0392
(0.080)

0.0359***

-0.0359***

0.0269***

-0.0269***

(0.004)

(0.004)

(0.004)

(0.004)

0.0191***

-0.0191***

(0.004)

(0.004)

State Deputy

Federal Deputy

Governor (1st Round)

Governor (2nd Round)

President (1st Round)

President (2nd Round)

Notes: The table above presents, in its main values, the disposition of the answers obtained from the estimation of the parameter β
- responsible for indicating the inﬂuence of the interacted term Postt × Protesti on Equation 9 - for four of the dependent variables
analyzed in this work. The responses collected were also separated according to the Elective Position. The columns represent the
following dependent variables: (7) the share of the valid votes for the unknown candidates in the electoral zone; (8) the share of the
valid votes for the known candidates in the electoral zone; (9) the share of the valid votes for the unknown parties in the electoral
zone; (10) the share of valid votes for known parties in the electoral zone. All observations belong to the electoral zones used as units
monitored in our panel data analysis. For the President (2nd Round), the dependent variables (9) and (10) did not show a response in
the electoral zones observed because there were only known parties disputing the elections of 2010 and 2014. The standard errors
are in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

necessary. These are functions that demand a more individualistic character, so the Executive elective positions
suffered more intensely with the discontent of the streets. This frustration was directed at those who are most
easily remembered among politicians, especially for exercising their functions alone rather than with a peer
group.

6.4 The performance of the Government and the Opposition
While the behavior of the valid votes for the types of political parties and candidates showed to be more
sensitive according to the political Branch to which the position in stake was tied, the valid votes for the party
of the president in ofﬁce during the demonstrations seems to follow this trend.

In columns 11, 12 and 13 in Table 4, there are the responses of the protests to the share of the valid votes
for the presidential party, as well as those for its coalition and the Opposition coalitions. It is valid to point out
that in both 2010 and 2014 elections the winner of the presidential race, Dilma Rousseff, was afﬁliated with
PT42, which makes it easier for us to understand how the votes for the incumbent president’s party may have

42The same party of Lula da Silva, the president in ofﬁce before the 2010 elections.

15

changed due to the June demonstrations.

Table 4: Electoral Inﬂuence of Protests - The performance of the Government and the Opposition

Dependent Variables

Share of the Valid Votes for

PT

(11)

0.00398
(0.004)
-0.0035
(0.005)

PT

Coalition

(12)
0.0106
(0.012)
0.00572
(0.012)

Opposition
Coalitions

(13)

-0.0145
(0.012)
-0.00997
(0.012)

-0.0477***

0.0459***

-0.0459***

(0.008)

(0.017)
-0.0406
(0.030)

(0.017)
0.0406
(0.030)

-0.00874**

-0.00874**

0.00874**

(0.004)

(0.004)

(0.004)

-0.0191***

-0.0191***

0.0191***

(0.004)

(0.004)

(0.004)

State Deputy

Federal Deputy

Governor (1st Round)

Governor (2nd Round)

President (1st Round)

President (2nd Round)

Notes: The table above presents, in its main values, the disposition of the answers obtained from the estimation of the parameter β
- responsible for indicating the inﬂuence of the interacted term Postt × Protesti on Equation 9 - for three of the dependent variables
analyzed in this work. The responses collected were also separated according to the Elective Position. The columns represent the
following dependent variables: (11) the share of the valid votes for PT in the electoral zone; (12) the share of valid votes for the PT
coalition in the electoral zone; (13) the share of the valid votes for the Opposition coalitions in the electoral zone. All observations
belong to the electoral zones used as units monitored in our panel data analysis. For the Governor (2nd Round), the dependent variable
(11) did not respond in the zones observed because there was no candidate from PT running both elections of 2010 and 2014. The
standard errors are between parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

For all the positions of the Legislative Branch analyzed, the demonstrations proved to be insigniﬁcant to
the disposition of the votes for the presidential party, as well as for its coalition and the Oppositions’. However,
in what refers to the positions of the Executive Branch the demonstrations contributed signiﬁcantly to the
reduction of votes for PT. Whether for the president position, with a reduction of 0.874 p.p. in the ﬁrst round
and 1.91 p.p. in the second, or for the 1st Round for Governors, reducing 4.77 p.p., the demonstrations are
directly related to the electoral performance of the presidential party.

However, it is noted for the 1st Round for Governors that the responses to the candidates afﬁliated with the
parties belonging to the PT presidential coalition were positively related to the demonstrations. As strange as it
may sound, the 4.59 p.p. increase for the candidates in this group can be justiﬁed because the PT coalition had
a very ideologically diffused range, in addition to the presence of the largest Brazilian party, the Party of the
Brazilian Democratic Movement (PMDB, Partido do Movimento Democr´atico Brasileiro) (Lameira and Peres,
2015). Moreover, even though they are part of the same presidential coalition at the national level, the parties
of the same coalition may be adversaries when they dispute the position of governor in a state, which promotes
difﬁculties of interpretation of this index for the position analyzed.

In sum, it does not seem absurd to assume that voter dissatisfaction was also intense for those candidates
who were part of the Government at the time that the demonstrations occurred. In tune with the personalistic

16

character of executive positions, and the inextricable relationship between the presidential party, PT, and the
Brazilian State as a whole, the candidates for governors and president from that institution were prejudiced in
the 2014 elections according to the June demonstrations.

7 Conclusion

The wishes expressed on the streets during the Brazilian Spring were displayed on the ballot box during the
2014 elections. According to our analysis, there is in fact relative persistence of the concerns of the protest for
moments that go beyond the acts themselves. When it comes to societies that are under democratic regimes,
the typical demonstrations of the 21st century reﬂects the street discontent at the elections.

The dissatisfaction of the Brazilian population with the political system, the main feature in all phases of
the 2013 protests, was observed in the most different results of the 2014 elections. Some of these outcomes
were the increase in the number of candidates and parties with a chance of winning, the growth of aggregate
blank and null votes, and the decrease in the percentage of the votes for candidates and parties known by them.
Regardless of what angle we look at, the conjuncture indicates discontent with the electoral scene and a clear
tendency towards political renewal. The course of the renewal could not be restricted only to the novices in
the political game. The candidates afﬁliated with the incumbent federal executive party faced greater voter
discontent, while those who were part of the Opposition were beneﬁted from the voter’s sympathy.

Another aspect that also entered the game was the type of elective position in stake. Those of the Executive
Branch found a greater relationship with the demonstrations than those of the Legislative. Whether for their
personalistic character or for the greater importance that is given by the voter for being responsible for executing
public policies; governor and president position faced the concerns of the demonstrations at the elections more
intensively.

The main ﬁndings of this work shed light on the questions about the events of June 2013 in Brazil and its
correlation to national elections. This paper collaborates with the literature that try to understand the importance
of protests in modern societies.

17

References

Acemoglu, Daron , Tarek A Hassan, and Ahmed Tahoun (2017). The power of the street: Evidence from

egypt’s arab spring. The Review of Financial Studies 31(1), 1–42.

Aidt, Toke S and Rapha¨el Franck (2015). Democratization under the threat of revolution: Evidence from the

great reform act of 1832. Econometrica 83(2), 505–547.

Avritzer, Leonardo (2016). Impasses da democracia no Brasil. Editora Jos´e Olympio.
Campante, Filipe , Ruben Durante, and Francesco Sobbrio (2017). Politics 2.0: The multifaceted effect of
broadband internet on political participation. Journal of the European Economic Association 16(4), 1094–
1136.

Campante, Filipe R and Davin Chor (2012). Why was the arab world poised for revolution? schooling,

economic opportunities, and the arab spring. Journal of Economic Perspectives 26(2), 167–88.

Kricheli, Ruth , Yair Livne, and Beatriz Magaloni (2011). Taking to the streets: Theory and evidence on

protests under authoritarianism. In APSA 2010 Annual Meeting Paper, 1–45.

Laakso, Markku and Rein Taagepera (1979). “effective” number of parties: a measure with application to west

europe. Comparative political studies 12(1), 3–27.

Lameira, Rafael Fantinel and Paulo Peres (2015). O lugar do pmdb na pol´ıtica brasileira: o limite das tipologias
partid´arias. 1o Semin´ario Internacional de Ciˆencia Pol´ıtica: Estado e democracia em mudanc¸a no s´eculo
XXI. UFRGS, Porto Alegre. Retrieved January 6, 2019 from https://www.ufrgs.br/sicp/wp-content/uploads/
2015/09/Rafael-LameiraPauloPeres.pdf .

Machado, Fabiana , Carlos Scartascini, and Mariano Tommasi (2011). Political institutions and street protests

in latin america. Journal of Conﬂict Resolution 55(3), 340–365.

Madestam, Andreas , Daniel Shoag, Stan Veuger, and David Yanagizawa-Drott (2013). Do political protests

matter? evidence from the tea party movement. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(4), 1633–1685.

Mendonc¸a, Ricardo Fabrino and Selen A Ercan (2015). Deliberation and protest: strange bedfellows? revealing

the deliberative potential of 2013 protests in turkey and brazil. Policy Studies 36(3), 267–282.

Ortiz, Isabel , Sara Burke, Mohamed Berrada, and Hern´an Cort´es (2014). World protests 2006-2013, ipd.
Technical report, FES Working Paper, 2013. Retrieved January 6, 2019 from http://policydialogue.org/ﬁles/
publications/papers/World Protests 2006-2013-Complete and Final 4282014.pdf.

Passarelli, Francesco and Guido Tabellini (2017). Emotions and political unrest. Journal of Political Econ-

omy 125(3), 903–946.

Rocha, Amanda (2015). Do politicians respond to political protest? effects of the 2013 protests in brazil.
Master’s thesis, Pontif´ıcia Universidade Cat´olica do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Retrieved January
6, 2019 from http://www.dbd.puc-rio.br/pergamum/tesesabertas/1313018 2015 completo.pdf.

Scherer-Warren, Ilse (2014). Manifestac¸ ˜oes de rua no brasil 2013: encontros e desencontros na pol´ıtica.

Caderno CRH 27(71).

Singer, Andr´e (2013). Brasil, junho de 2013, classes e ideologias cruzadas. Novos estudos-CEBRAP (97),

23–40.

Winters, Matthew S and Rebecca Weitz-Shapiro (2014). Partisan protesters and nonpartisan protests in brazil.

Journal of Politics in Latin America 6(1), 137–150.

18

Table 5: Summary Statistics for the Electoral Zones in 2010

Social and Economic Characteristics
Population
Real GDP (R$)
Fixed Telephony Accesses
Fixed Broadband Accesses
Mobile Telephony and
Broadband Accesses

Electoral Characteristics
Single
Married
Widowed
Judicially Separated
Divorced
16 year old
17 year old
From 18 to 20 years old
From 21 to 24 years old
From 25 to 34 years old
From 35 to 44 years old
From 45 to 59 years old
From 60 to 69 years old
From 70 to 79 years old
Over the age of 79
Illiterate
Read and Write
Incomplete Elementary Education
Complete Elementary Education
Incomplete High School
Complete High School
Incomplete Higher Education
Complete Higher Education
Male
Female

Electoral Zones that
did not host protests
sd

mean

N

Electoral Zones that

did host protests

N

mean

sd

5300
26563.88
5300
445477.8
5300
3358.277
5300 1065.658
1.31x107

5300

68036.44
2347323
14917.43
6124.539
1.34x107

905
905
905
905

905

1920185
6.52x107
603691.7
316900.2
1.90x107

3087164
1.19x108
1122135
627783.4
1.56x107

9052.387
5300
4241.623
5300
185.81
5300
5300
114.9466
5300 116.8666
123.974
5300
5300
187.48
5300 964.4738
5300 1428.379
5300 3315.662
5300 2660.869
5300 2963.921
5300 1146.925
5300 642.2992
5300
302.8362
5300 1187.967
2714.923
5300
4867.137
5300
5300
856.6408
2309.843
5300
1307.567
5300
5300
201.4064
5300
273.2358
5300 6759.313
5300
6963.944

11475.27
5239.216
275.1157
222.5096
222.5818
121.4286
202.528
1160.589
1796.586
4341.211
3491.672
3805.178
1327.967
711.9162
385.4286
1434.117
3018.783
5993.574
1441.674
3594.869
2546.376
466.266
640.8772
8110.533
8900.545

44156.19
905
21572.12
905
1182.96
905
982.1978
905
1004.052
905
265.3492
905
543.3635
905
4094.212
905
6492.776
905
16669.96
905
13852.1
905
16478.92
905
5808.461
905
3114.79
905
1703.943
905
1863.014
905
905
5885.786
905 20997.15
905 6347.419
905 14821.59
905 12047.28
905 2931.643
905 4067.929
32272.91
905
905
36666.77

25964.24
12170.7
716.0952
762.1303
728.1115
204.8648
395.7828
2571.153
4130.152

10216

8098.318
9305.442
3354.041
1969.391
1409.86
1633.154
4266.09
12381.09
3842.691
9028.997
8198.314
3140.119
5765.064
17941.18
20875.77

Notes: The unit of analysis is the electoral zone. N, mean and sd represent, respectively, the total of each type of electoral zone
analyzed, the mean, and the standard deviation of each control variable by the type of electoral zone analyzed. Data on electoral
zones in 2010 were taken from the databases provided by IBGE, ANATEL, TSE, and G1 (the bases were speciﬁed in Section 4).

19

