Área 4 – Macroeconomia, Economia Monetária e Finanças 

2016 

 

An IS-LM Model for a Closed Economy in a Stock-Flow Consistent Framework 

 

 

José Luis Oreiro* 
Júlio Fernando Costa Santos** 
Lia Lorena Braga*** 
Thales Ayres Barbedo Martins****  
 
Resumo:  O  objetivo  do  presente  artigo  é  o  de  construir  uma  versão  Stock-Flow 
Consistent (SFC) do modelo IS-LM para uma economia fechada com oferta de moeda 
endógena, a fim de analisar as propriedades dinâmicas do modelo. Mostramos que uma 
vez  que  o  efeito  da  capacidade  de  investimento  é  levada  em  conta,  o  equilíbrio  do 
modelo já não é caracterizado por um nível estacionário do produto real; mas por uma 
taxa de crescimento  constante do produto real.  O nível de atividade é representado no 
modelo  pela  utilização  de  capacidade  produtiva,  que  é  constante  e  inferior  a  um  ao 
longo  da  trajetória  de  equilíbrio.  Isso  significa  que  a  versão  SFC  do  modelo  IS-LM 
reproduz o resultado tradicional keynesiano de equilíbrio com subemprego. Além disso, 
no  estado  estacionário,  a  renda  disponível,  o  estoque  de  capital  e  a  riqueza  privada 
crescem a uma mesma taxa constante, o que  ao fim significa que existe uma trajetória 
de  crescimento  equilibrado  para  o  modelo  em  questão.  Também  é  mostrado  que  ao 
longo  do  da  trajetória  do  crescimento  equilibrado,  a  economia  é  dinamicamente 
eficiente  e  as  empresas  têm  uma  postura  financeira  de  hedge,  descartando  a 
possibilidade de instabilidade financeira, no sentido de Minsky. Em relação à dinâmica 
comparativa  do  modelo,  foram  realizadas  algumas  simulações  numéricas  sobre  os 
efeitos  dinâmicos  de  choques  sobre  a  trajetória  temporal  de  variáveis  endógenas.  O 
encontrado foi alguns resultados tradicionais de teoria keynesiana como o "paradoxo da 
poupança" e um regime wage-led de acumulação na abordagem SFC proposta. 
Palavras-chave:  Crescimento  Pós-Keynesiano,  Modelos  Stock-Flow  Consistency, 
Modelos de Simulação. 

 
Abstract:    The  objective  of  the  present  article  is  to  build  a  Stock-Flow  Consistent 
version  of  the  IS-LM  model  for  a  closed  economy  with  endogenous  money  supply  in 
order to analyze the dynamic properties of the model.  We show that once the capacity 
effect  of  investment  is  taken  into  account,  the  equilibrium  of  the  model  is  no  longer 
characterized by a stationary level of real output; but by a constant growth rate of real 
output.  The  level  of  activity  is  represented  in  the  model  by  the  variable  capacity 
utilization, which is constant and lower than one over the equilibrium path. This means 

                                                           
 The authors acknowledged the useful comments made by Genaro Zezza. Usual disclaimer applies.  
*  Associate  Professor  of  Economics  at  Universidade  Federal  do  Rio  de  Janeiro  (UFRJ)  and  Level  IB 
Researcher at CNPq. E-mail: jose.oreiro@ie.ufrj.br.  
** PhD Student in Economics at Universidade Federal de Uberlândia (UFU). E-mail: arnldin@gmail.com.  
***  Undergraduate  student  at  Instituto  de  Economia,  Universidade  Federal  do  Rio  de  Janeiro,  and 
Researcher at PIBIC. E-mail: liabraga94@gmail.com.  
****  Undergraduate  student  at  Instituto  de  Economia,  Universidade  Federal  do  Rio  de  Janeiro,  and 
Researcher at PIBIC. E-mail: thalesmartins33@gmail.com.  

that the SFC version of the IS-LM model reproduces the traditional Keynesian result of 
underemployment  equilibrium.  Moreover,  in  steady-state  disposable  income,  capital 
stock  and  private  wealth  all  grow  at  a  same  constant  rate,  meaning  that  a  balanced 
growth path exists for the model at  hand.  It  is  also shown that along balanced  growth 
path,  the  economy  is  dynamically  efficient  and  firms  had  a  hedge  financial  posture, 
ruling  out  financial  instability  in  the  sense  of  Minsky.  Regarding  the  comparative 
dynamics  of  the  model,  we  had  performed  some  numerical  simulations  about  the 
dynamic effects of shocks over the time path of endogenous variables. We showed that 
some traditional results of Keynesian Theory as the “paradox of thrift” and  a wage-led 
regime of accumulation still hold in a SFC framework.   
Keywords: Post-Keynesian Growth, Stock-Flow Consistency, Simulation Models. 

JEL Code: E12, E37, P10. 

 

1.  Introduction 

 

 

Since 

the  seminal  paper  “Mr.  Keynes  and 

the  Classics:  a  suggested 
interpretation”  written  by  John  Hicks  in  1937,  IS-LM  model  has  become  the  main 
theoretical framework for the exposition and spreading of Keynesian ideas all over the 
world.  Despite  the  strong  criticism  of  some  Post-Keynesian  economists  as  Luigi 
Pasinetti,  who  claimed  that  IS-LM  model  deformed  the  central  message  of  Keynes´s 
General Theory, neutralizing its revolutionary spirit (Pasinetti and Mariutti, 2008, p.59); 
the IS-LM model has been perceived ever since as a true piece of Keynesian economics.  
 One of the major weaknesses of the IS-LM apparatus is the clear inconsistency 
between  flows  and  stocks.  Indeed,  not  only  the  capacity  effect  of  investment  is  not 
taken into account, but also the effect of private and government savings over the stock 
of public bonds is completely neglected. In words of Godley and Lavoie (2007) the IS-
LM model has a huge “black hole” inside it, since nothing is said about  what families 
do with their savings or how government finance the excess of public expenditures over 
taxes. Some important flows of income (as savings) or expenditure (as investment) have 
no consequence over the magnitude of the existing stocks. They simply disappear from 
the model, as if they had fallen in a “black hole”. 

As  stressed  by  Tobin  (1982),  the  first  inconsistency  in  IS/LM  model  is  the 
solution,  since  it  “cannot  generally  be  a  stationary  equilibrium.  The  values  that  the 
solution  gives  to  the  flow  of  variables  in  the  model  usually  imply  that  stocks  are 
increasing or decreasing. Thus net investment may be positive, so that the capital stock 
is increasing. Savings may be positive, so that household net worth is increasing. Yes, 
the government deficit may be positive, so that public debt, in some form monetary or 
non-monetary,  is  increasing.  These  stocks  changes  matter  because  the  stocks  are,  or 
should be, arguments in the functions determining the flows: for example, capital in the 
investment and production functions, wealth in the saving function. As a result of these 
internal  dynamics,  the  IS/LM  is  generally  changing  as  time  passes,  even  though  no 
exogenous  shocks  are  occurring.  The  only  stationary  solutions,  if  any  exist,  are  those 
which imply stationary stocks – or balanced growth equivalent, stocks all growing at a 
common proportional rate” (Ibid, pp. 74-75).   

Even  if  we  consider  the  IS/LM  model  a  slice  in  a  continuous-time  dynamic 
model and then the model has a new solution to each microsecond, we still need to ask 
how  momentary  solution  be  different  if,  for  a  given  values  of  stocks  and  other  state 
variables,  government  expenditure  or  taxes  or  transfer  payments  are  different.  The 
stocks  could  no  change  by  finite  amounts  during  an  infinitesimally  small  interval  of 
time. As for monetary policy, it is possible to ask how the momentary solution will be 
different  if  the  central  bank,  by  finite  open  market  transactions  with  the  public  which 
take  zero  time,  alters  the  historically  determined  supplies  of  its  monetary  and  non-
monetary liabilities. The central  bank is  not  free  to  engineer instantaneously, via open 
market  operations,  any  finite  change  it  desires  in  the  state  variables  representing 
outstanding stocks of its liabilities. Thus, as professor Tobin said, some writers prefer to 
imagine  variation  of  monetary  stock  by  sudden  helicopter  drop  a  newly  minted 
currency, rather than by central bank transactions in the market.  

The  theoretical  problem  posed  by  this  inconsistency  is  that  the  results  of 
comparative  statics  of  the  IS-LM  model  –  for  instance,  the  partial  derivatives  of 
equilibrium  level  of  output  and  interest  rates  relative  to  changes  in  government 
expenditures and money supply – could be completely different if the relation between 
flows and stocks are taken into account. This is a very weak basis for Keynesian ideas.   
The objective of this article is precisely to correct this deficiency of the IS-LM 
apparatus. We will build a Stock-and-Flow Consistent version of the IS-LM model for a 
closed  economy  with  endogenous  money  supply  in  order  to  analyze  the  dynamic 
properties  of  the  model.  Although  the  traditional  specification  of  IS-LM  model 
considers  a  constant  stock  of  money  supply,  recent  developments  in  both  theory  and 
practice  of  monetary  policy  emphasizes  the  role  of  short-term  nominal  interest  rate  as 
the basic policy instrument at the hands of monetary authority. This means that nominal 
interest  rate,  instead  of  money  supply,  must  be  taken  as  a  policy  parameter  in  the 
structure of the IS-LM model, as it is done in Romer (2000).  

Redefining the standard macroeconomic models in terms of a SFC framework is 
a not novel task. Indeed, Godley and Shaik (2012) had already shown that the Classical 
Macroeconomic  Model  had  an  important  inconsistency  at  the  heart  of  its  logical 
structure.  As  is  well-known  the  classical  model  “exhibits  a  block  recursive  structure 
beginning from the equilibrium in the labor market and moving to real output demand 
and its components, including the real demand for money, and ending finally in nominal 
wages  and  prices”  (Ibid,  p.66).  This  structure  assure  that  “doubling  the  money  supply 
must  double  prices  so  as  to  keep  the  real  money  supply  equal  do  an  unchanged  real 
money demand” (Ibid, p.66), so that classical dichotomy holds. The problem is that this 
result  follows  from  the  assumption  that  all  real  net  income  of  business  sector  is 
somehow  distributed  to  households.  Since  the  only  instrument  available  for  firms  to 
distribute profits to households is interest payments on the bonds they have issued, then 
household income has to be redefined as wage and interest income, instead of wage and 
profits  income.  Once  household  income  is  correctly  specified,  the  classical  dichotomy 
disappears,  because  a  “change  in  the  price  level  (due,  say,  to  a  change  in  the  money 
supply) changes the real value of the bonds outstanding, and hence changes the level of 
real interest flows. Since real interest flows enter into the household income, this affects 
real  consumption  demand,  real  investment  demand  (…)  and  the  interest  rate”  (Ibid, 
p.67). This means that “real variables such as consumption, investment, the interest rate 
and  the  real  money  demand  became  intrinsically  linked  to  nominal  variables  such  as 
price level and the money supply” (Ibid, p.77).  

The novelty to be presented in this paper is to combine the theoretical structure 
of the standard IS-LM model – that is the equilibrium conditions for goods, money and 

bond markets – with an exogenous interest rate-endogenous money supply approach as 
the one developed by Romer (2000) in a SFC framework. This differs from Godley and 
Shaikh  (2002)  in  two  important  aspects.  First  of  all,  the  level  of  output  is  demand-
determined in  the model to  be presented in  the following sections. Second, the money 
supply  is  now  an  endogenous  variable,  not  being  subject  to  the  control  of  monetary 
authorities.  

Regarding  the  specification  of  behavior  equations  of  the  model,  our  approach 
rests on the work of Lavoie and Godley (2012) for investment demand. More precisely, 
investment  demand is  defined in  terms  of a desired rate of capital  accumulation, as in 
Kaleckian models of  growth such as the ones as  developed by Rowthorn  (1981), Dutt 
(1990) and Lavoie (1995). This specification for investment function allows that, once 
the capacity effect of investment is taken into account, the equilibrium of the model is 
no  longer  characterized  by  a  stationary  level  of  real  output;  but  by  a  constant  growth 
rate  of  real  output.  The  level  of  activity  is  represented  in  the  model  by  the  variable 
capacity  utilization,  which  is  constant  and  lower  than  one  over  the  equilibrium  path. 
This  means  that  the  SFC  version  of  the  IS-LM  model  reproduces  the  traditional 
Keynesian result of underemployment equilibrium. Moreover, in steady-state disposable 
income, capital stock and private wealth all grow at a same constant rate, so a balanced 
growth path exists. We also show that distribution of wealth between money and bonds 
is  also  constant  in  steady-state  growth.  Finally,  it  is  also  shown  that  along  balanced 
growth  path,  the  economy  is  dynamically  efficient  and  firms  had  a  hedge  financial 
posture. This means that financial fragility in the sense of Minsky (1986) is ruled out of 
the model.   

Turning  to  the  comparative  dynamics  of  the  model,  we  had  performed  some 
numerical  simulations  about  the  dynamic  effects  of  shocks  over  the  time  path  of 
endogenous  variables.  We  have  tested  changes  in  the  autonomous  rate  of  capital 
accumulation,  the  propensity  to  consume  out  of  disposable  income,  the  coefficient  of 
profit  distribution,  the  tax  rate,  the  nominal  interest  rate  and  the  wage  share.  One 
important but expected result is that the qualitative effects of changes in the parameters 
of  investment  and  consumption  functions  are  very  similar.  Indeed,  an  increase  in  the 
propensity  to  consume  out  of  disposable  income  generated  an  increase  in  the  level  of 
capacity  utilization  and  an  increase  in  the  growth  rate  of  capital  stock  and  private 
wealth;  an  increase  in  the  autonomous  rate  of  capital  accumulation  generated  just  the 
same qualitative effects.  

Another interesting result is about the old “paradox of thrift”. An increase in the 
marginal  propensity  to  consume  (a  reduction  in  the  marginal  propensity  to  save) 
resulted  in  an  increase  in  the  level  of  capacity  utilization,  and  also  an  increase  in  the 
growth rate of capital stock and private wealth1.  

Regarding  the  effects  of  changes  in  fiscal  policy  over  the  dynamic  behavior  of 
the economy, the model showed that an increase in the tax rate – in a possible attempt 
of the government to reduce fiscal deficit and the ratio of public debt to GDP – has also 
no effect over the time path of the public debt to GDP ratio. This can be due to the fact 
that being growth rate of disposable income higher than interest rate along the balanced 
growth path then even if government runs a primary deficit than the ratio of public debt 
to GDP will be decreasing over time, making “fiscal adjustment” unnecessary.  

                                                           
1 This result replicates the “paradox of thrift” in the growth and distribution model of Joan Robinson. See 
Harcourt (2006, p. 29).  

Finally,  the  model  showed  a  clear  wage-led  regime  of  accumulation2,  since  an 
increase in the wage share resulted in an increase in the growth rate of both capital stock 
and private wealth and also an increase in the level of capacity utilization.  

The  article  is  organized  in  six  sections,  including  the  present  introduction.  In 
section two we presented the accounting structure and the theoretical assumptions of the 
SFC version of IS-LM model.  In section three we will present the behavior equations 
of  the  model,  that  is,  its  formal  theoretical  structure.  Section  four  is  dedicated  to  the 
calibration  of  the  model  and  the  performing  of  the  basic  numerical  simulation.  In 
section  five  we  perform  the  comparative  dynamic  exercises,  evaluating  the  effects  of 
exogenous shocks in some behavior and policy parameters over the dynamic path of the 
endogenous variables. In section six, we do some final remarks.  

 
2.  Accounting Structure and Theoretical Assumptions 
 
We will consider a closed economy (there is no import and export of goods and 
services  and  no  capital  flows)  with  four  sectors:  Households,  Firms,  Government  and 
Central Bank. The balance sheet of these sectors is summarized in table 1 below. 

 

Table 1: Balance Sheet of Model IS-LM 

 

Note: Positive variables are assets, while negative ones are liabilities. 

 
Looking at balance sheet, you should notice that the only asset owned by Firms 
is  the  fixed  capital  (tangible  goods).  Thus  all  their  funds  are  used  to  finance  the 
purchase  of  new  fixed  capital  equipment.  We  don’t  consider  commercial  banks  in  the 
composition of monetary system. However, we consider the issuance of corporate notes. 
We  will  suppose  that  corporate  notes  are  perfect  substitutes  of  government  bills.  The 
basic idea was to  follow the original  structure  of  IS-LM model  and  deal  with  just one 
interest  rate  for  different  assets.  All  funds  used  to  finance  firms  come  from  retained 
profits  plus  the  new  corporate  bonds  issued.  Households  accumulate  financial  wealth, 
which can be allocated in the form of money or buying bills issued by the government 
or corporate notes issued by firms. The Central Bank is considered as an institution in 
its  own  right.  The  central  bank  purchases  bills  from  government  and  also  corporate 
notes from firms, thereby adding to its stock of assets. On its liability side, the central 
bank  provides  money  to  households.  This  money  can  take  the  form  of  either  cash  or 
deposits  at  the  central  bank.  It  is  assumed  that  central  bank  has  zero  net  worth.    The 

                                                           
2 This is not a surprising result since we are supposing the existence of a strong accelerator effect in the 
investment  function.  If  investment  spending  was  sensitive  to  changes  in  the  profit  share,  as  in  Bhaduri 
and Marglin (1990), then this result could be reversed to a profit-led regime.  

HouseholdsFirmsGovernmentCentral Bank∑Fixed CapitalMoneyBills / Corporate NotesBalance (net worth)∑00000                                    value of bills insured by government is the public debt. As usual all rows and columns 
must sum zero. The exception is the fixed capital row.    

Table  2  shows  the  transactions-flow  matrix  of  our  model.  Once  again,  all 
columns  and  all  rows  must  sum  zero  to  ensure  that  all  transactions  are  taken  into 
account. Thus we avoid black holes in the system. The government pays interest arising 
from  government  debt  both  to  households  and  central  bank.  Interest  payments  each 
period  are  generated  by  stocks  of  assets  in  existence  at  the  end  of  previous  period. 
Because  of  this  time  lag,  the  rate  of  interest  on  bills  relevant  in  period  t  is  the  rate  of 
interest that was set at the end of previous period, at time    . 

 

Table 2: Transactions-flow matrix of Model IS-LM 

 

Note: Positive figures denote sources of funds, while negative ones denote uses of fund. 

 
The  government  savings  is  the  difference  between  government  revenues  and 
expenditures. The increasing of public debt is financed by issuing of new bills.  In the 
opposite way, the fiscal surplus should be used to decrease public debt. By the way, the 
column sum of government must be zero. 

We have set the central bank’s net worth in zero, which implies that any profit it 
makes is always distributed to government. Here, the central bank certainly does make 
profits since it owns bills which yield interest payments, whereas its liabilities (money) 
pay no interest.  

The household income is given by wages payments by firms, interest payments 
from  government  bills  and  corporate  notes  and  profits  distributed  by  firms.  With  all 
these  revenues,  households  pay  taxes,  purchases  goods  and  services  from  firms  and 
buys government bills and corporate notes. 

Goods sales are the only source of revenues to firms. Households buy a quantity 
   and  government  buy  a  quantity     of  goods  and  services.  The  current  account 
represents  the  income  flows  within  the  sector,  while  the  capital  account  represents 
sources  to  finance  firms.  For  the  model  be  consistent,  the  column  sum  must  be  zero. 
The  entire  resource  flows  entering  should  be  spent.  The  firms  spend  their  resources 
paying wages to households. The difference between all flows constitutes the profit. It is 
assumed that  a share  of profits is  retained to  finance new investments,  while the other 
part is distributed to the households.   

 

CurrentCapitalCurrentCapitalConsumption0Government Expenditures0Investment0Wages0Taxes0Interest Payments0Central Bank Profits0Firms Profits0Change in Money0Change in Bills / Corp. Notes0∑0000000FirmsGovernment∑HouseholdsCentral Bank                                                                                                                          3.  Model Behavioral Structure 

Social  account  matrix  is  no  able  for  forecast,  by  itself,  the  path  taken  by  the 
economy. For this purpose, this section will present the behavior equations that explain 
decision  making  by  economic  agents.  The  behavior  of  firms,  households,  government 
and  central  bank  will  be  displayed.  Decision  making  is  thus  represented  by  aggregate 
behavior  equations  (like  the  consumption  and  investment  function)  instead  of  Euller 
equations  coming  from  some  problem  of  utility  maximization.  This  means  that 
rationality in the model to be presented rationality is better represented by the concept 
of procedural rationality in the sense of Simon (1982)3. It is also shown the calculation 
of  short-term  output  and  portfolio  decisions.  Following  the  logic  of  a  CFS  model,  the 
model follows the proposal not present black holes. Everything that comes from a place 
is going somewhere else. 

3.1. Firms 

Equation (1) defines the level of investment in the current period. The firm must 

choose the desired level  of  investment,  defining  a rate of  growth  for the  capital  stock.   
The desired rate of capital accumulation rate is given by (2), where    is the parameter 
that represents the animal spirits of entrepreneurs,    represent the sensitivity of capital 
accumulation to the level of capacity utilization and the last term     is the sensitivity of 
capital  accumulation in  relation  to  changes in interest  rate. This  is  a typical  Kaleckian 
specification for investment function, and it is based on Lavoie and Godley (2012). The 
actual  and  full  capacity  utilization  level  of  output  is  given  by  equations  (3)  and  (4). 
Equation (5) shows that retained profits are equal to (1-d) times total profits, where d is 
the  coefficient  of  profit  distribution.  If  retained  profits  are  not  enough  to  finance  the 
desired  level  of  investment,  than  firms  will  issue  corporate  notes  in  order  to  get  the 
necessary funds in capital markets. Furthermore, we will suppose that there is no limit 
for  the  level  of  indebtedness  of  firms,  which  implies  that  firms  are  always  capable  to 
secure  the  required  amount  of  funds  to  finance  the  desired  level  of  investment.  This 
means that there is no financial constraint to investment.   

                    
 
                            
   
 

 

 

 

     

 

 

 

 

  
   
 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

     (     )      (     )  (                  ) 

                             

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

(1) 
(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

                                                           
3 For a discussion of alternative concepts of rationality see Silvia Possas (1995).  

3.2.Households 

The households receive income form three sources. First, as stated on equations 
(5)  and  (7),  all  residual  profits  (difference  between  retained  profit  and  full  profit)  are 
distributed to households. Second, as a payment for labor services, they receive wages, 
as  can  be  noticed  in  equation  (10),  (10a)  and  (11).  The  last  source  is  the  interest 
received  for  holding  government  bills  and  corporate  notes.  This  still  could  be  noticed 
looking at equation (10) and (10a). Households pay taxes    over total income. For the 
sake  of  simplicity,  we  will  assume  that  government  sets  a  tax  rate  of     over  gross 
income,  independent  of  the  source.  This  means  that  disposable  income      is  equal  to 
(     ) .  Consumption  expenditures  depend  both  on  the  stock  of  wealth  and 
disposable income as in Godley and Lavoie (2007, p. 107). Finally, households wealth’s 
is  defined  in  period     by  the  stock  accumulated  in         plus  the  savings  (difference 
between disposable income and consumption) in  . 

          

 

 

          (      )  

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                               

                              

 

     (     )   (                   )  

          

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(7) 

(8) 

(9) 

(10) 

(10a) 

(11) 

3.3.Government and Central Bank 

Now  we  turn  attention  to  the  behavior  of  government  and  central  bank. 
Regarding government expenditures, equation (12) states that government set the level 
of public expenditures in order to obtain a desired ratio to the level of capital stock. This 
means that government expenditures are driven by capital accumulation.  Equation (13) 
shows  that  all  taxes  revenues  come  from  disposable  income  from  households.  The 
implicit idea is  that only households are taxed, in  other words,  retained  profits  are tax 
free.  Equation  (14)  states  that  government  issues  new  bills  in  order  to  finance  any 
budget  deficit. Households will demand  a share  of those bills. The difference between 
the supply of new bills and demand by households will be bought by central bank, that 
acts as a residual buyer as show equation (15). Note in equation (16) that central bank 
also  buys  corporate  notes.  Finally,  in  equation  (17)  we  notice  that  interest  rate  is  an 
exogenous variable, determined by central bank.  

               

 

 

 

 

         (                   )               

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(12) 

(13) 

                  (              )   (               ) 

                       

                     

     ̅    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3.4.GDP in Short Run 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(14) 

(15) 

(16) 

(17) 

 
A simple way to solve the model is established by the calculation of short-term 
GDP. We can see in equation (18) short-term output is determined by the demand side. 
The  superior  bound  for  the  short-term  GDP  is  given  by  the  full  capacity  output 
determined in equation (4). If the real effective demand is greater than full employment 
capacity than output is supply constrained. Once short-term GDP is determined, we can 
calculate all other model variables and defined their desired paths.  

Equations (18), (19) and (20) shows can be used to get the equation (20). 

      {

                                                
                                                         

    

 

 

 

(18) 

Where we have: 

 

 

 

          (     )   [    (     )   (     )]           (     )                   
      
(19) 
 
   (                       )          
 
(20) 
 
 
 
               
 
 
 
 
 
(21) 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

After some algebraic manipulation, we found: 

 

       

   (   )                 (               )            

     (   ) [  (   ) (   )]

 

 

 

 

(22) 

 

3.5.Portfolio Decisions   

The next equations (ADUP 1,2,3 and 4) defines portfolio restrictions. The equations of 
the  portfolio  decisions  are  based  on  the  seminal  approach  proposed  by  Tobin  (1969). 
Thus,  we  present  the  equation  (23),  in  matrix  form,  that  households  keeps  a  share  of 
their  expected  wealth  in  the  form  of  asset  i,  and  these  proportions  varies  according  to 
changes  on  interest  rates  and  disposable  income.  Finally,  as  we  can  see  in  equations 
(24) and (25) expectations are adaptive. 

               

 

 

 

 

 

 

       

(ADUP.1) 

               

               

               

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(ADUP.2) 

(ADUP.3) 

(ADUP.4) 

[     ]   [       ]        [               ]   [   ]        [       ]      

        

         

 

             

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(23) 

(24) 

(25) 

4.  Calibration and Basic Simulation 

 

The model was simulated in MATLAB 2013 software environment. We calibrate 
our model in order to make it as close as possible to what we find in the literature4. We 
have on the table 3 below the values used and the parameter description.  

                              Table 3: Calibration and initial conditions of Model IS-LM 

   
   
   
   
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
    
    
    
    
    

         

 

0.6 
0.02 
0.02 
0.2 
0.2 
1.5 
0.3 
0.03 
0.1 
0.15 
0.6 
0.5 
-0.4 
0.3 
0.5 
0.4 
-0.4 
100 

 
In the figure 1, we have two quadrants. The first quadrant (west) shows the path 
of the main aggregates of the real economy. In the second quadrant (east) we have the 
time  path  of  growth  rates  of  disposable  income,  capital  and  wealth.  Since  all  growth 
rates converge to the same positive constant, than we can conclude that the model has a 
balanced growth path.  

 

                                                           
4 For a detailed description of calibration methodology see Oreiro and Ono (2007).  

Figure 1: Main results of IS-LM simulated model. 

 

 

In the figure 2, we have four quadrants. The first quadrant (top/west) shows the 
paths of monetary variables. In the second quadrant (top/east) we have the behavior of 
the stocks of financial wealth. The third quadrant (bottom/west) shows the behavior of 
portfolio composition. As can be seen, after a certain time portfolio composition is kept 
constant. The fourth quadrant (bottom/east) shows the path of the ratios: Bills/GDP and 
Corporate  Notes/EBI  (Earnings  before  interest).  An  important  point  is  that  the  public 
debt  /  GDP  and  private  debt/EBI  converges  to  a  positive  constant  rather  than  keep 
growing indefinitely. This is an important point to be highlighted because it shows that 
the model doesn’t have an explosive behavior in the public and private debt levels. 

Figure 2: More results of IS-LM simulated model. 

 

 

In  figure  3,  we  have  in  the  first  quadrant  (top/west)  the  path  of  the  following 
ratios: Interest/EBI, Retained Profits/EBI and Distributed Profits/EBI. The basic idea in 
this  chart  is  show  that  the  interest  payment  doesn’t  crush  the  profit  nor  investment 
activity.  On  the  second  quadrant  (top/east)  we  have  the  path  of  fixed  capital  and 
investment  confirming  what  was  shown  in  the  previous  graph.  On  the  third 
(bottom/west),  we  have  the  path  of  the  capacity  utilization.  As  can  be  seen,  capacity 
utilization converges to a lower than one value, meaning that the model reproduces the 
traditional  Keynesian  result  of  underemployment  equilibrium.  The  last  quadrant 
(bottom/east) shows the path of interest rate and of profit rate, that is, the return of the 
financial investment (bills and corporate notes) and the return on investment in the real 
economy  (fixed  capital  invested  by  firms).  As  we  can  see,  profit  rate  is  consistently 
higher than interest rate.  

 

Figure 3: Firms and Government results of IS-LM simulated model. 

 

 

The data obtained in the steady state was summarized and can be seen in Table 
4. We have that the GDP growth rate, the fixed capital growth rate and wealth growth 
rate converge to the same value (5.79% p.p). The return on productive capital remains 
above the return on financial capital and capacity utilization remains below the rate of 
full  capacity  utilization  (73.95%  of  full  capacity).  The  wealth/GDP  ratio  converges  to 
2.98, Bills/GDP ratio to 2.065 and Corporate Notes/EBI to 1.281.  

 
 

Table 4: Main values in Steady-State 

 

 

In Table 4, we can see that along the balanced growth path we have:          
  . This means that this economy is dynamically efficient (Blanchard and Fischer, 1989, 
pp.103-4)  and  firms  had  a  hedge  financial  posture  (Foley,  2003,  pp.160-01).  This  last 
property of the balanced growth means that there is no financial fragility in the long-run 
equilibrium.  

 
5.  Comparative Dynamics 

 

Here,  we  present  the  main  effects  over  macroeconomic  variables  after  some 
shocks.  In  table  5,  we  present  these  results.  The  shocks  were  given  as  follows:  it  was 
chosen deliver a shock at the time the model had reached its steady state, in other words, 
the time which the rates have converged to grow at the same value. Thus, we wait until 
the  period  70  to  add  a  shock.  Thus,  Table  5  shows  the  observed  values  of  the  key 
variables in the period 100 and the charts in period 1 to 100. 

Table 5: Results of the main variables, after shocks. 

 

 

 

Simulation Results on Steady-Stateg_GDP5.79%g_K5.79%g_V5.79%r_K19.36%r 5.00%u73.95%V/GDP2.98Bills/GDP2.065Corporate Notes/EBI1.281Ret_EBIAlpha1 +10%6,34%6,34%6,34%1,581,0476,71%19,88%Alpha1 -10%5,33%5,33%5,33%2,601,3871,67%18,95%d +10%5,34%5,34%5,34%3,32-0,6671,69%17,78%d -10%6,27%6,27%6,27%1,142,4876,34%20,76%Ghama_0 +10%6,04%6,04%6,04%1,891,3674,18%19,48%Ghama_0 -10%5,55%5,55%5,55%2,271,0373,74%19,24%r +10%5,78%5,78%5,78%2,121,1274,38%19,50%r -10%5,81%5,81%5,81%2,021,2873,54%19,23%Theta +10%5,31%5,31%5,31%1,951,3971,54%18,93%Theta -10%6,30%6,30%6,30%2,141,0576,50%19,84%w +10%6,52%6,52%6,52%0,753,4077,59%18,67%w - 10%5,12%5,12%5,12%4,10-1,6770,64%20,21%ShockCapacity UtilizationNotes/EBIBills/GDPg_Kg_Vg_Y_dIn Figure 4 we present the results of shocks in     the autonomous component of 
investment demand, which represents the animal spirits of entrepreneurs.  In the upper 
quadrant we have the result of a 10% increase in the parameter that presents the animal 
spirits of entrepreneurs. As discussed earlier, the shock was given in the period 70. We 
had  an  increase  in  the  growth  rate  of  all  the  variables  in  its  steady  state.  We  had  an 
increase in capacity utilization and the values related to the ratio public debt / GDP and 
Notes/EBI remain almost the same. Already in the lower quadrant, we have the result of 
a decrease of 10% over the same parameter. We can see that there is a fall in the growth 
rate of all the variables in its steady state. We had a decrease in capacity utilization and 
the ratio public debt / GDP and Notes/EBI remain almost the same. 
 
Figure 4: Shocks in    (+10%; - 10%).  

 

Note: Positive shocks on top line and negative ones in bottom line. 

In  figure  5  we  show  the  results  of  a  positive  and  negative  shocks  in    ,  the 
marginal propensity to consume out of disposable income.  Upper quadrant there was a 
+10% shock in the parameter and the lower quadrant -10%. We can see that the positive 
shock  led  to  an  increase  in  growth  rates  of  the  variables,  an  increase  in  the  capacity 
utilization and a little drop in the public debt / GDP and a little increase in notes/EBI. 
The  negative  shock,  led  to  a  fall  in  growth  rates,  a  drop  in  capacity  utilization  and  a 
little increase in the public debt / GDP and in Notes/EBI. This means that the old result 
of “paradox of thrift” still holds in the model, since an increase/decrease in the marginal 
propensity to consume produces an increase/decrease in the growth rate of capital stock, 
wealth  and  disposable  income,  as  also  an  increase/decrease  in  the  level  of  capacity 
utilization.  

 

 

Figure 5: Shocks in    (+10%; - 10%). 

 

Note: Positive shocks on top line and negative ones in bottom line. 

In  Figure  6  we  show  the  effects  of  a  shock  in  d,  the  coefficient  of  profit 
distribution. The upper quadrant shows the results of a shock of +10% in d and in the 
lower quadrant a shock of -10% in d. The positive shock led to a fall in growth rates, a 
drop in capacity utilization and a rise in the public debt / GDP and a fall in Notes/EBI. 
The negative shock resulted in a rise in growth rates, an increase in capacity utilization, 
a fall in the ratio public debt / GDP and an increase in Notes/EBI. An interesting result 
can be observed in the dynamics of corporate debt. When we increase d by 10%, we are 
assuming  that  more  profits  are  distributed  to  families  and  less  is  used  to  finance 
business  investment.  However,  as  the  investment  demand  doesn’t  fall,  finance  is 
supplied  by  the  issuance  of  new  corporate  notes  which  then  increase  the  firm's  debt 
level.  Otherwise,  given  a  shock  of  -10%  in  d,  we  have  fewer  notes  to  be  issued  or  at 
worst, may even be repurchased reducing the level of indebtedness of firms. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 6: Shocks in   (+10%; - 10%). 

 

Note: Positive shocks on top line and negative ones in bottom line. 

 

In  Figure  7  we  show  the  effects  of  a  shock  in  r,  the  level  of  interest  rate.  The 
upper quadrant shows the results of a shock of + 10% in r and in the lower quadrant a 
shock of -10% in r. The positive shock led to a little fall in growth rates (to a value that 
is almost the same before the shock), a rise in capacity utilization and no change in the 
value  of  the  ratio  public  debt  /  GDP  and  Notes/EBI.  The  negative  shock  resulted  in  a 
little increase in  growth  rates (to  a  value that is  almost  the same before the shock), an 
increase  in  capacity  utilization  and  no  changes  in  the  ratio  public  debt  /  GDP  and 
Notes/EBI. 

Figure 7: Shocks in   (+10%; - 10%). 

 

Note: Positive shocks on top line and negative ones in bottom line. 

In Figure 8 we show the effects of a shock in  , the tax rate. The upper quadrant 
shows the results of a shock of + 10% in   and in the lower quadrant a shock of -10% in 
 . The positive shock led to a little fall in growth rates, a fall in capacity utilization and 
no changes in the ratio public debt / GDP and Notes/EBI. The negative shock resulted 
in an increase in growth rates (to a value that is almost the same before the shock), a fall 
in capacity utilization and no changes in the ratio public debt / GDP. 

Figure 8: Shocks in   (+10%; - 10%). 

 

Note: Positive shocks on top line and negative ones in bottom line. 

In  Figure  9  we  show  the  effects  of  a  shock  in   ,  the  wage-share.  The  upper 
quadrant shows the results of a shock of +10% in   and in the lower quadrant a shock 
of -10% in  . The positive shock led to a rise in growth rates (this was the shock that 
led to  higher  growth  rates), a  rise in  capacity utilization and  a fall in  the public debt  / 
GDP with  an increase on private debt. The negative shock resulted in a fall in  growth 
rates (this was the shock that led to lower growth rates), a fall in capacity utilization and 
a rise in the ratio public debt / GDP with a decrease in private debt. With falling wages, 
more  profit  can  be  obtained  to  finance  the  investment  demand  and  consequently  there 
may  be  a  drop  in  private  debt  by  repurchasing  the  notes  already  issued.  The  opposite 
shock has the same symmetrical argument. 

This  last  result  shows  that  in  the  economy  at  hand  prevails  a  wage-led 
accumulation  regime,  since  an  increase/decrease  in  wage  share  is  followed  by  an 
increase/decrease in the growth rates of capital stock, disposable income and wealth, as 
well as an increase/decrease in the level of capacity utilization.  

 

 

Figure 9: Shocks in   (+10%; - 10%). 

Note: Positive shocks on top line and negative ones in bottom line. 

 

 

6.  Final Remarks 

 

The idea of this paper is to build a Stock-and-Flow Consistent version of the IS-
LM  model  for  a  closed  economy  with  endogenous  money  supply,  in  order  to  analyze 
the  dynamic  properties  of  the  model.  We  show  that  once  the  capacity  effect  of 
investment  is  taken  into  account  and  investment  exceeds  depreciation  rate,  the 
equilibrium of the model is no longer characterized by a stationary level of real output, 
but by a constant growth rate of real output.  

The  level  of  activity  is  represented  in  the  model  by  the  variable  capacity 
utilization,  which  is  constant  and  lower  than  one  over  the  equilibrium  path. 
Furthermore,  any  shock  generated  was  unable  to  put  the  economy  at  full  capacity 
utilization.  This  means  that  the  SFC  version  of  the  IS-LM  model  reproduces  the 
traditional Keynesian result of underemployment equilibrium. Moreover, in steady-state 
disposable income, capital stock and private wealth all grow at a same constant rate. We 
also showed that along balanced growth path, the economy is dynamically efficient and 
firms had a hedge financial posture.  

 Regarding  the  comparative  dynamics  of  the  model,  we  had  performed  some 
numerical  simulations  about  the  dynamic  effects  of  shocks  over  the  time  path  of 
endogenous variables. The most sensible parameter was  w. The shocks in w generated 
the highest and lowest values in: growth rates, capacity utilization and public debt/GDP 
ratio.  Thus,  the  model  shows  that  some  traditional  results  of  Keynesian  Theory  as  the 
“paradox of thrift” and a wage-led regime of accumulation.   

 

References 

BHADURI, A; MARGLIN, S. “Unemployment and the Real Wage: the economic basis 
for contesting political ideologies”. Cambridge Journal of Economics, Vol. 14, N. 
4, 1990.  

BLANCHARD, O; FISCHER, S. Lectures on Macroeconomics. MIT Press: Cambridge 

(Mass.), 1989.  

DUTT,  A.K.  Growth,  Distribution  and  Uneven  Development.  Cambridge  University 

Press: Cambridge.  

FOLEY,  D.  “Financial  Fragility  in  developing  economies”  In:  DUTT,  A.K;  ROS,  J 
(ORGS).  Development  Economics  and  Structuralist  Macroeconomics.  Edward 
Elgar: Aldershot, 2003.  

GODLEY,  W.;  LAVOIE,  M.  Monetary  economics:  an  integrated  approach  to  credit, 

money, income, production and wealth. New York: Palgrave MacMillan, 2007. 

GODLEY, M; SHAIKH, A. “An  Important  Inconsistency at  the Heart of the Standard 
Macroeconomic  Model”  In:  LAVOIE,  M;  ZEZZA,  G  (orgs.).  The  Stock-Flow 
Consistent Approach. Palgrave Macmillan: London, 2012. 

HARCOURT, G. The Structure of Post-Keynesian Economics: the core contributions of 

the pioneers. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, 2006.  

HICKS,  J.  “Mr.  Keynes  and  the  Classics”:  A  Suggested  Interpretation.  Econometrica, 

5(2), pp. 147-159. 1937. 

LAVOIE, M. “The Kaleckian Model of Growth and Distribution and Its Neo-Ricardian 

and Neo-Marxian Critiques”. Cambridge Journal of Economics, 19(6), 1995.   

LAVOIE,  M;  GODLEY,  W.  “Kaleckian  Models of  Growth  in  a  Coherent  Stock-Flow 
Monetary Framework: A Kaldorian View” In: LAVOIE, M; ZEZZA, G (orgs.). The 
Stock-Flow Consistent Approach. Palgrave Macmillan: London, 2012.  

MINSKY, H.P.  Stabilizing an Unstable Economy. Yale University Press: New Haven, 

1986.  

OREIRO, J.L;  ONO,  F.  “Um modelo Macrodinâmico Pós-Keynesiano de Simulação”. 

Brazilian Journal of Political Economy, 27(1), 2007. 

PASINETTI,  L;  MARIUTI,  G.  “Hicks´s  ´conversion´-  from  J.R  to  John”  In: 
SCAZZIERI,  R;  SEN,  A;  ZAMAGNI,  S  (eds).  Markets,  Money  and  Capital: 
Hicksian  economics  for  the  twenty-first  century.  Cambridge  University  Press: 
Cambridge, 2008. 

POSSAS,  S.  “Notas  acerca  da  racionalidade  econômica”.  Economia  e  Sociedade,  5: 

181-187, 1995.   

ROMER,  D.  “Keynesian  Macroeconomics  without  the  LM  Curve”.  Journal  of 

Economic Perspectives, Vol. 14, N.2, 2000. 

ROWTHORN, R.E. “Demand, Real Wages and Economic Growth”. Thames Papers in 

Political Economy, Autumn: 1-39.   

SIMON,  H.  “From  Substantive  to  Procedural  Rationality”  In:  Models  of  Bounded 

Rationality, MIT Press: Cambridge, 1982. 

TOBIN,  J.  Asset  Accumulation  and  Economic  Activity:  Reflections  on  Contemporary 

Macroeconomic Theory. University of Chicago Press: Chicago, 1982.  

-------------. “A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory”. Journal of Money, 

Credit and Banking. Vol. 1, pp. 15-29, 1969. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

