 

The physiological roots of the Tableau Économique 

 

Abstract 

The paper discusses the physiological inheritance from Quesnay's previous training and practice in 
natural sciences to the Tableau Économique. By reviewing his medical writings from 1720 to 1747 
it  was  possible  to  identify  Quesnay’s  affiliation  among  the  various  medical  schools  of  thought  in 
18th-century France. It is argued that Quesnay developed an eclectic approach towards physiological 
processes that merged vitalistic principle with the canonical Galen and Hippocratic humors theory. 
This  identification  provided  the  analytical  means  by  which  it  was  possible  to  deconstruct  the 
somehow traditional understanding that the Tableau was inspired by the circulatory system. Thus, 
the  paper  sheds  light  on  the  interfaces  between  medicine and  the  birth  of  Political  Economy.  The 
article leaves open for further analysis the relation between capital expenditure and the ecological 
role played by the Vital Principle.     
 
Key words: François Quesnay - Tableau Économique – Physiocracy. 
JEL: A12, B11, B31 
 

Autores:  

Fernando Ribeiro Leite Neto – Pontifícia Universidade Católica de São Paulo e INSPER 

Nelson Mendes Cantarino – FECAP e INSPER 

 

 

 

 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

 

François  Quesnay  obtained  his  surgeon  degree  in  Saint-Côme,  in  1717.  Later,  in  1744  he 
became a physician acquiring a medical degree at the Faculté de Pont-à-Mousson.  Ironically, as a 
surgeon Quesnay played the most important role in the long and bitter battle between the Surgeon’s 
Order  and  the  Medical  Order.1  His  theoretical  and  practical  works  on  physiology  granted  him 
nominations to the Académie des Sciences in Paris and the Royal Academy of Sciences in London.  

Thanks  to  his  prudent  behavior  as  a  surgeon  of  the  nobility  members  and  also  his  strong 
relation with La Peyronie, Quesnay became Madame Pompadour’s private physician early in 1749. 
It  seemed  to  be  the  highest  professional  level  for  someone  who  was  born  from  a  small  peasant 
family (Schelle, 1907).  

However,  once  lodged  in  an  entresol  in  Versailles,  Quesnay  became  an  active  scholar  in 
political economy. Biological images and physical analogies were part of the long-term process that 
gave  birth  to  political  economy  as  an  autonomous  science  (Schabas,  2005  and  2009;  Christensen 
1994).  At  first,  Quesnay  le  fils  contributed  to  the  Encyclopédie  with  the  articles  Fermiers  (1756) 
and Grains (1757),  not to mention the methodological and epistemological article Evidence (1756) 
which was  anonymously published there. Other articles would became entries in the Encyclopédie, 
such as Hommes, Impôts and Interest de l’argent, but royal censorship prevented them from being 
published by Denis Diderot (1713-1784) (Grenewegen, 2002; Steiner, 2003; Théré and Loic, 2008).  

This paper discusses Quesnay’s transition from his previous practice of natural sciences to 
political  economy  and  proposes  an  alternative  route  to  understand  the  French  author’s  works  in 
special the  Tableau Économique.  To put in the words of  Foley (1973 p. 121): “whether Quesnay 
might have  gotten his notions of the circulation of goods and money in society from his previous 
acquaintance  with  Harvey’s  researches  on  the  circulation  of  the  blood”.  In  doing  so,  the  article 
pursues what Marcuzzo (2008, p. 111) describes as “contextual analysis”2 

By reviewing his medical writings from 1720 to 1747, it was possible to identify Quesnay’s 
affiliation to  several  18th  century  medical  schools  of  thought  in  France.  It  is  argued  that  Quesnay 
developed an eclectic approach towards physiological processes that merged the vitalistic principle 
with  the  canonical  theory  of  humors  developed  by  Hippocrates  of  Kos’  (460  BC  –  370BC)  and 
Galen  of  Pergamon  (130  BC.  –  200  BC.).  This  identification  led  us  to  deconstruct  the  somehow 
traditional understanding that the Tableau Économique was inspired by the circulatory system.  

Hence,  the  contribution  of  the  paper  is  two-fold:  on  one  hand  the  article  provides  strong 
criticism to Foley’s proposition that the Tableau Économique should be understood as an analogy to 
the  circulatory  system.  The  criticism  is  built  upon  the  debates  undertaken  in  the  18 th  century 

                                                             
1 Aiming to his independence from the physicians’ domain, the surgeons, led by François Gigot de la Peyronie (1678-
1747)  and  Quesnay,  released  Saint-Côme  surgery  faculty  from  the  Medical  Facultè  de  Paris’  monopoly  in  teaching 
anatomy and physiology in 1750. From then on, Saint-Côme was able to have its own anatomical and surgical teaching 
(Shelle, 1907).   

2 “By context I mean the set of questions and answers which framed theories and concepts, the intellectual interlocutors 
to whom they were addressed and ‘the state of the art’ at the time of their conception. The framework consists of facts 
regarding time, place and circumstances, about which knowledge and information have first to be dug out and then used 
to make sense of what is being interpreted or, as far as possible, illuminated.” (Marcuzzo, 2008, p. 111). In this paper 
Marcuzzo presents and discusses other methods related to the Historiography of Economic Thought.    

 

2 

medical thought. The critics towards Foley’s approach hits Banzhaf (2000) and Christensen (1994) 
only  to  the  extent  that  both  authors  accept  and  share  Foley’s  analogy  relating  the  Tableau  to  the 
circulatory system. Apart from that issue, the article mergers with Banzhaf (2000) and Christensen 
(1994) on the quest to unite Quesnay’s natural thought to his political arithmetic system.  

On the other hand the paper invites to a deep digression in a rather unknown territory to 

most of historians of the economic thought: medical, physiological and chemical thought during the 
French enlightenment. It is argued that one of the most relevant issues in dispute in the awake of 
political economy, i.e. the origin of production, is related to Quesnay’s filiation to the Vital 
Principle theory, which was one of several other theories in dispute regarding the causes of motion 
in organic matter.    

This paper is organized as follows: in the first section, we provide an overview of Quesnay’s 

work in the context of the object of study proposed here; in the second section, we describe the 
debates in medical thought in the mid 18th century to pinpoint Quesnay’s medical affiliation, and in 
the third section, we focus on the so-called vital principle which accounts for the physiological 
origin of the Tableau Économique. We conclude with a brief discussion about the findings and 
point to further research in the area.  

 
 

II. 

A  LONG-LASTING  DEBATE:  THE  TABLEAU  ÉCONOMIQUE  AS  A 

BIOLOGICAL IMAGE OR AUTONOMOUS POLITICAL ARITHMETIC? 

Much has been said to explain Quesnay’s interest in political economy and rural economy 
circa 1750. As Steiner (2003) and Théré (1998) point out, economic affairs were quite frequent in 
public debates all over the 18th century in France. Théré (1998) managed to count 1,946 authors of 
publications in economics (pamphlets, booklets, books and so on) from 1550 to the French 
Revolution, out of which 127 were doctors and surgeons (6.5%). However, by the time Quesnay 
started to publish on political economy, doctors and surgeon accounted for 7.8% of the total number 
of known authors (Théré, 1998, p. 36-37).3 

Quesnay’s change from physiology and natural science to political economy did not surprise 

his contemporaries. For George-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon (1707-1788), Quesnay only 
changed his interest from healing people to practicing medicine for governments. Pierre Samuel Du 
Pont de Nemours (1739-1817) also argued that, for Quesnay, political economy was medicine 
applied to the whole nation (Vardi, 2012, p. 61). Camile François Claude, Comte D’Albon’s (1753-
1789) Élogue Historique de François Quesnay (1775) seems quite clear about this position:     

After completing his work Essay Physique sur L’Oeconomie Animale (1747), Quesnay found 
himself naturally compelled to be involved with Political Economy. By addressing the 
influences of the effects of the soul on the body, we were soon convinced that men could not be 
truly healthy if they were not happy and they could not be happy if they did not live under a 
good government (Comte D’Albon, 1775, p. 33-34).4 

                                                             
3 One reason for the emergence of the economic debate of that time might be found in the series of crop shortfall due to 
weather condition in the turning of the 17th century to the 18th century. Also, events such as the recurrent war between 
the  Netherlands  and  the  Austrian  Empire  and  the  Seven  Years  Wars  against  England  created  famine,  high  mortality 
among population and fiscal crisis (Orain, 2013 and Steiner, 2003). 

4  Après  avoir  terminé  son  travail  sur  l’Economie  Animale,  Quesnay  se  trouva  naturellement  conduit  à  s’ócuper  de 
l’Economie  Politique.  En  refléchissant  aux  influences  des  affections  de  l´âme  sur  le  corps,  on  ne  tarde  guere  à  se 
convaicre que les hommes ne sçauroient avoir une veritable santé s’ils ne sont heureux et ne peuvent être heureux s’ils 
ne vivent sous un bon government (Comte D’Albon, 1775, p. 33-34). 

3 

 

In the ‘Wealth of Nations,’ Adam Smith (1723-1790), discussed the physiocratic doctrine. 
According to Smith (2005[1776], p.549), Quesnay was a “very speculative physician.” In Smith’s 
viewpoint, the possible inheritance from medical training to economic reasoning was once again 
based on the analogy of the political body as something similar to the human body. In a digression 
about the effects of different political economy systems on the progress of a nation, Smith pointed 
out that:  

Mr. Quesnay, who was himself a physician, and a very speculative physician, seemed to have 
used the same kind of notion of the political body, and thought it would thrive and prosper only 
under a certain precise system, the exact system of perfect freedom and perfect justice (Smith 
2005 [1776], p. 549). 

As is well known, Smith criticized Quesnay’s approach to agriculture as the only source of wealth. 
Even if the true nature of value was a subject of dispute between Smith and Quesnay (not to 
mention Étienne Bonnot de Condillac (1715-1780), Ferdinando Galiani (1728-1787) and Jean 
Baptiste Say (1767-1832)), Smith planned to dedicate ‘Wealth of Nations to Quesnay. Nevertheless, 
despite Smith’s critical approach, the Tableau Économique had a long-lasting influence on both 
political economy and economics.5 

The Tableau Économique provided Karl H. Marx (1818-1883) with the design of the 

dynamic schemes of capital reproduction, depicted in Book II of ‘The Capital.’ Marx’s (1867) 
simplest dynamic model referred to an economy that reproduced the same level of output 
throughout time. Marx acknowledged Quesnay’s Tableau influence in a letter addressed to Engels 
in July 1863 (Marx, 1966, p. 469; Gherke and Kurz, 1995).6  

Although criticizing the weak physiocratic approach to prices, Léon Walras (1834-1910) 
praised Quesnay’s remarks. In Section VII, Lesson 37th of Élements d’économie politique pure 
([1874] 1926), it reads: 

                                                             
5 However, his influence came later by the mid19th century when Eugéne Daire (1843, 1844 and 1846) published a set 
of  18th  century  French  economic  texts,  including  Turgot  and  the  Physiocrats  (Vardi,  2012).  The  reception  of  the 
Tableau  Économique,  probably  the  version  published  in  1761  in  the  sixth  volume  of  Honoré  Mirabeau’s  L’ami  des 
hommes,  might  be  considered  in  two  ways:  first,  there  was  general  skepticism  on  the  économistes’  methodological 
approach,  too  much  based  on  deductions  derived  from  general  principles  that  were  available  if  evidence  was  free  to 
penetrate  one’s  mind  (Van  den  Berg,  2002  and  Vardi,  2002);  and  second,  there  was  a  more  technical  and  precise 
criticism of the Tableau from François Véron Duverger de Forbonnais (1767) and Jean-Joseph-Louis Graslin (1767), as 
detailed in Van den Berg (2002). 

6 Marx (1863) developed an analysis of Physiocracy and Quesnay’s Tableau in his “Theories of Surplus Value”. Marx 
praised  Quesnay  and  the  phisiocrats  for  having  identified  the  source  of  surplus  value  in  direct  production  instead  of 
exchanges. Although the physiocrats presented the capitalist mode of production under a feudal theoretical framework, 
the  most important contradiction  lied  in  identifying the surplus  value generated  in agriculture as a social surplus-use-
value generated by nature forces: “Hence the contradictions in this system:  it was the first to explain  surplus-value by 
the  appropriation  of  the  labour  of  others,  and  in  fact  to  explain  this  appropriation  on  the  basis  of  the  exchange  of 
commodities; but it did not see that value in general is a form of social labour and that surplus-value is surplus-labour. 
On the contrary, it conceived value merely as use-value, merely as material substance, and surplus-value as a mere gift 
of nature, which returns to labour, in place of a given quantity of organic material, a greater quantity” (Marx, 1863, p. 
70).  

 

4 

Theferore, we will be led to really criticize the imperfections, what does not prevent us from 
recognizing, however,  that they were not just the first but the only school of economists  which 
in France have had an Pure original political economy […] (Walras [1874] 1926, p. 390).7  

Late in the 19th century, both physiocracy and Quesnay seemed to have been forgotten and were 
under strong criticism. Bauer (1890) provides a testimony, even if somehow incomplete, about the 
skepticism towards the physiocratic model by the time. At the Archives Nationales in Paris, Bauer 
(1890) found out the first edition of Tableau’s original manuscript (1758), three copies of the 
second edition (1759) and a set of Quesnay’s letters to Mirabeau. At the Bibliotheque Nationale, 
Bauer (1890) also found out a copy of Quesnay’s Hommes (1757). That might explain why 
Oncken’s (1888) edition of Quesnay’s works do not present a copy of the Tableau Économique, 
only the Arithmetic Analysis (1766). 

By the mid 20th century, there was an issue about whether Quesnay’s economic works 

inherited the natural philosophy approach from his previous practice as a surgeon and physician. 
Schumpeter (1954) and Meek (1960, 2003) argued in favor of the dissociation of Quesnay’s 
economic reasoning from any medical, physiological or natural philosophy model he could have 
acquired during professional life.  

Sutter (1958) was the first to make an attempt to acknowledge physiological and natural 
philosophy influences on Quesnay’s social thought. In turn, Foley (1973) was able to shape the 
coming debates about the matter by addressing the relation between the circulatory system and 
wealth circulation in the Tableau Économique. His contribution will be discussed and deconstructed 
later on in this paper.  

Christensen (1994) and Banzhaf (2000) provided a detailed account of the various disputing 
and complementing theories of the nature of matter, its motion and generation, nutrition, chemistry 
and metaphysics from Descartes (1677) to Quesnay (1759). In doing so, the authors provided an 
outline of the possible influences on Quesnay’s natural thought, particularly described in Quesnay 
(1747). Nevertheless, the theoretical paths that could merge Quesnay’s social and natural thought 
were only briefly explored. In Christensen (1994), the physiology of the Tableau reproduces 
Foley’s (1973) arguments in a briefer discourse.8       

According to Groenewegen (2001), the theory of knowledge, as presented in Quesnay 

(1736, 1747 and 1958 [1756]), was the main channel for the author’s change from natural 
philosophy to social theory. The evidence was based on Quesnay’s text reconstruction in the light of 
the broader philosophical debates at that time about the true nature of matter (its different 
manifestations, its motion and so on). The theory of sensitive functions in body tissues entailed the 
rule of nature (vegetative soul) that gave order to both natural and social realms.9 But when it came 

                                                             
7 On serait ainsi amené à leur reprocher bien des imperfections, ce qui n’empêche pas, cependant, qu’ils aient été non 
seulement la première mais la seule école d’économistes qui, en France, aient eu une économie politique pure originale 
[…] (Walras [1874] 1926, p. 390).  

8  “We  argue that Quesnay's economic theory of production and circulation (the  Tableau Économique)  and  his unique 
theory  of  agricultural  productivity  (and  manufacturing  sterility)  reflect  not  only  his  physiological  model  of  the 
circulatory system, as argued in Foley (1973) but also his physical, chemical, physiological, and "ecological" theory of 
production and circulation of materials in nature. ” (Christensen, 1994, p. 249-259). 

9 Interestingly, Groenewegen (2001) followed the same theoretical viewpoint in Comte D’Albon (1775, p. 24-34) who 
claimed  that  Quesnay’s  interest  in  political  economy  came  from  the  psychological  and  philosophical/epistemological 
approaches developed  in the  latest edition of  Essay Physique sur l’Oeconomie Animal  (1747):  “Je ne parlerai pas des 
principes  constitutifs  et  des  élémentaires  qui  n’on  rapport  qu’à  la  Physique  ou  à  la  science  Physico-médicale.  Je 
5 

 

to medicine and economics in Quesnay’s works, the author did not provide any new evidence as to 
whether Quesnay’s economic thought was autonomous in relation to his practice of natural 
sciences.  

More recently, the hypothesis of a sort of a genetic path that linked physiology to economics 
in Quesnay’s works had apparently been dismissed. Charles (2003) argued that one must understand 
the Tableau Économique as a heuristic and rhetoric device used to elucidate and simplify Quesnay’s 
model. In that sense, the Tableau Économique came up as a ‘rational recreation’ inspired by the 
rolling ball clock of French inventor Gaspard Grollier de Servière. In the 17th and 18th centuries, 
rational recreations were artifacts designed to offer magic, sensorial and pedagogical experiences.    

A research agenda compounded by a rather mathematical interpretation of the Tableau 
Économique showed itself more fruitful. In fact, a whole literature had emerged since Meek’s 
(1960, 2003 [1962]) reinterpretation of the Tableau. This literature was characterized by the use of 
what Marcuzzo (2008) labels as “rational recreation”, which aims to translate the ideas of the past 
into modern economics by means of mathematical language (Maital, 1972; Barna, 1975; Bilginsoy, 
1994; Eltis, 1975; Vaggi, 1985; Serrano and Mazat, 2013).  

 

III.  MEDICAL THOUGHT IN THE MID 18TH CENTURY: IN THE SEARCH FOR 

QUESNAY’S MEDICAL AFFILIATION 

I  have  to  say  that  I  have  abandoned  you  to  your  bad 
constitution, to the stiffness of your entails, to the corruption of 
your blood, to the bitterness of  your bile, and to the  feculence 
of your humors (Moliére, 1815 p. 197).10 

The  18th  century  scientific  thought  was  still  under  the  influence  of  metaphysics.  One  form  of 
manifestation  of  this  distinctive  feature  is  the  long-  lasting  influence  of  theories  of  humor  and 
temperament  in  medicine  as  a  direct  Hippocrates’s  and  Galen’s  tradition.  Humors  represent  the 
nature’s  fundamental  elements  in  the  body’s  physiology.  Fire  is  related  to  yellow  bile.  Air  is 
associated  to  blood.  Water  can  be  translated  into  phlegm  and  earth  is  black  bile.  Each  of  those 
humors  is  responsible  for  a  given  temperament,  for  example,  yellow  bile  is  related  to  a  choleric 
soul,  sanguine  and  phlegmatic  temperaments  are  self-evident  and  melancholic  individuals  suffer 
from a relative excess of black bile.  

Health was granted by a sort of very personal imbalance in the individual’s endowment of 
humors.  Humors  were  in  constant  motion  (what  caused  the  motion  of  matter  is  one  of  the  main 
concerns  of  the  18th  century  natural  philosophy)  in  order  to  assure  health.  Illness  was 
characteristically a manifestation of a great imbalance between the endowment of humors and flows 
in the body.  As nature aimed at restoring the original personal imbalance, or the original personal 
temperament the body tries to expel the exceeding humor. The physicians’ goal was to help nature 
in its work by delivering antiemetics, laxatives and naturally bloodletting (Mitchell 1979).  

                                                                                                                                                                                                          
m’attacherai  seulement  aux  facultés  sensitives  et  intellectuelles  que  ces  derniers  principes  renferment”  (Comte 
D’Albon, 1775, p. 24).     

10 J’ai a vous dire que je vous abandonne à votre mauvaise constituition, à la intempérie de vos entrailles, à la corruption 
de votre sang, à l’àcreté de votre bile, et à la féculence de vos humeurs (Moliére, 1815 p. 197). 

 

 

6 

Published in Frankfurt, William Harvey’s (1993 [1628]) discovery was far from threatening 
this system. One must recall that physicians’ practice, like law professionals or theology scholars in 
the  18th  century,  was  based  on  antique  traditions.  It  meant  that  any  breakthrough  in  science  was 
much  of  an  elaboration  in  canonical  knowledge  rather  than  a  radical  transformation  (Hamilton, 
1951; Broman, 1989). That explained, at least in part, why Harvey (1993 [1628]), Giovanni Alfonso 
Borelli (2011 [1680, 1681]) and Marcello Malpighi (1958 [1661]) findings lasted in a context where 
Hippocrates’s and Galen’s paradigms remained untouched. Friedman and Friedland (2000) stressed 
just  how  often  the  path  towards  Harvey’s  discovery  was  blocked  by  the  difficulties  to  fit  the 
anatomical and physiological discoveries of Andreas Vesalius (1514-1564) and his followers, such 
as Bartolomeu Eustachio (1520-1574) and Gabriel Falopio (1525-1562), into Galen’s tradition.  

The  circulatory  system  depicted  by  Harvey  (1993  [1628])  was  in  line  with  the  theory  of 
humor  insofar  as  humors  are  fluids  running  within  body  tissues.  That  is  where  René  Descartes 
(1596-1650) articulated his metaphysics  of circular motion in  dynamical system theory. Descartes 
(1677) argued that the human body is a mechanical system controlled by a rational soul located in 
the pineal gland and working under the laws of hydrodynamics. The human body was a hydraulic 
system operating according to the laws that shape structure and motion in the universe, which  was 
also  regarded  as  a  mechanic  system.  Harvey  (1628)  fits  perfectly  Descartes’s  (1677)  mechanistic 
theory.  This  approach,  shared  by  Descartes,  Isaac  Newton  (1642-1727)  and  Robert  Boyle  (1627-
1691),  was  based  on  a  metaphysical  ontology  of  action  in  which  matter  was  entirely  passive,  it 
could neither think nor move of its own volition. All motion in nature was made by God at the time 
of Creation. Here the analogy with the image of the clock is quite clear. Motion, created at the dawn 
of life, perpetuated itself in all living creatures by means of inertia.  

In  the  late  17th  century  and  early  18th  century,  the  debate  over  natural  philosophy  was 
centered  on  the  causes  of  the  motion  of  matter.  The  iatrophysics  (also  iatrophysiology  or 
iatrochemistry) represented the research agenda of the period, an agenda that included metaphysics 
and  experimental  science.  The  most  fundamental  issue  in  dispute  was  the  primary  cause  of  the 
motion of matter, particularly in body tissues, liquids and so on (Mitchell, 1979; Christensen, 1994; 
Maquet,  1992,  Banzhaf,  2000).  Herman  Boerhaave  (1668-1738),  a  most  important  influence  on 
Quesnay’s  physiological  approach,  clearly  remarked:  “We  are  totally  ignorant  of  the  origin  and 
communication of the motion in bodies” (Christensen, 1994, p. 252). 

Iatrophysics  was  further  developed  by  Borelli  (2001  [1680,  1681])  who  was  the  chair  of 
Mathematics  at  the  University  of  Pisa  and  worked  together  with  Marcello  Malpighi  in  the  early 
1660s. Malpighi (1958 [1661]), by means of dissection in living animals and the use of microscope, 
discovered the capillaries in the lung, an extension of Harvey’s circulatory system.   

Borelli’s (2001 [1680, 1681]) work was published in two parts focused on the very core of 
the  iatrophysics  concern:  motion.  De  motu  animalium  was  a  remarkable  physiological  and 
anatomical work in the context of the scientific revolution of the 17th century.  As  an extension to 
Harvey’s findings, Borelli (2001 [1680, 1681]) applied the laws of fluid mechanics to calculate the 
flow of blood filtered by the kidneys in relation to heart contractions and also measured the quantity 
of  air  in the  thoracic  cavity.  Most  interestingly,  both  Borelli’s  De  motu  animalium    and  Harvey’s 
Exercitation  anatomica  de  motu  cordis  et  sanguinis  in  animalibus  did  not  refer  to  metaphysical 
causes underlying the forces that create motion.  

However,  by  the  mid  18th century,  the  mechanistic agenda  was  challenged.  Biological  and 
chemical  experiments  and  observations  all  evidenced  sensitivity  in  living  tissues.  Moreover,  the 
assumption  of  preformation,  that  is,  the mechanistic  scholars’  explanation that  generation  was  the 
simple enlargement of the germs was inconsistent with the existence of hybrids, monsters and, more 

 

7 

importantly, the regeneration of the parts, as revealed by Tremblay’s Polyp in 174011 (Christensen, 
1994) .     

As  mechanistics  faced  an  intellectual  crisis,  a  sort  of  synthesis  took  place  in  natural 
philosophy.  Neomechanists,  materialists and  vitalists  provided  a  set  of  assumptions  to  explain  the 
motion in matter. In that context, the vital principle was one of the competing theories. In any case, 
in the 18th century medicine in France, the theories of humor and temperament were predominant. 
Hence,  they  were  mixed  with  different  ‘schools’  of  physiological  thought  and  provided  medical 
practitioners with a somewhat general approach to illness (Mitchell 1979; Delacy 1993).  

Firstly, illness represented an imbalance of the whole body system. Although located in any 
specific region, organ or tissue, it spread throughout the system. At that time, physicians developed 
a  ‘macroeconomic’  approach  to  understand  illness  dynamics  similar  to  medical  practice  and  the 
Tableau.  Secondly,  the  most  usual  practice  of  the  18th  century  physicians  was  the  ‘bedside 
physician’  (Mitchell  1979).  Medical  practitioners  gave  very  detailed  descriptions  of  illness 
symptoms  as,  for  example,  the  fact  that  there  were  no  less  than  210  terms  used to  describe  fever. 
This evidenced the great difficulty physicians went through to diagnose an illness, except for well-
known  ones  such  as  tuberculosis  and  typhus  (the  most  common  respiratory  pathologies)  and 
smallpox and scarlet fever (eruptive illnesses) (Bercé, 1997).  

Thirdly, since pathologies had an underlying root in the individual’s imbalances of humors 
and  temperaments, there  were  no  etiological assumptions  as  to  any  general  causes  of  illnesses.  In 
fact,  illness  was  a  manifestation  of  individual  imbalance  rather  than  a  social  or  external 
phenomenon, which meant that part of the treatment depended on the individual himself. This was 
in line with Hippocrates’s remarks that healing was fastened as long as the patient kept his hopes 
and strength (Mossé, 1997).    

That was how the vital principle added to Hippocrates’s and Galen’s paradigms gave sense 
to  medical  practice  in  the  mid  18th  century.  Quesnay’s  natural  philosophy,  as  described  in  the 
second  edition  of  Essai  physique  sur  l’oeconomie  animale  (1747)  fits  both  the  vitalistic  approach 
and the ancient theory of humors. 

[...]  As  soon  as  the  blood  circulation  was  known,  Human  Body  was  taken  for  nothing  but  a  hydraulic 
machine, we have considered in the treatment of diseases the movement of humors rolling in vessels; all 
the  intentions  of  physicians  were  confined  to  maintain  the  balance  between  solids  and  liquids 
[...](Quesnay, 1747, p. 418-419). 12 

The  vital  principle  was  to  be  found  in  chemistry.  For  Boerhaave  (1743)  fire  is  a  universal 
instrument used in chemical processes, it is the material that explains heat, combustion, fluidity and 
light.  Likewise,  Georg  E.  Stahl  argued  that  phlogiston  was  the  main  material  found  in  minerals, 
vegetal  and  animals.  Phlogiston  is  the  principle  of  fire.  It  has  an  ecological  dynamics  since  it 
circulates among the natural kingdoms by means of its regeneration from dead animals and plants to 
minerals, than to earth and to plants and animals once again (Christensen, 1994).         
                                                             

11  The  experiences  of  John  Abraham  Trembley  (1710-1784)  with  freshwater  polyps  demonstrated  the  regenerative 
capacity of the body tissues. "Somehow, it was believed that the way by which the polyp regenerates itself certifies that 
matter was a dynamic and not just only passive entity." Bernat (2013, p. 36). 

12 [...] aussitôt que la circulation du sang a été connue, on n’a plus regardé le Corps Humain, que comme une machine 
hydraulique, on n’a envisagé dans la cure des maladies, que le movement des humeurs qui roulent dans les vaisseaux; 
toutes les intentions des médicens se sont bornées à entretenir l’equilibre, entre les solides et les liquides […] (Quesnay, 
1747, p. 418-419). 

 

8 

According to Quesnay (1747), fire could be further reduced to a more general element. That is 
where metaphysics and medical practice were introduced in the argument. Quesnay recalled an old 
idea he got from Boerhaave and Sthal. The motion of matter, the most relevant issue in dispute in 
the 18th century natural philosophy, was due to a generic and abstract element. This vital principle is 
ether,  a  general,  atomistic  and  active  element  that  penetrates  all  pores  of  each  living  creature.  As 
long  as  it  creates  motion,  ether  is  also  the  source  of  heat  and  energy  in  the  body.  The  most 
important  physiological  processes  within  the  natural  realm  are  explained  by  the  operation  of  this 
subtle and general element. Generation, nutrition and motion all come from the functions of ether in 
the  body.  Ether  is  nothing  but  the  “vegetative  soul”  of  all  living  creatures  which  provides 
sensibility, motion and natural wisdom to tissues, organs and fluids. (Quesnay 1747).13 

But what is this primitive Agent? It is neither difficult to separate it from the other principles of the Body 
nor from the other fluids; since only Ether has its own activity and fluidity and from which all other fluids 
derive their active qualities (Quesnay, 1747, p. 110).14 

Most interestingly, Quesnay (1747) pointed out that nutrition was a process that take place in very 
small  vessels  and  tissues,  not  blood  vessels,  but  the  smallest  ramification  of  the  nerves  into  the 
muscular  tissues.  That’s  where  nutrition  and  humors  motion  happens  influenced  by  the  vital 
principle – ether: 

Say  more, the fact is certain;  since the Vital Principle actually  has a very  large activity, and  it does not 
receive it but from that Ether. It is therefore not other parts that can cope with the Ether but the fluid of 
nerves,  where  resides  the  Vital  Principle,  whose  activity  is  the  primary  cause  of  all  movements  of  the 
Body: The Vital Príncipe is nothing but the Ether, retained in Nerves […] (Quesnay, 1747, p. 111-112).15 

This was important because it led Quesnay’s to be aware of Harvey’s (1993 [1628]) conclusions:  

Like all things, both arguments and visual demonstration showed that the blood passes through the lungs 
and  heart  by  the  action  of  the  ventricles  and  atrium  and  is  distributed to  all  parts  of  the  body,  where  it 
passes  through  the  veins  and  pores of  the  flesh,  and  then  flows  through the  veins  surrounding  all  sides 
towards the center, from the  smaller to the  larger veins, and  is  by then  finally discharged  into the vena 
cava and right atrium of the heart, in such quantity and at such ebb and flow through the arteries and veins 
in such a way that it cannot be supplied by the diet, and much larger than necessary for the mere purpose 
of nutrition. It is absolutely necessary to conclude that the blood is in constant state of motion and that is 
the  act  or  function  which  the  heart  performs  by  means  of  pulse  and  which  is  the  only  function  of  the 
movement of contraction of the heart (Harvey 1993 [1628] p. 145. Italics by the author). 

Quesnay  (1747)  provides  a  very  clear  insight  on  his  relative  stance towards  the  physiological and 
chemical theories in dispute in the mid 18th century. Quesnay’s (1747) medical thought was based 
                                                             
13  In  his  Élogue  Historque  de  François  Quesnay,  the  Comte  D´Albon  (1775,  p.  23)  highlighted  this  physiological 
discovery in the Essay Physique sur l’Oeconomie Animale: “Boerhaave avoit fait une physiologie, dans laquelle il avoit 
répandu la lumiere sur la structure des organes du corps et leurs fonctions particulieres; mais il avoit omis d’expliquer 
les  premieres  causes  Physiques  qui  leur  donnent  de  l’action,  ou  du  moins  n’en  avoit  il  parlé  que  fort  légérement. 
Quesnay comprit toute l’importance de cette partie de la Physiologie; elle étoit neuve […].”     

14 Mais quell est cet Agent primitive? Il n’est pas difficile de le démêler d’avec les autres príncipes des Corps, ni d’avec 
tous les autres fluides; puisqu’il  n’y a que  l’Ether qui ait par  lui-même son activité e sa  fluidité et que tous les autres 
fluides empruntent de lui toutes leurs qualités actives (Quesnay, 1747, p. 110). 

15  Disons  plus,  le  fait  est  certain;  puisque  le  principle  Vital  a  réellement  une  très  grande  activité,  et  qu’il  ne  pas  la 
recevoir que de l’Ether. Ce n’est donc pas dans les autres parties que peuvent composer avec l’Ether, que le fluide des 
nervs, que reside le príncipe Vital, dont l’activité est la première cause de tous les mouvements du Corps: Le príncipe 
Vital n’est donc que l’Ether même, retenu dans les nervs avec le fluide qui peut être refermé avec lui dans ces mêmes 
nervs (Quesnay, 1747, p. 111-112).  

 

 

9 

on a process of general changes in natural philosophy ranging from the mechanistic approach to a 
more wide-ranging view that merged neo- mechanistic, vital principal defenders and others. We can 
see now Quesnay’s medical and physiological  practice in its own context: he was a practitioner in 
bloodletting and as such he was still influenced by antique wisdom (the theory of humors).  

Nevertheless,  at  the  same  time,  he  was  aware  of  the  chemistry  advances  to  meet  the 
limitations of the mechanistic theory.  In that sense, Quesnay was able to identify the very nature of 
the motion in tissues, organs and the body through chemical processes. In fact, life is mostly a set of 
chemical  reactions.  That  is  the  most  fundamental  message  of  the  Vital  Principal  theory.    For 
Quesnay  (1747),  ether  was  the  primitive  chemical  substance  that  provided  motion  to  muscles 
through  tiny  nerve  vessels.  Moreover,  ether  was  an  ecological  element  that  guaranteed  the 
maintenance and continuous reproduction of both natural order and social reproduction by means of 
the  agricultural  activity.  If  there  was  anything  similar  to  a  physiological  tradition  in  the  Tableau 
Économique,  it  was  the  ecological  feature  of  the  vital  principle  and  not  the  analogy  with  the 
circulatory system.    

 

IV. 

THE VITAL PRINCIPLE: THE PHYSIOLOGICAL ORIGIN OF THE 

TABLEAU ÉCONOMIQUE 

The most long-lasting contribution to the idea that the Tableau Économique had its origin in 
Quesnay’s medical practice is found in Foley (1973).  The author first reported the bitter academic 
battle  between  Quesnay  (1750)  and  Silva  (1727)  about  the  effects  of  bloodletting  on  healing 
wounds, fevers and so on. Silva’s (1727) argument was based upon the assumption that blood flows 
have different speeds in the bloodletting process. By opening a wound in the opposite direction of 
the illness spot,  blood would flow quickly from the illness spot to the opened wound. This forced 
the  balance  in  the  humors’  restoring  health  once  again  (Silva,  1727;  Foley,  1973;  Christensen, 
1994).   

Quesnay  used  the  most  important  scientific  subjects  available  at  the  time  to  impose  his 
victory on the imminent physician: dynamic hydraulics. Through his tin tube experiment, Quesnay 
was able to prove that “the speed of the blood in the circulatory  system would be nearly the same” 
(Foley, 1973, p. 129).   

Foley  (1973,  p.  130)  claims  that  “Quesnay  believed  that  the  pulmonary  circulation  was  so 
slow that it was insignificant to the metabolic economy of the body”. Curiously, Quesnay (1750, p. 
88-91),  as  cited  in  Foley  (1973,  p.  130),  deals  with  the  melancholic  temperament  and  how 
spoliation could treat fevers related to these types of  imbalances.  This was in full agreement with 
the 18th century medical thought in France, as mentioned before.  

However,  how  could  Quesnay  assumed  that  there  was  different  blood  speed  in  the  human 
system since he had argued Silva’s (1727) bloodletting practices in terms of the equalization of the 
water flow rate stemming from his experiment with the tin tube? Moreover, Quesnay was aware of 
the  circulatory  system  discoveries  made  by  Borelli  (2011  [1680,  1681])  and  Malpighi  (1958 
[1661]),  which  meant  that,  as  a  physician,  Quesnay  sustained  that  blood  flows  tended  to  flow 
throughout the human body at the same speed. It certainly encompassed pulmonary circulation:   

It is obvious that if the amount of blood that comes out of the bleeding is repaired by a similar amount of 
blood that occurs, everything is restored to the same state as before; the resistances will gather around the 
same  balance.  However,  this  balance  is  the  term  of  the  branch;  because  the  derivation  always  assumes 

 

10 

less resistance in the vessels where it is. Thus, there is little or a lot of blood in the vessels, the amount 
that goes into more in those where there is revulsion, is always equal to the amount of blood that comes 
out by bleeding. (Quesnay, 1750 p. 190).16 

Foley  (1973,  p.  130)  links  his  “origin  of  the  Tableau”  to  Quesnay’s  neglected  pulmonary 
circulation.  This claim  is important  since  blood,  like  noble  rents  in  the  Tableau, was  divided  into 
two flows when it came out of the heart. This two-fold division “brings to focus several key points 
about  the  hypothesis  that  Quesnay’s  economic  theory  borrows  from  his  medical  views”  (Foley 
1973, p. 130). 

However,  Quesnay  (1747,  p.  422-423)  did  not  neglect  pulmonary  circulation  in  in 
Oeconomie  Animale.  Actually,  pulmonary  circulation  was  very  important  to  Quesnay’s  natural 
system because it is through respiration that ether, the vital principle, entered the body. Moreover, 
air  in  the  lungs  provided  one  more  source  of  power  to  the  circulatory  system  besides  heart  and 
artery contraction. This was exactly opposite to Foley’s claim.  

When  blood  is  coming  to  the  right  ventricle  of  the  heart,  it  is  pushed  into  the  pulmonary  artery  that 
distributes it in the lung, and is taken over by the pulmonary vein, which reports the left ventricle of the 
heart, where it is expelled immediately to repeat the same movement. 

The continuous pressure of the air that we breathe, much contributes to the movement of blood flowing 
through the lung. It is even absolutely necessary to route the blood in the vessels of this organ [...] 

[...]  And  our  body  is  a  machine,  which  the  interior  movements  depend  on  an  external  cause,  and  it 
resembles to those machinery powered by water or wind (Quesnay, 1747, p. 422-423)17.  

An  important  element  mentioned above  is  the  analogy  of  the  human  body  with  a  machine 
(hydraulic  and  air  machine).  If  political  economy  was  related  to  political  body,  then  the  use  of 
machines  as  an  analogy  to  explain  Oeconomie  social  perfectly  fit  the  18th  century  discourse.  The 
Tableau Economique was a machine, a model that aimed to explain the effects of fiscal policy  on 
income and expenditures flows: 

I  have  tried  to  construct  a  fundamental  Tableau  of  the  economic  order  for  the  purpose  of  displaying 
expenditure  and products  in a way  which  is easy to understand, and  for the purpose of  forming a  clear 

                                                             

16 Il est evident en effet que si la quantité de sang qui sort par la saignée est réparée par une pareille quantité de sang qui 
survient,  tout  est  rétabli  dans  le  même  état  qu’auparavant;  les  resistances  se  retrouveront  partout  dans  le  même 
équilibre. Or, cet équilibre est le terme de la dérivation; car la dérivation suppose toujours une moindre résistance dans 
les vaisseaux où elle se fait. Ainsi, soit qu’il y ait peu ou beaucoup de sang dans les vaisseaux, la quantité qui en passe 
de plus dans ceux où il y a révulsion, est toujours égale à la quantité de sang qui sort par la saignée (Quesnay, 1750 p. 
190). 

17 Lorsque le sang est arrive au ventricule droit du Coeur, il est poussé dans l’artere pulmonaire qui le distribue dans le 
poumon, et il est repris par la veine pulmonaire qui le rapporte au ventricule gauche du Coeur, d’où il est chassé aussitôt 
pour recommencer  la  même circulation. La pression  momentanée et successive de  l’air, que nous respirons, contribui 
beaucoup au mouvement du sang qui circule dans le poumon. Elle est même absolument nécessaire pour faire cheminer 
le  sang  dans  les  vaisseaux  de  ce  viscere  […]  […]  ainsi  notre  corps  est  une  machine,  don’t  les  mouvemens  interieurs 
dépendent  d’une  cause  extérieure,  et  qui  ressemble  en  cela  aux  machines  que  l’eau  ou  le  vent  mettent  an  movement 
(Quesnay, 1747, p. 422-423). 

 

11 

opinion about the organization and disorganization the government can cause (Quesnay, 1758 as cited in 
Meek, 2003, p. 108).18

 

Therefore,  the  twofold  division  could  be  seen  as  a  legacy  of  physiological  reasoning  to 
economic theory only if pulmonary circulation was neglected. Foley (1973, p. 130-131) argued that 
Quesnay was not aware of the physiological relevance of pulmonary circulation because “at some 
point,  Harvey’s  contributions  were  corrupted”.    Here  three  important  claims  must  be  raised:  first, 
since  Harvey  played  very  important  role  in  medical  history  and  the  scientific  revolution,  it  was 
necessary to sustain exactly when Harvey’s discoveries were corrupted by documentary sources and 
second,  it  was  possible  to  demonstrate  that  Harvey’s  circulation  system  was  in  the  very  center  of 
mechanistic approach in the early 18th century. 

Finally,  and  most  importantly,  Quesnay  (1747,  p.418)  was  aware  of  Harvey’s  depiction  of 
the circulatory system saying that “the discovery of the circulation has shed light on the physics of 
Animal  Oeconomy.”19  The  twofold  division  of  the  circulatory  system  from  the  left  ventricle  also 
gave rise to the famous analogy that could translate physiology in economics:  

Thus a major similarity between the circulation of the Tableau and the circulation of Quesnay’s medical 
scheme published a quarter-century before lies in the fact that they both begin with an initial division of 
the circulating medium into two separate and equal flows (Foley, 1973, p. 134)  

At  this  point,  Foley  (1973,  p.  134)  argues  that  this  was  exactly  the  reason  why  Quesnay 
“decided  to  split  his  hypothetical  society  into  two  and  only  two  social  classes.”    But  this  is  a 
misleading statement. In a later version of the Tableau, the Analyse de la formule arithmétique du 
Tableau,  Quesnay  (1766  [1888],  p.  305)  was  quite  explicit  about  his  economic  classification  of 
society  claiming  that  “the  nation  is  reduced  to  three  classes  of  citizens:  the  productive  class,  the 
owners’ class and the sterile class.”20 

Reducing  Quesnay’s  social  scheme  into  only  two  classes  was  important  to  Foley’s 
discussion  as  it  gave  rise  to  the  analogy  between  social  classes  and  the  circulatory  system.  Foley 
argues that, in the mid 18th century medical thought, arteries were believed to have the property of 
contraction which put pressure and motion to blood flow. The productive class was identified with 
arteries since only this class added value, that is, this class,  just like arteries, played active role in 
both physiological and economic system. Veins, as long as they served as passive channels whereby 
blood flows, could be understood as the sterile class in social structure (Foley, 1973, p. 134-136).  

Foley (1973) tried to translate the most important feature of physiocratic thought: agriculture 
as  the  exclusive  source  of  social  output  into  the  basic  structure  of  the  circulatory  system. 
Nevertheless, anatomy gives evidence against Foley’s analogy: it was the aorta, an artery that leads 
the  blood  from  the  left  ventricle  to  both  sterile  and  productive  class.  This  was  well-known  by 
medicine  practitioners  at  that  time.  To  claim  that  sterile  class  could  be  translated  as  veins  in  the 
system  implied  that  this  class  transformed  arterial  blood  into  venous  blood.  But  then  again,  since 

                                                             
18 As Théré and Loic (2008) pointed out, Quesnay was a rather unnoticeable figure in the context of Versailles court. 
Publishing articles with pseudonymous was part of his strategy to remain discreet. So Quesnay was not supposed to be 
as an enthusiastic spokesman of his own theories within French nobility, particularly about tax related issues. 

19  La  découverte  de  la  circulation  a  répandu  de  grandes  lumieres  dans  la  Physique  de  l’Oeconomie  Animale  […] 
(Quesnay, 1747, p.418). 

20  La nation est réduite à trois classes de  citoyens:  la classe productive,  la classes des propriétaires et la classe  sterile 
(Quesnay, 1886, p. 305). 

 

12 

Borelli (2011 [1680, 1681]) and Malpighi (1958 [1661]) in the late 17th century, physiologists knew 
that gas exchange occurred in the lungs.  

Even  if  Quesnay  (1750,  p.  166)  explicitly  recognized  that  “blood  is  divided  out  of  the left 
ventricle of the heart into two currents,”21 it can only be viewed as a simple physiological statement 
and  not  a  genetic  trace  that  was  to  be  found  in  Quesnay’s  economic  theory.  As  pointed  out  by 
Forbonnais  (1766),  even  if  the  nobles’  rents  were  not  split  from  the  very  first  expenditure  of  the 
fiscal  year,  further  subdivisions  of  the  expenditures  within  and  across  the  productive  and  sterile 
classes  would  guarantee  the  final  balance  in  terms  of  the  composition  of  aggregate  demand  and 
exchange value. That outcome was possible because the sterile class’s spend its total income on the 
output of the productive class.22 

However, it is not only blood that should be translated into wealth in the  Tableau. In order 
to support the physiological origin of the Tableau, the net product cannot be identified with blood 
but  rather  with  the  vital  principle  that  gives  rise  to  the  motion  in  the  system.  A  misleading  or 
incomplete reading of Quesnay’s medical writings gives rise to false conclusions and analogies. The 
vital principle’s operation did not take place in  blood, but in the nerves: “It was recognized by all 
terms that this first principle lies within the nerves and experience does not allow any doubt about it 
(Quesnay,  1747,  p.  104).23  This  approach  was  in  line  with  the  blend  of  neo-mechanistic  and  vital 
principle schools of natural thought to which Quesnay was affiliated to.  

Any legacy of physiological and natural philosophy to political economy must be traced in 
Quesnay’s  broader  approach  to  chemistry.  As  mentioned  before,  ether  was  the  source  of  motion, 
heat and natural processes. In that sense, agriculture as the exclusive source of the net product can 
be explained in terms of the chemical and ecological role played by this general principle, the ether. 

Quesnay’s  second  contribution  to  Encyclopédie  shows  the  macroeconomic  role  played  by 

agriculture in the political body: 

[...]  But  the  principle  of  all  these  benefits  is  in  agriculture,  which  provides  the  first  need  of  material, 
which provides reserves to the king and to the owners, tithes to clergy, and profits to farmers. These are 
first wealth, always renewed, which support all the other states of the kingdom, which give the business 
to  all  other  professions,  which  blooms  the  trade  that  favor  the  population,  which  animate  the  industry, 
which maintain prosperity of the nation (Quesnay, 1888 [1757], p. 215-216).24 

                                                             
21 Le sang est partagé a la sortie du ventricule gauche du Coeur en deux courans […] (1750, p. 166). 

22 As early as 1767, there was a debate about the effects of the sectorial composition of aggregate demand on the output 
level in the Tableau Économique. Forbonnais (1767) claimed that a decrease in total output would take place only if the 
sterile class did not spend his whole income on agricultural goods, otherwise all income would return to the productive 
class regardless of  nobility expenditure pattern. Abbé  Baudeau, chief-editor of the  Ephémérides du Citoyen answered 
such criticism without addressing  neither the  methodological  nor the theoretical points  identified  by  Forbonnais (Van 
der Berg, 2002).   

23 On a reconnu de tous terms, que ce premiere principe reside dans les nerves et l’experiénce ne permet pas d’en douter 
(Quesnay, 1747, p. 104). 

24  […]  mais  le  principle  de  tous  ces  avantages  est  dans  l’agriculture,  qui  fournit  les  matières  de  premier  besoin,  qui 
donne des reserves au roi et aux propriétaires, des dîmes au clergé, des profits aux cultivateurs. Ce sont ces premiéres 
richesses, toujours renouvelées, qui soutiennent tous les autres états du royaume, qui donnent de l’activité à toutes les 
autres professions, qui font fleurir le commerce, qui favorisent la population, qui animent l’industrie, qui entretiennent 
la prosperité de la nation (Quesnay, 1886 [1757], p. 215-216). 

 

13 

 In the latest and expanded edition of  Quesnay’s treatise on physiology, Essai Physique sur 
L’Oeconomie  Animale  (1747),  the  author  describes  the  “macroeconomic”  role  played  by  the  vital 
principle, that is, ether as the source of motion in animal economy:  

This  requires  that the  Vital  Spirit  is  itself  an  activity  that  in  order to  give  birth  to  all  these  movements 
need  not  but  simple  causes:  Muscles  that  are  the  organs  through  which  the  parties  are  set  in  motion, 
derive their strength from a force driven to them by the continuous blood flow in their fibers, which puts 
them  in  contraction  as  early  as  the  liquid  is  either  delayed  or  intercepted  in  these  fibers;  but  the 
interception  or  delay  the  circulation  of  blood  in  the  muscles,  depends  itself  upon  a  first  force  that 
produces the fibers of these muscles to change by which the blood has stopped it. Now this first strength 
lies in the Nerves [...] (Quesnay, 1747, p. 109-110).25 

This  ‘premier  force’  is  the  “principle  to  which  we  must  attribute  this  huge  activity  of  the 
Animal Spirit, which gives us all our sensations and moves all our organs” (Quesnay, 1747, p. 112-
113).  Not  blood,  but  ether  was  the  nutritive  substance  of  both  social  and  animal  economy. 
Therefore, the Tableau Économique is not an analogy with the circulatory system but rather a subtle 
heuristic device that depicts the role played by ether in animal and social economy. 

To conclude, although nature provides the power to constantly renew the net product, what 
moves  the  whole  economic  system  is  the  capital  expenditure  undertaken  by  the  agricultural 
entrepreneur  (le  fermier).  In  fact,  even  in  Quesnay’s  very  first  economic  essays  (1757,  [1888]), 
capital  expenditure  is  a  central  element  in  his  economic  system.  Moreover,  nature  is  able  to 
reproduce itself, but political economy might indicate the proper ways nature forces should be used 
in order to assure abundance to the political body.   

V. 

FINAL REMARKS 

François  Quesnay  developed  an  eclectic  approach  to  his  physiological  thought.  As  a 
surgeon,  he  was  a  bloodletting  practitioner  aligned  with  Galen’s  and  Hippocrates’s  long  lasting 
theory of humors. Even before getting his medical degree, Quesnay (1736) was working on natural 
philosophy and physiology.  In a context in which mechanistic school was questioned, Quesnay was 
in  line  with  the  most  relevant  developments  in  chemistry  that  ultimately  led  him  to  adopt  the 
vitalistic  approach  without  affecting  his  rather  mechanistic  view  towards  the  human  body. 
Hydrodynamics,  the  theories  of  humors  and  the  vital  principle  were  blended  in  Quesnay’s 
physiological thought just before he changed to political economy.  

The analysis of the intellectual context of the 18th century debates about natural philosophy 
provided  the  historical  and  analytical  tools  to  retrace  a  possible  inheritance  from  physiology  to 
political  economy  to  the  Tableau  Économique.  Rather  than  the  circulatory  system,  the  Tableau 
might share some physiological influence in a broader sense: vital principle plus capital expenditure 
render possible the continuous reproduction of the political body over time. It  is the ecological and 
cyclical feature of the vital principle chemistry that provides capital yields in agriculture. Therefore, 
the  Tableau  was  not  an  analogy  to  the  circulatory  system  but  rather  the application  of  Quesnay’s 
physiological thought to political economy.    

                                                             
25 Il faut donc que l’Espirit Vital ait par lui-même une activité qui n’ait besoin, pour faire naître tous ces mouvements 
que  des  causes  simplement  déterminantes:  les  Muscles  qui  sont  les  organs  par  lesquels  les  parties  sont  mises  en 
mouvement, on à la verité une force que leur comunique le Sang qui coule continuellment dans leurs fibres, et qui les 
met en contraction aussi-tôt que le cours de ce liquid est ou retardé, ou intercepté dans ces fibres; mais cette interception 
ou ce retardement de la circulation du Sang dans les Muscles, depend lui-même d’une premiere force qui produit dans 
les fibres de ces Muscles un changement par lequel le Sang y est arrêté. Or cette premirer force reside dans les Nerfs 
[…]   (Quesnay, 1747, p. 109-110). 

 

 

14 

Apart  from  identifying  Quesnay’s  relative  position  in  the  debates  about  the  18th  century 
medical thought,  we criticize  the somehow traditional approach to  the Tableau Économique as an 
analogy  to  the  circulatory  system  as  proposed  by  Foley  (1973)  Christensen  (1994)  and  Banzhaf 
(2000). Based upon Quesnay’s medical writings it was possible to  relate the Tableau Économique 
to the author’s physiological thought in a far more subtle and sound theoretical way.  

Moreover, the paper identifies an agenda to conduct further research on the relation between 
fermier’s  capital  expenditure  and  the  ecological  role  played  by  the  vital  principle.  Capital  and 
chemistry sustain the political body. 

The  article concludes  that  it  is  possible  to  reunite  the  Tableau  with  previous  physiological 
thought  developed  by  Quesnay.  Actually,  this  possible  genetic  line  from  physiology  to  political 
economy in Quesnay is wide spread everywhere in the metaphysical form of an ether. 

REFERENCES 

Banzhaf, H. Spencer. 2000. “Productive Nature and the Net Product: Quesnay’s Economies Animal 

and Political.” History of Political Economy 32, 3: 517-552.  

Barna, T. 1975. “Tableau in modern guise.” The Economic Journal 85, 339 (Sep): 485-496.     

Bauer, Stephen. 1890. “Studies on the origin of the  French economics”. The Quarterly Journal of 

Economics 5, 1(Oct.): 100-107. 

Bernat,  Pasqual.  2013.  “El  Pólipo  de  Trembley:  el  animal-planta  que  transformó  la  biologia  del 

siglo XVIII.” Métode 78: 33-37.  

Bercé, Yves-Marie. 1997. “Os soldados de Napoleão vencidos pelo Tifo” In Jaques Le Goff, ed., As 

Doenças têm História. Lisboa: Terramar, pp. 161-172. 

Bilginsoy, C. 1994. “Quesnay’s Tableau Economique:  Analytics and Policy  Implications.” Oxford 

Economic Papers, New Series 46, 3 (Jul): 519-533. 

Borelli, J. A. [1680 and 1681] 2011. On the movement of animals. Berlin, etc.: Springer-Verlag. [De 
motu  animalium.  Pars  Prima.  Roma:  Angeli  Bernabo,  1680  and  De  motu  animalium.  Pars 
Altera. Roma: Angeli Bernabo, 1681].   

Broman,  Thomas.  1989.  “University  Reform  in  the  medical  thought  at  the  end  of  the  Eighteenth 
Century”.  Osiris, 2nd Series, Vol. 5, Science in Germany: The Intersection of Institutional 
and Intellectual Issues: 36-53.    

Charles, Loïc. 2003. “The visual history of the Tableau Économique.” The European Journal of the 

History of Economic Thought 10,4: 527-550.  

Christensen,  Paul  P.  1994.  “Fire,  motion,  and  productivity:  the  proto-energetics  of  nature  and 
economy  in  François  Quesnay.”  In  Phillip  Mirowsky,  ed.,  Natural  Images  in  Economic 
Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 249-288.  

Comte  d’Albon.  1775.  Élogue  Historique  de  François  Quesnay.  Paris:  L’imprimerie  de  Knapen. 

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k58086667.r=Comte+D%27Albon.langPT 

 

15 

Delacy,  Margaret.  1993.  “Influenza  Research  and  the  Medical  Profession  in  Eighteenth-Century 

Britain.” A Quarterly Journal Concerned with British Studies 25, 1 (Spring): 37-66. 

Descartes,  René.  1677.  L’Homme  de  René  Descartes  et  la  Formation  du  Foetus.  Paris:  Theodore 

Girard. http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k942459. 

Eltis,  W.  A.  1975.  “François  Quesnay:  A  Reinterpretation  1.  The  Tableau  Economique.”  Oxford 

Economic Papers, 27, 2 (Jul): 167-200. 

Forbonnais,  François Véron de. 1767.  Principes et observations oeconomiques. Amsterdam: Marc 
Rey. 

Michel 
http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=RTJXAAAAcAAJ&printsec=frontcover&hl=pt-
BR&source=gbs_ge_summary_r&cad=0#v=onepage&q&f=false 

Friedman,  Mayer  and  Friedland,  Gerald  W.  2000.  Medicine’s  10  greatest  discoveries.  Yale:  Yale 

University Press.  

Foley, V. 1973. “An origin of the Tableau Économique.” History of Political Economy 5, 1: 121-50. 

Gherke, Christian and KURZ, Heins D. 1995. “Karl Marx on physiocracy.” The European Journal 

of the History of Economic Thought 2, 1: 53-90.  

Graslin,  Jean-Joseph-Louis.  [1767]  1911.  Essai  Analytique  sur  la  Richesse  et  sur  límpôt.  Paris: 

Librairie Laul Geuthner. http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k800687.r=.langPT 

Groenewegen,  Peter.  2001.  “From  prominent  physician  to  major  economist.  Some  reflectios  on 
Quesnay’s  switch  to  economics  in  the  1750’s.”  In  P.  Groenewegen,  ed.,  Physicians  and 
Political  Economy.  Six  studies  of  the  work  of  doctor-economists.  London  and  New  York: 
Routledge, pp. 155-186.   

_____.  2002.  “Quesnay’s  first  publication  in  economics.  The  article  “Fermiers”  for  the 
Encyclopédie – an introduction.” . In P. Groenewegen, ed., Eighteenth Century Economics. 
Turgot,  Beccaria  and  Smith  and  their  contemporaries.  London  and  New  York:  Routledge, 
pp.247-262.   

Hamilton,  Bernice.  1951.  “The  medical  profession  in  the  Eighteenth-Century.”  The  Economic 

History Review 4 (2): 141-169.   

Harvey,  William.  [1628]  1993.  On  the  motion  of  the  heart  and  blood  in  animals.  New  York: 
Prometheus  Books.  [Exercitation  anatomica  de  motu  cordis  et  sanguinis  in  animalibus. 
Frankfurt am Main.] 

Maital,  S.  1972.  “The  Tableau  Economique  as  a  simple  Leontief  Model:  an  amendment.”  The 

Quartely Journal of Economics 86, 3 (Aug): 504-507  

Malpighi, Maecello. [1661] 1958. De pulmonibus. Roma: Societá Italiana di Istochimica.  

Maquet, Paul. 1992. “Iatrophysics to biomechanics.  From  Borelli (1608-1679) to  Paulwels (1885-
(may):  335-339. 

1990).”  The  Journal  of  Bone  and  Joint  Surgery  74b,  3 
http://www.boneandjoint.org.uk/highwire/filestream/14782/field_highwire_article_pdf/0/33
5.full-text.pdf. 

 

16 

Marcuzzo,  Maria  Cristina.  2008.  “Is  history  of  economic  thought  a  “serious”  subject?”  Erasmus 

Journal for Philosophy and Economics 1, 1 (Autumn): 107-123. 

Marx, Karl. 1966. El Capital. Ciudad de México, DF: Fondo de Cultura Económica.  

_____. 

1863. 

Theories 

of 

Surplus-Value. 

E-book. 

https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/download/prc/ 

Meek, R. L. 1960. “The Interpretation of the Tableau Economique.” Economica 27, 108 (nov): 322-

347.   

_____. [1962] 2003. The economics of physiocracy. London and New York: Routledge.  

Mitchell,  Harvey.  1979.  “Rationality  and  control  in  French  Eighteenth-Century  medical  views  of 

the peasantry.” Comparative Studies in Society and History 21, 1 (Jan.): 82-112. 

Moliére, J. B. P. 1815. Oeuvres de J. B. P. Molière. Tome Septième. Paris: Chez T Desoer.  

Mossé, Claude. 1997. “As lições de Hipócrates”. In Jaques Le Goff,  ed., As Doenças têm História. 

Lisboa: Terramar, pp. 39-55. 

Oncken,  A.  1888.  Oeuvres  économiques  et  philosophiques  de  F.  Quesnay.  Paris:  Jules  Peelman.  

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k72832q.r=Oncken%2C+August.langPT. 

Orain,  Arnaud.  2013.  “Soutenir  la  guerre  et  reformer  la  fiscalité.  Silhouette  et  Forbonnais  au 

contrôle general des finances.” French Historical Studies 36, 3 (summer): 417-447.  

Quesnay,  François.  1736.  Essai  phisique  sur  l’economie  animale.  Paris:  Guillaume  Cavelier. 

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k829070.r=Quesnay%2C+Fran%C3%A7ois.langPT. 

_____. 1747. Essai physique sur l’oeconomie animale. Seconde Edition. Paris, Guillaume Cavelier. 

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k829070.r=Quesnay%2C+Fran%C3%A7ois.langPT. 

_____.  1750.  Traité  des  effets  et  de  l’usage  de  la  saignée.  Nouvelle  edition  de  deux  traités  de 
l’auteur sur la saignée, réunis, mis dans um nouvel ordre et três augmentés. Paris: D’houry. 
http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k2819495.r=Quesnay%2C+Fran%C3%A7ois.langPT. 

_____.  [1756]  1958.  “Evidence”.  Quesnay  et  la  Physiocratie.  2  V.  Paris:  Institute  National  de 

l’économie et de la demographie. 

Steiner,  Philippe.  2003.  “Physiocracy  and  French  pre-classical  political  economy”.  In  Warren  J. 
Samuel;  Jeff  E.  Biddle  and,  John  B.  Davis,  eds.,  A  companion  to  the  history  of  economic 
thought.  Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, pp. 61-77.  

Schabas,  Margaret.  2005.  The  Natural  Origins  of  Economics.  Chicago  and  London:  The  Chicago 

University Press. 

_____. 2009. “Constructing “the economy”.” Philosophy of the Social Sciences 39 (1): 3-19. 

Schumpeter, J. A. 1954. History of Economic Analysis. London: Allen and Unwin.    

 

17 

Serrano,  F.  and  Mazat,  N.  2013.  “Quesnay  and  the  analysis  of  surplus  in  an  agrarian  capitalist 

economy.” MPRA Paper. 47781, (jun). http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/47781/ 

Schelle,  Gustave.  1907.  Le  docteur  Quesnay,  chirurgien,  Médicen  de  Madame  Pompadour  et  de 

Louis XV, Physiocrate.  Paris.  

Silva, Jean Baptieste. 1727.  Traité de l’usage des diferentes sortes de saignées, principalmente de 
l’Imprimerie  Royale. 

Paris:  D’Aannison,  Directeur 

celle 
http://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=ucm.5327730337;view=1up;seq=7 

pied. 

du 

de 

Smith,  Adam.  [1776]  2005.  The  Wealth  of  Nations.  http://www2.hn.psu.edu/faculty/jmanis/adam-

smith/wealth-nations.pdf 

Sutter,  J.  1958.  “Quesnay  et  la  medicine”.  Quesnay,  François.  Quesnay  et  la  Physiocratie.  2  V. 

Paris: Institute National de l’économie et de la demographie.  

Théré, Christine. 1998. “Economic publishing and authors, 1566-1779.” In Gilbert Faccarello, ed., 
Studies in the history of French political economy. London and New York: Routledge, pp. 1-
56.  

_____  and  Charles,  Loïc,.  2008.”  The  workshop  of  François  Quesnay  and  the  making  of 

Physiocracy.” History of Political Economy 40, 1: (5-42).    

Van  den  Berg,  Richard.  2002.  Contemporary  responses  to  the  Tableau  Économique.  In  Stephan 
Boehm,  Christian  Gehrke,  Heinz  D.  Kurz  and  Richard  Sturn,  eds.,  Is  there  progress  in 
economics?  Knowledge,  truth  and  the  history  of  economic  thought.  Cheltenham:  Edward 
Elgar, pp. 295-318. 

Vardi,  Liana.  2012.  The  Physiocrats  and  the  world  of  enlightenment.  Cambridge  and  New  York: 

Cambridge University Press.    

 

Vaggi, G. 1985. “A Physiocratic Model of Relative Prices and Income Distribution.” The Economic 

Journal 95, 380 (Dec.): 928-947. 

Walras, Leon. [1874] 1926. Élements d’économie politique pure ou Theorie de la richesse sociale. 
Rouge.  

R.  Durand-Aurais 

Lausanne: 

R. 

F. 

et 

Paris: 
http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k111752b#. 

Pichon 

et 

 

18 

