 

 

THE EVOLUTION OF A METHODOLOGY FOR RELEVANT MARKET DEFINITION: AN 

ANALYSIS OF CADE’s JURISPRUDENCE ON PRIVATE HIGHER EDUCATIONAL MARKETS 

 

Thomaz Teodorovicz* 
Tainá Leandro† 
Luiz Alberto Esteves‡ 

 
ÁREA 9 - Economia Industrial e da Tecnologia 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The  implementation  of  antitrust  legislation  implies  the  delimitation  of  the  smaller  space  in  which  any 
excessive  market  power  could  be  exercised:  the  “relevant  market”.  Since  2007  a  wave  of  mergers  and 
acquisitions  in  the  private  higher  educational  market  has  placed  a  challenge  upon  Brazilian  antitrust 
agency  (CADE).  Several  methodologies  for  accurate  definition  of  higher  educational  relevant  market 
have been used and tested, also differentiating presence from distance education markets. This paper aims 
to  structure the evolution of CADE’s methodologies for relevant  market  definition in the private  higher 
educational segment, exposing their limitations and advances. Through a qualitative analyses of votes and 
technical  documents  regarding  all  cases  from  the  higher  educational  that  were  analyzed  by  CADE,  we 
found that the methodologies are becoming increasingly more pragmatic and quantitative, departing from 
a  former  “reasonability”  approach  towards  a  statistical  method,  in  order  to  cope  with  newer  levels  of 
complexity in the private higher educational market. 
 
Keywords: Relevant market; antitrust regulation; private education. 
JEL Code: K22; L41 
 
RESUMO 
 
A  implantação  da  legislação  antitruste  implica  na  delimitação  do  menor  espaço  no  qual  um  excessivo 
poder  de  mercado  poderia  se  exercido:  o  “mercado  relevante”.  Desde  2007,  uma  onda  de  integrações 
horizontais  no  mercado  de  ensino  superior  privado  tem  desafiado  a  agência  brasileira  de  defesa  da 
concorrência (CADE). Diversas metodologias para a definição do mercado relevante  do ensino superior 
foram testadas e utilizadas, diferenciando ensino presencial e à distância. Este trabalho busca estruturar a 
evolução das metodologias aplicadas pelo CADE para a delimitação do mercado relevante no segmento 
de  ensino  superior  privado,  expondo  suas  limitações  e  avanços.  A  partir  de  uma  análise  qualitativa  dos 
votos  e  pareceres  técnicos  de  casos  de  educação  superior  submetidos  ao  CADE,  conclui-se  que 
abordagens  pautadas  em  definições  “razoáveis”  foram  substituídas  por  novos  métodos  estatísticos  e 
pragmáticos de modo a melhor analisar os novos e mais complexos casos do mercado educacional.  
 
Palavras-chave: Mercado relevante; regulação antitruste; educação privada. 
Código JEL: K22; L41 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                            
* UFPR 
† ANCINE 
‡ CADE; UFPR; CNPQ 

1 

 
1 INTRODUCTION 
 
 
What  is  the  competition  space  affected  by  horizontal  and  vertical  integrations  and  therefore 
subject to abusive conduct by firms with market power? The answer to this question represents the core of 
antitrust regulation. To enforce antitrust legislation, remarkably on the prevention of the abusive exercise 
of  market  power,  usually  implies  the  delimitation  of  the  smallest  competition  and  economic  space  in 
which  such  power  can  be  practiced:  the  “relevant  market”.  By  analyzing  technical  and  economic 
variables, antitrust agencies attempt to accurately define the “relevant market” where competition actually 
takes place and economic agents could possible incur on anticompetitive behavior. 
 
 Ever  since  2007,  a  wave  of  mergers  and  acquisitions  has  been  observed  in  Brazilian  private 
higher  educational  segment,  leading  to  a  prominent  discussion  about  its  impacts  on  the  national 
educational system and  on how the relevant  market  should be defined. Central  to  this convoluted  issue, 
the “Conselho Administrativo de Defesa Econômica”1 (CADE), Brazilian antitrust agency, evaluates the 
conditions that may influence competition in such segment. While demand and supply substitutability stir 
debates  on  the  ‘traditional’  presence  educational  market,  the  evolution  of  technology  systems  and 
learning/teaching  methods  resulted  in  the  ascent  of  distance  higher  educational  courses  and  have 
introduced new features that further complicated relevant market definition. The  recent merger between 
two of the biggest educational groups in Brazil: Anhanguera and Kroton, exemplifies the entanglements 
faced  by  CADE.  The  necessity  of  an  extensive  study  related  with  distance  courses  resulted  in  CADE’s 
requirement for a deadline extension in order to  more accurately analyze the likely competitive impacts 
resulting from this merger. 
 
A  set  of  different  methodologies  has  been  applied  by  the  “Secretária  de  Acompanhamento 
Econômico”2 (SEAE) and CADE to establish competitive boundaries in the higher educational segment. 
This paper aims to present and review these methodologies for defining the relevant relevant within the 
higher  educational  segment,  exposing  both  their  limitations  and  improvements.  This  study  is  based  on 
information collected from CADE’s precedents regarding this segment, which are analyzed quantitatively 
and  qualitatively  to  expose  the  Agency’s  position  regarding  antitrust  analysis  on  higher  educational 
market and to identify the most important methods in jurisprudence for relevant market definition. 
 
Aside from  this introduction, this paper is  divided in  four  sections. The next section  presents  a 
brief summary of the private higher education market’s legal and economic characteristics which justifies 
CADE’s  oversight.  Section  3  presents  a  quantitative  summary  of  all  mergers  and  acquisitions  in  this 
market that were analyzed by CADE. Section 4 concisely reviews the concept of “relevant market” and 
then structures this work’s main contribution: the evolution of CADE’s methodology for relevant market 
definition  in  both  presence  and  distance  private  higher  educational  market.  The  fifth  and  last  section 
concludes and proposes further studies. 
 
2  LEGAL  AND  ECONOMIC  BASIS  FOR  BRAZILIAN  PRIVATE  HIGHER  EDUCATIONAL 
MARKET  
 
 
In order to understand the structure of the Brazilian private higher educational market, it is first 
necessary  to  establish  the  legal  framework  under  which  the  agents  compete.  Mendonça  (2012,  p.  3-9) 
provides the legislative history of such segment in Brazil, which according to him can be summarized by 
five  main  legislative  events:  i)    issuance  of  law  4.024/61,  structuring  guidelines  and  basis  for  Brazilian 
educational  system;  ii)  1968  academic  reform;  iii)  1988  Federal  Constitution;  iv)  issuance  of  law 
9.394/96,  replacing  the  law  4.024/61  and  establishing  new  guidelines  and  basis  for  Brazilian  education 
system; and v) issuance of Act 2.306/1997, institutionalizing the profit-based education institution. 
 
In  1961,  the  Law  nº  4.024/1961  (BRAZIL,  1961)  established  that  the  service  of  “higher 
education” in Brazil would be provided by establishments or universities in cooperation with research or 

                                            
1 “Administrative Council for Economic Defense”. 
2 “Secretariat for Economic Monitoring”. 

2 

 
professional  training  centers3,  and  such  service  would  be  constituted  of  undergraduate,  graduate  and 
specialization  courses4.  Moreover,  article  80  dictated  that  universities  would  also  have  administrative, 
financial,  disciplinary,  and  teaching  autonomy.  In  1968,  law  4.024/61  (BRAZIL,  1968)  was 
complemented by law 5.540/1968, which distinctively determined that high education services could be 
supplied by both public and private institutions5.  
The  1988  Constitution  (BRAZIL,  1988)  reaffirmed 
the legality of private  education institutions in  its article 209, bounding the permit  to  two conditions: i) 
submission and accordance with education national norms; and ii) approval and quality evaluation by the 
public  power.  Subsequently,  in  1996,  the  issuance  of  law  9.394/1996  (BRAZIL,  1996),  which  revoked 
law  4.024/61,  established  that  the  national  education  system  would  be  composed  by  i)  institutions 
administered by the Union; ii) institutions created and administered by private initiative; and iii) federal 
education  agencies6.  It  also  postulated  that  high  education  institutes  should  be  classified  in  one  of  two 
groups: public (those who were created or incorporated, sustained, and administered by the public power) 
or private (those sustained and administered by individuals or institutions subject to private law)7. 
 
By  the  end  of  1996,  previous  legislative  pieces,  including  law  9.394/96,  granted  private 
institutions  the  right  to  provide  higher  educational  services.  However,  it  was  only  the  Act  nº  2.306 
(BRAZIL, 1997) that allowed private educational institutions to have lucrative purpose, being treated as a 
‘regular’  commercial  institutions,  including  being  submitted  to  the  same  fiscal,  labor  and  commercial 
legislations8. A second innovation was also introduced by article 12, which granted them the autonomy to 
create,  organize  and  eliminate  higher  education  courses  within  its  establishments.  Finally,  the  third 
innovation  started  an  approximation  between  the  education  segment  and  competition  concerns,  by 
mandating  that  high  education  institutions  transfers  from  one  economic  group  to  another  should  be 
submitted and validated by the Education Ministry9 10.  
The legislative evolution that established the figure of the private higher educational institution 
 
(private  HEI)  is  important  for  two  main  reasons:  i)  it  allowed  profit-seeking  firms  to  start  operating  in 
Brazilian  education  segment;  and  ii)  through  the  issuance  of  law  9.3964/96  and  Act  2.306  (revoked  by 
Act 3.860/2001, which was subsequently revoked by Act 5.773/2006), the higher educational market was 
legally segmented in two main groups: public and private HEIs, those last divided between for-profit and 
nonprofit  institutions.  Especially,  the  for-profit  HEIs  adopted  the  traditional  business  logic:  profit-
maximization  with  their  main  service  being  education  courses  oriented  to  professionalization  and 
placement in the job market (BRAZIL, 2012b).  
 
There are deeper differences in both supply and demand conditions which justify the segregation 
between  private  and  public  HEIs  (Sécca  and  Leal,  2009;  BRAZIL,  2012c).  Five  characteristics  related 
with supply conditions sustain this dichotomy: 

1) Academic x Professional orientation: while public HEIs have more professors with graduate 
degrees  and higher research levels; private HEIs  are market-oriented, seeking to  prepare the 
student based on a business-approach; 

2) Flexibility:  since  public  HEIs  are  bounded  by  legal  restraints,  public  bureaucracy  and 
government policy, they are more inflexible when it comes to demand-oriented changes and 
innovation than private HEIs; 

3) Diurnal x Nocturnal courses: since private HEIs are business-oriented, they supply more than 

60% of its courses on nocturnal basis, while public HEIs offer diurnal courses mostly; 

4) Admissions: public HEIs have limited placements and a more competitive entry examination 

due to its non-paid,  high standard of quality and market recognition characteristic; 

                                            
3 Article 67. 
4 Article 69. 
5 Article 2. 
6 Article 16. 
7 Article 19. 
8 Article 7.  
9 Article 11, § 2°. 
10 In 2001, this Act was revoked by Act 3.860/2001 (BRAZIL, 2001), which was then revoked by Act 5.773/2006 (BRAZIL, 
2006),  but  both  maintained  the  basic  features  of  the  private  higher  educational  market  which  are  important  for  this  paper’s 
intent. 

 

5) Capillarity:  private  HEIs  groups  tend  to  have  national  capillarity  due  to  maintenance  of 
several  different  universities  or  centers  at  the  same  time.  While  usually  bigger  in  individual 
terms, public HEIs have each its own regulations and policies, being regionally located; 

3 

 
As for demand factors, there is a historical condition in which Brazilian public HEIs not only are 
usually  frequented  by  an  economic  elite,  but  also  hold  the  top-ranking  positions  on  quality  national 
rankings, leading to better market acceptance when compared with private HEIs.  According to Folha de 
São  Paulo’s  university  ranking  (FOLHA,  2014),  amongst  the  top  50  universities  in  Brazil  in  2013,  43 
were  public  while  only  7  were  private  institutions11.  Private  HEIs  usually  offer  its  services  for  low-
income  students  who  already  have  a  job  and  seek  professionalization,  especially  because  difference 
between tuition fees is an important factor for them. With this first distinction among private and public 
HEIs, it is then justifiable to delimitate the scope of this study to the private higher educational market. 
 
3 PRIVATE HIGHER EDUCATIONAL MARKET IN CADE: A QUANTITATIVE SUMMARY 
 
 
The first  merger  case  in  the private  education service market  was  analyzed by CADE  in  2007, 
when  “Grupo  Estácio  de  Sá”  (Estácio),  a  national  holding  of  private  education  centers,  acquired  the 
“Instituto  Radial  de  Ensino  e  Pesquisa”  (IREP)12.  Ever  since,  a  total  of  57  horizontal  integrations  have 
been reviewed by CADE in the private educational market. As shown in table 1, more than 90% (52 out 
of 57) of mergers affected the higher educational segment, which makes this segment the most frequent in 
CADE’s jurisprudence:  
 
Table 1  – Quantity of  mergers/acquisitions in  the private  educational  market judged by  CADE (by type of education; 2007-
May/2014). 
 

Higher 

education¹ 

Primary/ 
Secondary 
education 

Language 

courses 

Other courses² 

Total³ 

4 

4 

2 

57 

52 

Mergers/Acquisitions 
Elaboration based on data retrieved from CADE (2014). 
¹ “Higher educational” comprises the sum of technical, undergraduate, graduate and specialization courses. 
² “Other courses” comprises preparatory courses for public examinations and professional training courses. 
³ “Total” does not account for the sum of all separate divisions because some cases affected more than one education segment. 
 
 
The  year  of  2007  also  marks  the  beginning  of  several  initial  public  offerings  by  education 
groups,  such  as  Anhanguera,  Kroton  and  Estácio,  in  Brazilian  stock  market.  This  trend  had  a  clear 
reflection in the number of private higher educational market horizontal integrations, estimated to be 150 
between 2007 and 2011 (BRAZIL, 2012c). Due to the aim of this paper, only those cases submitted for 
CADE’s  approval  were  considered,  and  they  show  a  high  concentration  of  mergers  in  4  educational 
groups:  Estácio,  Laureate,  Anhanguera  and  Kroton,  which  were  responsible  for  83%  of  all  horizontal 
integrations voted by CADE in the private higher educational segment (from 2007 to May/2014) (CADE, 
2014).  Not  only  that,  graphic  1  evidences  a  trend  in  such  mergers  and  acquisitions,  with  group  Estácio 
being the first to start a horizontal expansion strategy, and only later being followed by the others. More 
recently, Anhanguera and Kroton have been in evidence, not only because they are responsible for more 
than 60% of all voted cases in the period 2012-2014, but also because CADE, in May 2014, has  judged 
and  approved  with  restraints  the  merger  between  these  groups,  that  now  constitute  the  largest  private 
educational group in the country (merger n° 08700.005447/2013-12). 
 
Notwithstanding the prominence of the 4 aforementioned  groups,  a closer examination of their 
acquisitions  show  that  there  are  idiosyncrasies  regarding  each  strategy  for  horizontal  expansion.  As 
shown  in  figure  1,  groups  Estácio  and  Laureate13  acquired  mainly  universities  that  offered  exclusively 

                                            
11  With  exception  of  traditional,  and  already  prestigious  private  HEIs  such  as  “Pontifície  Universidade  Católica”  (PUC), 
“Ibemec”, ESPM, and “Fundação Getúlio Vargas” (FGV).  
12 Case n° 08012.011611/2007-31. 
13  Three  of  group  Laureate’s  horizontal  integrations  were  solely  an  increase  in  its  participation  on  already  controlled 
institutions. 

 
presence  high  education  services  in  an  attempt  to  expand  their  capillarity  in  the  North  and  Northeast 
states, while increasing their presence in the state of São Paulo. As for Kroton and Anhanguera, not only 
they  tried  to  expand  their  services  of  presence  higher  educational,  they  started  a  trend  of  buying 
institutions that also offered distance education courses, enhancing their national capillarity. 
 
Graphic  1  –  Evolution  of  mergers/acquisition  cases  analyzed  and  voted  by  CADE  in  the  private  higher  educational  market 
(share by economic group; 2007-May/2014) 
 

4 

 12

 10

 8

 6

 4

 2

 -

s
e
s
a
c
 
d
e
t
o
V

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

Estácio

Laureate (RIUL)

Kroton

Anhanguera

Others

2

-

-

-

-

7

-

-

-

2

1

2

-

-

2

1

3

1

2

-

2

1

1

3

2

2

-

4

1

3

1

1

1

5

-

1

-

-

1

-

Elaboration based on data retrieved from CADE (2014). 
 
Figure 1 –Acquisition network of the 4 greatest private higher educational groups (cases analyzed and voted by CADE; 2007-
2013) 

 

Elaboration based on data retrieved from CADE (2014). 

 

PHEI –presencecoursesPHEI–presenceanddistancecoursesHolding/MaintenancegroupAcquisition/MergerAdmnisteredPHEIIncreaseparticipationANHANGUERAFAMATUNI-CTSAESEUNIFECNOVATEC + IGABCCESUGFac.Int. ToricelliIEPLRSEPLUNIABCFac. AnchietaFac. Tec. AnchietaFac. Uirapuru + IMAPESUni. BandeiranteFac. Ciên. Apl. Casc.Fac. União BandeiranteEsc. Sup. de Educ. Corp.UNIBANSBHFac. Metr. BHPRAETORIUMKROTONUNIC SAUNIC FPUEVVUSEUNIC TNFac.Educ. de Ponta GrossaUNOPARFac. de Rio do sulFac. De SorrisoFac. Do Vale Itajaí MirimFac. Metr. BlumenauCULVFac. Reg. de Timbó. UNIASSELVIIUNIUNIC AEUNIC TSUnião de Fac. Do AmapáUNIME SalvadorSMECPLUNIME ItabunaUNIBRASUNIC VGUNIMECEAMAFAMAFac. Metr. GuaramirimUNIRONDONFCR –Campo VerdeCUCRFCR –CuiabáLAUREATE (RIUL)UNI-IBMRSOPESPSODECAMSPoEC+ SOCEC + SPaECASPECUNIRITTERUNINORTEFPBFac. dos GuarapesUNIFACSUAMISCPUnPESTÁCIOIREP (RADIAL)UniRadialFATEC/ RadialFac. Radial Jab.Fac. Tecn. ASFac. Tecn. Radial CtbaFac. Radial Ctba(PR)SESAPSESALSESSEUNECASSEAMAFac. SEAMAFABRASPFINTECABAETÊFac. InterlagosEuropanUNICEMMontessoriCECUnissoriSEAAFAASEAAFALUB São LuísFacSãoLuísSUDERNFABECTCAUniseb5 

 
   
Since  mergers  in  distance  higher  education  market  are  a  recent  trend,  CADE’s  jurisprudence 
regarding  distance  vis-à-vis  presence  courses  is  not  yet  consolidated.  In  2007,  the  first  acquisition 
concerning  this  market  was  analyzed:    merger  n°  08012.011782/2007-60,  a  horizontal  integration 
between group Estácio and two universities (EDUCON and FAEL)14. SEAE issued a non-binding opinion 
establishing that distance and presence courses are not in the same relevant market, even if they both offer 
higher  educational  services.  That  would  be  mainly  because  a  distance  higher  educational  requires 
different  preconditions  than  presence  ones,  such  as  a  special  register,  and  are  based  on  a  different 
technological  teaching  platform  (p.  7).  However,  the  claimants  dropped  the  analyzed  merger  before  its 
approval  and  the  next  case  that  accounted  for  this  division  was  judged  only  in  2012  (merger  ° 
08012.002734/2012-48),  then  leading  to  a  sequence  of  cases  that  divided  presence  from  distance 
educational markets15. 
Table 2 summarizes the statistics for all CADE’s decision regarding horizontal integration in the 
 
private higher educational market. With the exception of merger n° 08012.011782/2007-60 (dropped out 
by the parts), all  mergers  were  approved, but  14 of them conditioned to restrictions that varied from: i) 
alteration in non-competition clause; and ii) reaching a settlement which imposes structural or behavioral 
remedies for Parties, the Merger/Performance Agreement.  
 
Table 2 - Summary of CADE's decision regarding mergers/acquisitions in the private higher educational market (2007-2013) 

 

  

Approved 

    w/o restrictions 

    with restrictions² 

        Alteration in non-competition clause 

        Merger/Performance Agreement  

Non-approved 

Total (1) 

Presence 
education 

Distance 
education 

Total (2)¹ 

51 

38 

13 

9 

5 

1 

52 

8 

4 

4 

1 

3 

1 

9 

51 

37 

14 

9 

6 

1 

52 

 

 

Elaboration based on data retrieved from CADE (2014). 
¹ "Total (2)" does not represent the sum of presence and distance education mergers and acquisitions because there are cases 
in which the same horizontal integration includes both markets 
² "Approved with restrictions" does not represent the sum of "alteration in non-competition clause" and "PCT" because there 
are cases in which both restrictions were imposed by CADE or restrictions in only one market were imposed. 
 
 
The first  type of restriction is  related to  a common clause in  partial  acquisition  transactions, in 
which  the  buyer  introduces  a  non-competition  clause  in  the  contract,  prohibiting  the  acquired  group  of 
taking advantage of its experience and knowledge regarding the market in which he acted and creating a 
competitor in that relevant market (AZEVEDO, 2007). Usually CADE determines changes in such clause 
due  to  one  or  more  of  three  factors:  i)  broad  temporal  horizon;  or  ii)  clause’s  geographic/product 
definition broader than the relevant market affected by the merger. All of them are related with the proper 
definition of the relevant market and the non-competition clause should be restricted by its boundaries16.  
The second, signing an Agreement with CADE, is applied to merger and acquisition cases that 
shall  result  in  potential  competition  hazards,  imposing  net  welfare  loss  to  consumers.  In  this  sense,  in 
order to avoid CADE’s unilateral decisions to impose restrictions or not approve a horizontal integration, 

                                            
14 Technical report n° 06538/2007/RJ (BRAZIL, 2007b). 
15  For  private  distance  higher  educational  analysis,  see  mergers  08012.002734/2012-48;  08700.004112/2012-04; 
08012.000125/2012-54; 08012.009861/2011-97; 08012.001288/2012-54 
16 For non-competition clause restraints, see mergers 08012.011611/2007-31; 08012.006789/2008-41; 08012.004592/2011-72; 
08012.008463/2011-53; 08012.002734/2012-48; 08012.006610/2011-51; 08012.004979/2011-29. 

6 

 
the  parties  agree  to  certain  contractual  conditions  whose  objective  is  to  prevent  or  minimize  economic 
welfare losses derived from the integration17. 
 
An  accurate  definition  of  the  geographic  and  product  market,  along  with  a  study  of  entry 
conditions,  is  usually  the  first  step  in  CADE’s  antitrust  analysis.  Additional  challenges  rise  in  properly 
defining  such  ‘relevant  market’  in  the  private  higher  educational  segment,  since  there  are  factor  as:  i) 
intersection and interaction between presence and distance courses, ii) estimation of potential competition 
hazards  that  could  arise  from  an  horizontal  merger  or  acquisition,  iii)  choice  between  approving,  not 
approving  or  approving  with  some  restriction,  and  iv)  the  increasing  complexity  in  mergers  and 
acquisitions cases, associated with the market consolidation18. These challenges can be exemplified by the 
recent  merger  between  groups  Anhanguera  and  Kroton19.  Due  to  the  size  of  the  participants,  the  broad 
network of institutions involved across the country and the presence in both distance and presence higher 
educational market, CADE’s Commissioner Ana Frazão (BRAZIL, 2013) requested a deadline extension 
of 240 day for further analysis and better understanding of the impacts of such merger before issuing her 
vote  of  approving  the  merger  with  restrictions.  Supported  by  this  palpable  necessity  of  accurately 
delimiting the boundaries of the relevant market, to critically analyze and propose new methodologies for 
such definition comprise a challenging and necessary task. 
 
4  DEFINITION  OF  RELEVANT  MARKETS  IN  PRIVATE  EDUCATION  MARKET: 
EVOLUTION IN CADE’S METHODOLOGY 
 
 
The  complexity  of  horizontal  integrations  in  the  higher  educational  market  has  increased  since 
2007, and, along with  it  has CADE’s methodology  for relevant  market  definition. This  section presents 
this  evolution,  as  well  as  the  shortcomings  and  main  advances  of  each  methodology.  The  first  section 
briefly  reviews  the  concept  of  relevant  market.  The  second  section  targets  the  movement  of  presence 
higher educational definition from “reasonability” approaches (sub-section 4.2.1) towards an increasingly 
quantitative  analysis  (sub-section  4.2.2)  for  latter  achieving  a  more  advanced  statistical  methodology 
(sub-section 4.2.3). Finally, the third section attempts to briefly describe how distance higher educational 
relevant markets have been treated by CADE. 
 
4.1. THE CONCEPT OF RELEVANT MARKET 
 
 
To enforce antitrust legislation, remarkably on what concerns the study of potential competitive 
damage resultant from horizontal integrations, usually is necessary to define the “relevant market”20. This 
concept derives from the notion that a hypothetical firm, within a defined geographic scope of influence 
and  for  a  single  or  group  of  products,  could  act  as  if  it  were  a  monopolist  and  consequently  extract 
extraordinary  profits  by  controlling  price  and/or  output  due  to  the  absence  of  competitors.  The  relevant 
market’s  definition  is  presented  in  the  1997  US  Department  of  Justice  (US  DOJ)  and  Federal  Trade 
Commission (FTC) Horizontal Merger Guidelines: 
 
 
 

                                            
17  For  Agreements  restraints,  see  mergers  08012.005791/2012-89;  08012.006400/2011-62;  08012.003886/2011-87; 
08012.009861/2011-97; 08700.005447/2013-12; 08700.009198/2013-34. 
18 The rise in complexity is illustrated by the evolution on the share cases summarily analyzed by CADE. While between 2007 
and 2011, 94% of all private higher education mergers were summarily analyzed (30 out of 32), from 2012 to 2013 this share 
was reduced to 15% (3 out of 20) (CADE, 2014). 
19 Merger n° 08700.005447/2013-12 
20 According to the 2010 US Department of Justice (DoJ) and Federal Trade Commission (FTC) Horizontal Merger Guidelines 
(US DOJ; FTC, 2010, p. 7): “the Agencies’ analysis need not start with market definition. Some of the analytical tools used by 
the  Agencies  to  assess  competitive  effects  do  not  rely  on  market  definition,  although  evaluation  of  competitive  alternatives 
available to customers is always  necessary at  some point in the analysis. Evidence of competitive effects can  inform  market 
definition, just as market definition can be informative regarding competitive effects.” 

7 

 

A  market  is  defined  as  a  product  or  group  of  products  and  a  geographic  area  in  which  it  is 
produced or sold such that a hypothetical profit-maximizing firm, not subject to price regulation, 
that was the only present and future producer or seller of those products in that area likely would 
impose at least a "small but significant and nontransitory" increase in price, assuming the terms of 
sale  of  all  other  products  are  held  constant.  A  relevant  market  is  a  group  of  products  and  a 
geographic area that is no bigger than necessary to satisfy this test. (US DOJ; FTC, 1997, p. 5) 

 
 
Thus the relevant market is delimited through a combination of two fundamental dimensions: a 
product  market  and  a  geographic  market,  seeking  to  identify  the  extension  of  competition  between 
commercialized  substitutable  products  within  a  given  spatial  dimension.  While  the  geographic  market 
delimits  the  area  in  which  the  hypothetical  firm  acts,  the  product  market  identifies  a  set  of  specific 
characteristics  responsible  for  the  existence,  or  absence,  of  “good  substitutes”  (POSSAS,  1995).  This 
definition plays two crucial roles in  antitrust  analysis:  i)  to  specify the line of commerce and section of 
the country in which the competitive concern arises; and ii) to identify the likely market participants, its 
respective market  shares and the market  concentration  both  ex ante and ex post the proposed merger or 
act (US DOJ; FTC, 2010, p. 7). 
Whereas these dimensions represent  a static competitive arena,  to  assume that they are enough 
 
for  a  complete  analysis  would  be  a  mistake.  In  fact,  this  “photography”  must  be  combined  with  a 
temporal dimension, accounting for demand and supply dynamic conditions (SALOMÃO FILHO, 2002, 
p. 97-98). For the former, analysts address whether companies could adopt a monopolistic price strategy 
without substantially reducing quantity demanded, either due to actual consumption reduction or demand 
dislocation  to  partial  substitute  products21.  As  for  the  latter,  potential  suppliers  and  potential  entrants 
become  the  main  dynamic  aspects  incorporated  in  relevant  market  analysis.  On  the  one  hand,  potential 
suppliers are related with the possibility of an established firm to swiftly raise its production or dislocate 
its productive resources in order to attend a transitory or unforeseen increase in the quantity demanded, 
disabling  other  incumbents’  attempts  to  increase  prices  for  monopolistic  levels.  On  the  other  hand,  it 
becomes necessary to understand the existing entry and mobility barriers that a firm who is not already in 
the relevant or in a correlated market would have to surpass in order to enter in the analyzed market, such 
as  sunk  costs,  legal  restraints,  and  initial  investment  risk22  23.  Therefore,  a  set  of  structural  features 
associated with barriers to entry and mobility influence the capacity of an allegedly monopolist company 
to raise prices without being threatened by potential supply or entrants (POSSAS, 1995). 
 
The  relevant  market  can  be  regarded  as  the  smallest  economic  space  that  allows  one 
monopolistic  firm  to  exercise  its  market  power  by  fixing  prices,  but  such  delimitation  is  specific  to  the 
analyzed  industry,  region,  or  product  (POSSAS,  1995).  Cabanellas  (1983,  apud  ROSA;  SCHUARTZ, 
1995) emphasizes that the theoretical analysis derives from several assumptions which do not fully apply 
in empirical cases. Hence, the applied definition of a relevant market is not necessarily related to a literal, 
but rather to a potential concept of competition. Such difference among theoretical and applied definitions 
is perceptible when one analyzes the reality of Brazilian antitrust practice. 
 
Traditionally,  the  concept  of  relevant  market  has  been  present  in  Brazilian  antitrust  legislation 
through the texts of laws 8.884/94 and 12.529/11, which structured the former and new Brazilian antitrust 

                                            
21 Posner and Landes (1980, p. 939-43) showed that  a profit-maximizing firm would consider both price-demand elasticity and 
market share in order to calculate the optimum price for extract as much “supra-competitive” profit as possible. While the first 
has  a  negative  relationship  regarding  increase  in  prices,  the  later  has  a  positive  relationship.  Low  price-demand  elasticity 
indicates  that  a  potential  monopolist  could  successfully  gain  extraordinary  profits  by  overpricing  its  products,  in  case  of  a 
market  with  non-regulated  prices,  due  to  the  lack  of  good  substitutes  for  the  targeted  demand.  As  for  high  price-demand 
elasticity  value,  it  implies  that  if  the  potential  monopolist  firm  would  decide  to  raise  its  prices,  the  quantity  demand  would 
diminish more than proportionally in comparison with the price increase, potentially reducing private profits 
22 The study of entry barriers was mainly introduced by theory of “Constestable Markets” introduced by the Chicago School. If 
a market has low income barriers, the potential monopolist would behave as if it were in a competitive market due to the fear 
of new  entrants entering in the  market. For  more information, see Baumol (1982) “Contestable Markets:  An Uprising in the 
Theory of Industry Structure”. 
23 Mobility barriers complement the analysis of supply conditions because they establish the possibility for already incumbent 
firms in correlated segments or markets to enter the analyzed relevant markets. For more on mobility barriers, see Caves and 
Porter (1977) “From entry barriers to mobility barriers: conjunctural decision and contrived deterrence to new competition”. 

8 

time  and  costs  related 

iv)  evolution  of  relative  prices  and  sales; 

 
system respectively24. Specifically regarding mergers and acquisitions, law 12.529/11 states that mergers 
which eliminate competition in a “substantial portion” of the relevant market, that may create or reinforce 
a  firm’s  dominant  position,  or  that  result  in  complete  market  domination,  shall  not  be  approved25. 
Nevertheless, the legislation introduces, in article 88, §6°, a “rule of reason” clause: the proposed merger 
or acquisition, even if it may harm competition, will be allowed in case it leads, at the same time, to: i) 
efficiency  gains,  higher  product/service  quality,  or  economic/  technological  development;  and  ii)  a 
“substantial” part of its benefits are shared with  consumers. 
 
The  Brazilian  Merger  Guidelines  (BRAZIL,  2001b,  p.  9-10)  exposes  the  definition  of  the 
relevant  market  as  the  first  step  in  merger  analysis.  In  order  to  do  so,  CADE  considers  factors  as:  i) 
products  technical  characteristics;  ii)  processes  technical  characteristics;  iii)  products  commercial 
properties; 
to  demand 
decisions/substitutable products; v) evidences that consumers will or will not move their demand towards 
potential substitutes. 
 
If  CADE  uses  econometric  and  statistical  analysis  in  order  to  define  the  relevant  market,  as 
shown in Neto and Issler (2008), there are also cases in which legislative and regulatory obligations may 
also  be  used  to  establish  relevant  markets,  leading  to  case-specific  methodologies  that  embrace  one 
market’s  specificities  and  technicalities.  This  raises  the  question  of  whether  such  methods  are  more 
advanced  for  some  markets  than  for  others,  and  also  if  they  tend  to  evolve  across  time.  This  paper  is 
specifically  concerned  with  the  evolution  of  the  methodology  that  has  been  applied  for  mergers  and 
acquisitions within the higher educational markets. Why and how have the analysis and definition of both 
product market and geographic market evolved over the years?  
 
4.2 PRESENCE HIGHER EDUCATIONAL MARKET 
 
4.2.1 CADE’s early experiences and definition by “reasonability” 
 
 CADE’s  first  experience  analyzing  horizontal  integrations  in  the  private  higher  educational 
 
market was case n° 08012.011611/2007-37: the acquirement of IREP by group Estácio. At that time, the 
law nº 8.884/94 stated that SEAE held the competence of issuing a first non-binding opinion of proposed 
mergers  which  would  be  considered  in  CADE’s  final  decision.  In  order  to  fulfill  its  role,  through  the 
technical  report  n°  06519/2007/RJ  (BRAZIL,  2007a),  SEAE  proposed  the  first  methodology  for 
delimiting the relevant market in the private higher educational segment. 
 
Estácio, an education holding group, held participation in several private HEIs that were spread 
across 11 Brazilian states26, whereas IREP administered six different private HEIs with campus located in 
either  the  state  of  Paraná  or  São  Paulo.  SEAE  delimited  the  product  market  as  the  “supply  of  private 
higher educational” and the geographic market as the regions in which both institutions conjointly offered 
their  services,  namely  regions  South  (states  of  Paraná,  Santa  Catarina  and  Rio  Grande  do  Sul)  and 
Southeast  (states  of  São  Paulo,  Rio  de  Janeiro,  Espírito  Santo  and  Minas  Gerais).  This  definition  was 
based on a reasonability argument: in spite of stating that a precise definition of the relevant deserved a 
deeper study, SEAE considered that the amount of competing universities combined with the possibility 
of student mobility within national regions implied that students who found prices to be exaggerated in its 
city or state would be able to easily move to another state within the same region (p. 5). 
 
SEAE concluded that the merger would not harm competition. However, the case also involved a 
non-competition  clause  among  the  participants  preventing  IREP  to  open  new  competitors  in  the  higher 
educational market in Brazil for a period of 3 years. Here, the SEAE judged that the geographic extension 
was  too  broadly  defined  and,  because  of  that,  recommended  a  restriction  in  the  non-competition  clause 
narrowing it to the states in which IREP previously acted (Paraná and São Paulo) (p. 8). 

                                            
24 In 2012, the law 8.884/94 was replaced by law 12.529/11, which restructured the Brazilian antitrust system. 
25 Law 12.529/2011, article 88, § 5°. 
26 Paraná, Santa Catarina, São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Espírito Santo, Minas Gerais, Mato Grosso do Sul, Goiás, Bahia, Ceará 
and Pará 

9 

 
 
SEAE’s  methodology  was  not  fully  adopted  by  CADE,  which  agreed  with  the  product  market 
definition  but  exposed  an  inherent  contradiction  in  the  geographic  dimension.  The  Reporting 
Commissioner  of  merger  n°  08012.011611/2007-37,  Paulo  Furquim  de  Azevedo,  argued  that  whereas 
SEAE based its  competition analysis considering national regions  as relevant market boundaries, it also 
latter considered that the non-competition clause should be changed to only cover the states of São Paulo 
and Paraná, taking them as the “relevant” spaces in which IREP offered its services prior to the merger. 
Such  distinction  represented  a  blur  definition  of  what  was  the  actual  geographic  space  in  which 
competition concerns could be expected: at national regions or state level?  
 
Commissioner  Azevedo  defended  that  a  narrow  geographic  definition  of  the  relevant  market 
would  be  more  adequate,  once  the  affirmation  regarding  the  mobility  of  private  higher  educational 
students between different states seemed unlikely. Following his reasoning, the Commissioner redefined 
the  geographic  market,  maintaining  the  product  condition,  for  the  state-level:  all  private  HEIs  acting 
inside a same state were seen as potential competitors (AZEVEDO, 2007, p. 5-7)27 28. 
 
This particular case has produced one of the most important precedents of CADE’s jurisprudence 
regarding  the  methodology  for  defining  the  relevant  market  in  the  private  higher  educational  segment. 
The  intersection  of  a  geographic  market  defined  as  the  state  and  the  product  defined  as  “private  higher 
educational  services”  has  been  replicated  by  CADE  on  more  than  25  cases,  being  the  single  most  used 
methodology for such market (CADE, 2014).  
 
In  spite  of  the  precedents’  emphasis  on  the  imperfection  of  the  “state  level  x  private  higher 
educational”    methodology  for  market  definition,  it  was  understood  that  deeper  analysis  would  be 
unnecessary,  since  the  massive  number  of  private  HEIs  within  every  state  would  probably  block 
anticompetitive  behaviors  (BRAZIL,  2008a;  2008b;  2011).  Thus,  this  definition  was  also  based  on 
reasonability  and  it  was  used  from  2007  until  2011.  It  must  be  noted,  however,  that  this  specific 
combination of private higher educational services and state-level market was applied mainly for presence 
education courses. 
 
4.1.2 A step forward: quantitatively-defined geographic market and undergraduate/graduate dimensions 
 
 
Until  middle  2011,  the  “state  x  private  higher  educational  services”  relevant  market  definition 
represented  the  core  of  CADE’s  analyses  regarding  mergers  and  acquisition  in  the  private  higher 
educational  segment29.  It  was  only  through  Commissioner  Elvino  de  Carvalho  Mendonça’s  votes 
regarding  mergers  08012.004591/2011-28  and  08012.004592/2011-72  that  such  this  landscape  changed 
(MENDONÇA, 2011a;  2011b). They represented acquisitions by a subsidiary of “Grupo Abril” (Abril), 
which acted mainly in the publishing market and in São Paulo’s market of primary/secondary education, 
of an institution that offered primary/secondary education, and prep-courses in the state of Rio de Janeiro 
(“Grupo  PH”),  and  of  two  institutions  that  offered  professionalization  courses  in  São  Paulo  (“Grupo 
ETB”,  and  “Nice  Participações”).  Even  though  the  higher  educational  segment  was  not  linked  to  these 
cases;  Commissioner  Mendonça  proposed  a  new  concept  for  defining  the  geographic  market  that  was 
incorporated on the analyses of private higher educational mergers: the “radius of influence”. 
 
Mendonça’s  interpretation  was  that  a  private  HEI  would  not  necessarily  be  able  to  mobilize 
students  from  an  entire  state.  Instead,  every  institution  was  deemed  as  possessing  idiosyncratic 
characteristics  which  would  directly  affect  its  capacity  to  attract  new  students.  Sets  of  location-related 
elements,  such  as  the  available  means  of  transportation,  income  levels,  and  cultural  differences,  would 
                                            
27 The methodology for geographic market definition based on national regions was also used in SEAE’s analysis of merger 
08012.0011782/2007-60 (BRASIL, 2007b), which was issued before the judgment on merger 08012.011611/2007-37.  
28  While  this  methodology  narrowed  the  relevant  market  down,  the  Commissioner  maintained  SEAE’s  argument  that  a 
conservative  approach  should  be  preferred  for  concrete  analysis  even  though  deeper  studies  would  be  necessary  for  more 
accurate definition (AZEVEDO, 2007a p. 7). 
29 An exception can be made for Commissioner César Costa Alves de Mattos’ vote regarding merger 08012.011435/2008-18 
(MATTOS,  2009a).  He  accused  the  product  market  definition  as  overall  “private  higher  educational  services”  as  too  broad, 
favoring  a  more  narrow  definition,  in  which  every  offered  course  would  constitute  a  different  market  and  also  that 
undergraduate must be separated from graduate education (p. 4; 9). This criticism was not, however, immediately internalized 
by CADE’s decisions, which continued to be based on Azevedo’s vote on case 08012.011611/2007-31.  

 

10 

 
preclude  any  pre-defined  parameters  for  delimiting  the  geographic  market.  Thus,  different  institutions 
would not have the same capillarity, but each would possess a unique “radius of influence” which could 
only be determined on a case-by-case study.  
 
The  concept  of  “radius  of  influence”  (illustrated  in  figure  2)  was  defined  as  the  distance,  from 
any  private  HEI,  where  the  majority  of  its  students  resided,  that  is,  the  geographic  market  started  to  be 
defined as the dimensional space where the highest concentration of an institution’s students lived. This 
concept altered the perspective that a generic “state-level” approach was enough for CADE’s decisions. 
(2011a, p. 4-5; 2011b, p. 4-5). Besides from providing a more accurate method to determine geographic 
competition  boundaries,  the  concept  of  radius  of  influence  granted  flexibility  to  the  analysis,  a  trace 
exemplified  by  mergers  08012.004591/2011-28  and  08012.004592/2011-72.  Notwithstanding  the 
approval  of  both  cases  due  to  absence  of  competition  hazards  resulted  from  the  integration  per  se30, 
CADE  analyzed  the  radius  of  influence  due  to  the  existence  of  a  contractual  national  non-competition 
clause between the parts. 
 
Figure 2 – Graphical representation of the radius of influence methodology for defining the geographic market¹ 

 

Adapted from Mendonça (2011a, p. 5). 
¹ Small dots represent student’s residence location (municipal districts and/or city) 
 
 
 
Jurisprudence  had  always  vetoed  national  non-competition  clauses  in  presence  education 
institution  merges,  but  it  also  had  reset  the  clause’s  geographic  dimension  to  the  state  in  which  the 
acquired part formerly acted. By using the quantitative radius of influence methodology, Mendonça was 
able to better redefine the area that should be limited by the clause. 
 
For  merger  n°  08012.004591/2011-28,  the  analysis  established  four  initial  geographic  markets 
by dividing the city of Rio de Janeiro in three separate zones (North; South; and West) representing where 
the acquired institution offered educational services. Additionally, the city of Niterói was established as a 
fourth market. Based on this first definition, CADE gathered data on the location in which every student 
from  such institution lived, evidencing that  in  the first  three  geographic  markets,  more than 80% of the 
students lived in districts within these zones, therefore, reaffirming the existence of three distinct relevant 
markets in the city of Rio de Janeiro: i) zone North, ii) zone South, and iii) zone West.  
 
As for the city of Niterói, it was considered that its size  was not large enough to justify further 
divisions,  so  CADE  compared  the  share  of  students  that  lived  in  Niterói  against  those  who  lived  in 
“Niterói  plus  neighboring  cities”,  and  those  who  lived  in  any  other  city  for  delimiting  the  geographic 
market. From this, the city of Niterói was confirmed as a geographic market, once more than 80% of the 
primary  and  secondary  education  students  lived  within  the  municipal  boundaries.  Alternatively,  Niterói 
held  no  more  than  70%  of  prep-courses  students,  a  threshold  that  was  only  achieved  by  adding  the 
number of students who lived in Niterói to those who lived on any neighboring city. Thus, two different 

                                            
30  Prior  delimitating  the  radius  of  influence,  Mendonça  considered  that  neither  case  resulted  in  any  horizontal  or  vertical 
integration within any relevant market. He based his vote on the definition of four distinguished four product market: primar y, 
secondary, prep-courses and professionalization courses. Abril was only present in the first and second product markets and in 
the  state  of  São  Paulo.  That  being 
judged  mergers  08012.004592/2011-72  and 
08012.004591/2011-28  as  merely  a  substitution  of  market  agent.  In  the  first,  the  acquired  parts  acted  solely  in  the 
professionalization market (in which Abril was not present), and in the second the acquired institution acted solely in the city 
of Rio de Janeiro and Niteroi, while Abril was only present in São Paulo (MENDONÇA, 2011a; 2011b). 

the  Commissioner 

the  case, 

InfluenceRadiusGeographicMarketEducationInstitution11 

 

 
geographic markets were delimited: i) for primary and secondary education, the city of Niterói; and ii) for 
prep-courses, the city of Niterói plus its neighboring towns (MENDONÇA, 2011a). 
 
In  case  08012.004592/2011-72  the  same  methodology  was  applied:  Mendonça  first  compared 
the share of students who lived in cities where the acquired parts acted (Jundiaí, Sorocaba, Osasco, and 
Piracicaba) against those who lived in another city. Finding that such shares were approximately 50%, he 
augmented  the  geographic  market  for  those  cities  and  its  neighboring  town,  only  then  finding  shares 
above  80  or  90%.  Based  on  this  analysis,  four  relevant  markets  of  professionalization  courses  were 
defined: i) Jundiaí and its neighboring towns; ii) Sorocaba and its neighboring towns; iii) Osasco and its 
neighboring towns; and iv) Piracicaba and its neighboring towns (Mendonça, 2011b). 
 
Further  decisions  embraced  this  methodology  when  analyzing  private  higher  educational 
mergers  (RAGAZZO,  2011b;  LUIS,  2012b;  VERÍSSIMO,  2012b).  These  cases  illustrate  the  flexibility 
which  allowed  CADE  to  define  geographic  market  on  different  levels  (district  zones,  cities,  cities  and 
surrounding towns), and also the passage from a “reasonability” towards a quantitative approach.  
 
The  methodology  for  product  market  definition  was  also  improved  in  an  attempt  to  better 
establish  the  private  higher  educational  relevant  market.  In  the  beginning  of  2012,  SEAE  issued  a  non 
biding  report  concerning  the  case  nº  08012.009947/2011-1031  (BRAZIL,  2012b),  in  which  both  Parties 
offered  higher  educational  services  in  Sorriso,  a  city  inside  the  state  of  Mato  Grosso.  SEAE  already 
adopted the quantitative influence radius methodology for defining the  geographic market  as the city of 
Sorriso.  However,  the  major  component  of  this  precedent  was  the  discussion  regarding  what  product 
market should be considered as “relevant”. 
 
As  explained  in  the  previous  section,  CADE’s  initially  had  delimited  the  “offering  of  higher 
educational services” as the product market that should be accounted for in antitrust analyses. According 
to  law  nº  9.394/1996,  article  44,  “higher  educational”  is  comprised  by  four  different  levels  which  were 
aggregated  in  CADE’s  jurisprudence  in  a  unique  product  market:  i)  sequential  courses32;  ii) 
undergraduate education; iii) graduate education; and iv) extension courses33 (BRAZIL, 1996). 
 
Questioning the adoption of “higher educational” as a single product market, SEAE attempted to 
review  the  methodology  based  on  the  legislative  differences  within  the  higher  educational  segment. 
SEAE  observed  that  the  requisition  for  acquiring  the  certification  and  the  disciplines  covered  in  each 
course  influenced  separately  people’s  incentives  to  attend  each  course.  From  that,  it  was  proposed  the 
existence of not one “higher educational” market, but instead of three distinct markets: i) undergraduate 
education and sequential courses; ii) strictu sensu graduate courses; and iii) lato sensu graduate courses 
(BRAZIL, 2012b, p. 7-12). This definition was held in CADE’s judgment (VERÍSSIMO, 2012b) and was 
applied, along with the influence radius method, in future analyses. 
The second phase of  CADE’s methodology  for relevant  market  definition in  the private  higher 
 
educational  sector  was  marked  by  two  main  advances:  the  quantitative  radius  of  influence  and  the 
division  of  higher  education  in  sub-markets  which  should  be  analyzed  separately.  The  “radius  of 
influence”  approach  introduced  a  quantitative  approach  whereas  the  prior  definition  based  itself  upon  a 
“reasonable”  interpretation  that  private  HEIs  competed  among  themselves  in  a  state-level  space. 
Mendonça’s  new  methodology  forced  the  antitrust  agency  to  quantitatively  calculate  appropriate 
influence  radii  and  relevant  markets  through  georeferenced  information.  Moreover,  while  this  new 
methodology was apparently more pragmatic than the former, it also incorporated flexibility to CADE’s 
analyses  by  establishing  geographic  markets  on  district,  municipal,  or  potentially  state  levels.  The  new 
product  market  definition  proposed  a  more  modest  methodological  impact,  but  also  represented  an 
evolution towards accurate relevant market delimitation. 
  
 

                                            
31 Acquirement of “União Sorrisisense de Educação Ltda” (USE) by group Kroton. 
32  Sequential  courses  comprise  a  set  of  systematic  activities  which  corresponds  to  a  higher  education  course,  but  that  are 
characterized as complementary, alternative or that provide formation on a narrower/ more specific field of knowledge when 
compared with undergraduate studies (BRAZIL, 1999) 
33 Extension courses aim to update student’s knowledge and strengthen his professional network. They differ from graduate or 
undergraduate courses because they do not pose graduate or undergraduate certificates as pre-requisites (BRAZIL, 2012b).  

12 

 
4.2.3 Refining the relevant market: statistical influence radius and course substitution 
 
 
Although  the  segregation  of  higher  educational  services  in  different  markets  based  on  the 
specificities  of  undergraduate  and  graduate  course  was  only  exposed  in  2012,  the  most  advanced 
technique  to  determine  the  relevant  market  in  this  segment  had  already  been  used  in  the  end  of  2011. 
Once again, Commissioner Mendonça held the role of its proponent through a review vote for merger n°  
08012.000046/2011-62  and  also  his  vote  for  case  08012.004447/2011-91,  both  read  on  December  07, 
2011 (MENDONÇA, 2011c;  2011e), in  which he proposed  both  a new product  market  definition and a 
deeper application of the “radius of influence” concept 34.  
 
First, the Commissioner argued that to consider “the offer of private higher educational” as the 
product  market  would  be  too  broad  even  if  graduate  and  undergraduate  educations  were  considered 
separately.  Such  abstraction  of  reality  would  disregard  important  course-specific  characteristics  that 
blocks  complete  substitutability  or  even  reveal  absence  of  substitutability  among  different  courses.    To 
accurately define the product market, both demand and supply condition must be analyzed to determine 
substitutability  between  courses.  In  merger  n°  08012.000046/2011-62  (acquirement  of  “Sociedade 
Educacional  Plínio  Leite  S.A.”  –  SEPL  -  by  group  Anhanguera),  Mendonça  analyzed  SEPL  students’ 
turnover rates and discovered that less than 2% of all students actually changed courses after entering one, 
meaning that different courses could not be considered as substitute products. On the supply side, several 
factors  resulted  in  non-substitutability  between  courses:  i)  existence  of  technical  entry  barriers 
(technology  and  infrastructure  especially  for  courses  within  the  hard  sciences);  ii)  legal  entry  barriers 
(register in the Education Ministry, complex bureaucracy); and iii) necessary specialized labor (graduate-
level  professionals).  Concluding  that  individual  courses  are  not  substitutes,  neither  on  supply  nor  on 
demand  side,  the  Commissioner  established  a  course-level  product  market.  This  new  product  market 
definition meant  that  every individual private  higher educational  course  offered by  an institution would 
represent a separate market (MENDONÇA, 2011c, p. 3-6).  
 
Secondly, the proposed methodology for geographic market was an expansion of the “radius of 
influence”  analysis.  As  was  shown  in  the  previous  section,  attributing  influence  radii  to  private  HEIs 
represented  a  breakthrough  in  the  CADE’s  methodology,  moving  on  from  a  reasonability-based  to  a 
quantitative  approach.  However,  this  posed  a  limitation  for  a  more  accurate  definition  of  the  actual 
geographic  market,  once  the  analyses  became  dependent  from  pre-determined  administrative  divisions 
(districts, cities, neighboring areas, etc.), that would then support the geographic dimension. 
 
Pointing  out  that  price,  existence  of  scholarships,  regional  socioeconomic  conditions  and  other 
idiosyncratic conditions lead to variability in the actual dimension of any private HEI’s influence radius, 
Mendonça  proposed  an  advance  from  a  merely  reasonable  or  quantitative  approach  to  a  statistically-
defined  geographic  market.  A  spatial  statistics  method,  whose  goal  was  to  examine  systematic  or 
randomized  patterns  of  student  dispersion  in  relation  to  the  private  HEI,  so  as  to  attribute  a  specific 
influence  radius  in kilometers, was presented for  defining the  geographic market. The two  fundamental 
concepts  were  those  of  “gravitational  center”  and  “standard  radius”:  the  higher  educational  institutions 
unities  would  be  gravitational  centers  associated  with  specific  standard  radii  that  represented  the 
variability  in  student’s  residences  in  relation  with  the  institution’s  locations  (2011c,  p.  7-8).  Based  on 
these concepts, the Commissioner established the following 5-step methodology: 

1) Gather the number of students per municipal district per course; 
2) Calculate the Euclidian distance between municipal districts and education institution unity’s 

location35; 

                                            
34  “Considero  que  ambas  as  definição  são  insuficientes  para  garantir  o  verdadeiro  ambiente  concorrencial  no  segmento  de 
ensino superior privado, tendo em vista que a grande diversidade de cursos de graduação e de pós-graduação existentes, cada 
qual com as suas idiossincrasias, traz elementos distintos para a escolha do consumidor, quer seja em termos de curso quer seja 
em termos de deslocamento” (MENDONÇA, 2011e, p. 3). 
35 The Euclidian distance is calculated through the geographic coordinates of the student’s residence location and of the  higher 
educational  institution  unit  through  the  equation:  √(𝑥 − 𝑥′)2 +   (𝑦 − 𝑦′)²,  in  which  the  variables  x  and  x’  correspond  to  the 
longitudes of both student’s residence and higher educational institution, while y and y’ correspond to the respective latitudes.  

13 

 

3) Calculate  the  event  occurrence  intensity  measure  per  unit  of  area  (distance  in  kilometers) 

through the Kernel intensity estimator; 

4) Build the expanded cumulative distribution function; 
5) Assess the specific criteria to choose the appropriate influence radius.  
This  new  methodology  can  be  better  understood  through  the  exposure  of  Commissioner 
 
Mendonça’s  analysis  of  merger  08012.000046/2011-62,  in  which  it  was  exposed  for  further  reference, 
even  though  the  Commissioner  considered  that  there  was  no  geographic  horizontal  overlap36.  For  the 
determination of the product market, information about undergraduate courses offered by SEPL exposed 
a total of 32 different presence courses. The second step in defining the product market would be to elicit 
which  courses  were  offered  by  the  involved  Parties:  overlapping  courses  were  considered  product 
markets. Since Anhanguera did not act in Rio de Janeiro, the commissioner applied the new methodology 
for  the  Businees  Administration  undergraduate  course  solely  for  exposure  purposes  (offered  by  SEPL, 
Estácio and UCAM in Niterói). 
 
The  geographic  market  was  then  defined  accordingly  with  the  5-step  methodology  briefly 
described  above.  After  constructing  a  database  with  both  location  of  student’s  residences  and  the 
Euclidian distance of the municipal districts  in  which they lived in  comparison with  the education unit, 
graphics were drawn to represent the Kernel intensity estimator for SPEL, Estácio, and UCAM students 
of  Business  Administration.  Graphic  2 illustrates the study  for SEPL: the x-axis  represents  the distance 
(in kilometers) of a student residence municipal district in relation with the education institution unit; and 
the  y-axis  the  percentage  of  students  that  lives  within  that  distance.  This  graphic,  combined  with  the 
respective  studies  for  Estácio  and  UCAM,  evidenced  that  the  distribution  of  students  may  vary  among 
institutions, but in all three cases analyzed, most students reside within a distance of 20km between their 
home and respective universities, indicating a specific influence radius. 
 
Graphic 2 – Kernel Intensity - Business Administration - SEPL 

 

Mendonça (2011c; p. 10-11)  
 
 
 
The fourth step is exemplified by graphic 3 (for SEPL). In order determine the point in which an 
increase  in  distance  softens  the  expanded  cumulative  distribution  function,  so  as  marginal  changes  in 
distance  result  in  small  variations  in  the  quantity  of  students,  the  expanded  cumulative  distribution 
function  is  analyzed.  Thus,  it  becomes  possible  to  define  the  radius  that  delimits  the  relevant  area 
supplied by the considered private higher educational. 
 
The  analysis  of  the  expanded  cumulative  distributions  enhances  the  flexibility  for  defining 
geographic  market.  While  SEPL  presented  a  function  showing  that  until  the  distance  of  25  km  there  is 
still a growing frequency  of students  that attend Business Administration there, on UCAM and Estácio, 
this  indicator  already  starts  to  drop  at  a  distance  of  20km.  That  means  that  SEPL  influence  radius  is 
higher  than  UCAM’s  and  Estácio’s,  and  also  that  all  institutions  within  a  25  km  of  SEPL  can  be 
considered  as in  the same geographic market  and should be analyzed in  order to  see if there will  be an 
horizontal overlapping in the product market. Therefore, market concentration should be restricted to the 
participation within such boundaries. 

                                            
36 Anhanguera was not present in Rio de Janeiro’s private presence higher educational market, whereas SEPL only had unities 
in a specific town (Niterói/RJ). 

 
Graphic 3 – Expanded Cumulative Distribution - Business Administration - SEPL 

14 

 

Mendonça (2011c; p. 12-13)  
 
 
Approaching the relevant market through spatial statistics and course-level discrimination was a 
method that was well-received in CADE, being nowadays the methodology adopted for private presence 
higher  educational  mergers  and  acquisition  analyses.  Since  Mendonça’s  vote,  15  other  cases  have  used 
the  combinations  of  statistically-defined  influence  radius  and  course-level  discrimination  in  order  to 
determine the geographic market. It is remarkable that the jurisprudence evidences the achievement of the 
main  goal  in  using  spatial  statistics  analysis  for  influence  radii  determination.  Within  the  17  cases  that 
have  implemented  this  method,  the  amplitude  in  geographic  markets  dimension  varied  from  8,5km 
(RIBEIRO,  2012b)  to  40km  (VERÍSSIMO,  2012a).  In  fact,  in  merger  08012.008694/2011-67,  several 
different influence radii were calculated due to the high number of overlapping courses among the parts 
(RIBEIRO, 2013a).  
While  the  combination  of  specific  courses  with  the  statistical  calculus  of  the  influence  radius 
 
remains  as  CADE’s  ‘best-practices’,  additional  considerations  should  be  made  regarding  the  two  most 
recent  cases  analyzed  by  the  Agency:  the  notorious  merger  between  groups  Anhanguera  and  Kroton 
(FRAZÃO,  2014a),  and  the  acquisition  of  Uniseb  by  Estácio  (FRAZÃO,  2014b).  On  both  cases  when 
analyzing the competitive impacts on the presence higher educational market, Commissioner Ana Frazão 
referenced  Mendonça’s  methodology  for  both  product  and  geographic  dimensions.  However,  she 
considered two additional changes that may now be incorporated in future analyses.  
First, regarding the product market, the vote followed a guideline used by Commissioner Marcos 
 
Paulo Veríssimo’s vote on merger n° 08700.004112/2012-04 (VERÍSSIMO, 2012d), in which instead of 
considering  all  higher  educational  courses  as  different  markets,  he  made  a  distinction  between 
undergraduate  and  graduate  courses.  If  the  conditions  formerly  exposed  for  segmenting  each 
undergraduate  course  as  individual  markets  were  deemed  plausible,  the  Commissioner  argued  that  the 
same  boundaries  were  not  observable  for  graduate  courses.  Stating  that  the  substitutability  between 
graduate courses was higher than for undergraduate courses, both demand and supply sides, the graduate 
market  was  divided  in  5  broad  fields  that  grouped  together  courses  based  on  their  broad  area:  Social 
Sciences and Business; Law; Health and Life Sciences; Education; Science, Math and Computation. 
 
In addition, even though Commissioner Frazão cited the concept of radius of influence, her vote 
considered that the jurisprudence exposed that most influence radii were between 15km and 25km. From 
this, it was stated that not only to gauge different radii for every market would consume much effort, but 
also  the  limit  of  15-25km  could  be  taken  to  represent  the  entire  cities  in  which  the  private  HEIs  acted. 
Thus,  while  both  votes  made  use  of  the  radius  of  influence  methodology,  they  considered  the 
administrative municipal division as the geographic market. 
The  evolution  in  CADE’s  relevant  market  methodology  for  the  private  presence  higher 
 
educational  market  is  presented  in  box  1  evidences  a  constant  evolution  from  “reasonable”  definitions 
towards  more  pragmatic  and  quantitative  methods.  While  the  cases  have  been  analyzed  under  several 
different lenses for both geographic and product dimensions since 2007, the arrival of statistical methods 
and  a  more  narrow  definition  of  both  product  and  geographic  market  have  been  the  dominant  method 
since 2012. 
 

 
Box  1  -  Evolution  on  CADE's  adopted  methodology  for  defining  relevant  market  within  the  private  presence  higher 
educational market 

15 

Method  Geographic Market 

Product Market 

Reference document(s) 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

National Regions 

National States 

Higher education 

Brazil (2007a) 

Azevedo (2007) 

Specific Courses 

Mattos (2009a) 

Higher education 

Mendonça (2011a; 2011b) 

Undergrad. x Grad. 

Brazil (2012c) 

Veríssimo (2012d) 

Specific Courses 

Mendonça (2011c; 2011d) 

1743 

Quantitative 

Influence Radius 

Statistical Influence 

Radius 

Total 
cases 

237 

2738 

139 

240 

141 

242 

 

Elaboration based on data retrieved from CADE (2014). 
 
4.3 Distance Higher Educational Market 
 
 
 
All  methodologies  explained  so  far  were  applied  in  private  presence  higher  educational  cases. 
However, as evidenced in section 3, a recent wave of mergers has begun to be place a new educational 
segment  in  the  spotlight.  Since  2012,  mergers  in  distance  educational  segment  have  increasingly 
becoming  a  current  object  in  CADE’s  analyses,  posing  a  new  challenge  related  with  the  creation  of 
methods  for  market  definition  while  also  coping  with  this  segment’s  specificities.  Even  though  the 
primary distinction between presence and distance higher educational was delineated in SEAE’s analysis 
of proposed merger 08012.011782/2007-60 (Brazil; 2007a), this integration was in fact abandoned by the 
parts.  After  it,  the  period  2007-2011  represented  a  jurisprudential  vacuum  for  relevant  market 
methodology for distance higher educational segment44, and it was only in 2012 when the next merger in 
the distance higher educational market was submitted for CADE’s review and approval.  
 
 The first case in which the distance courses were analyzed as a separate product offered by one 
of  the  Parties  was  merger  08700.004112/2012-04,  the  acquirement  of  “Ítala  Participações”  (Ítala)  by 
group Kroton. At that time, this integration represented a sui generis case for CADE because there was no 
horizontal overlapping in the Parties’ activities regarding presence higher educational services, which as 
                                            
37 SEAE’s technical and non-binding reports concerning cases 08012.011611/2007-31 and 08012.011782/2007-60 (BRAZIL, 
2007a; 2007b). 
38  Mergers  n°  08012.011611/2007-31;  08012.010741/2008-37  (AZEVEDO,  2007;  2008);  08012.001740/2008-00; 
08012.006180/2008-71  (PRADO,  2008a;  2008b);  08012.010747/2008-12;  08012.005387/2009-18;  08012.011705/2010-13 
(CARVALHO, 
08012.004486/2009-74; 
08012.006686/2010-03;  08012.003088/2011-55  (RAGAZZO,  2008;  2009a;  2009b;  2010;  2011a);  08012.001741/2008-46 
(VASCONCELLOS, 2008); 08012.010748/2008-59; 08012.009902/2009-31; 08012.006147/2010-66; 08012.003968/2010-41; 
08012.011748/2010-91  (FURLAN,  2008;  2010a;  2010b;  2010c;  2011);  08012.006864/2008-73;  08012.010746/2008-60; 
08012.009801/2010-93 
2009b);  
08012.003407/2010-41;  08012.002864/2011-08 (RUIZ, 2010; 2011); 08012.003076/2011-21; 08012.012129/2011-02 (LUIS, 
2011; 2012a); 08012.008300/2011-71 (MENDONÇA, 2011c). 
39 Merger n° 08012.011435/2008-18 (MATTOS, 2009a). 
40 Merger n° 08012.008463/2011-53 (RAGAZZO, 2011b); 08012.004592/2011-72 (MENDONÇA, 2011a). 
41 Merger n° 08012.009947/2011-10 (LUIS, 2012b) 
42 Mergers n° 08700.004060/2012-68 ; 08700.004112/2012-04 (VERÍSSIMO, 2012b; 2012d). 
43 Mergers n° 08012.000046/2011-62; 08012.004447/2011-91; 08012.001613/2012-89 (MENDONÇA, 2011b; 2011d; 2012); 
08012.002734/2012-48;  08012.006610/2011-51;  08012.008694/2011-67;    08012.004979/2011-29;  08012.006400/2011-62; 
08012.009861/2011-97 
08012.001288/2012-54; 
08012.008706/2011-53;  08012.000125/2012-54;  08012.005791/2012-89  (VERÍSSIMO,  2012a;  2012c;  2012e;  2013); 
08012.004503/2011-98;  08012.003886/2011-87  (LUIS,  2013a;  2013b);  08700.004112/2012-04;  08700.009198/2013-34 
(FRAZÃO, 2014a; 2014b). 
44  However,  it  would  not  be  true  to  state  that  distance  education  was  completely  absent  in  CADE’s  analysis.  In  fact,  it  was 
indirectly present on some presence education mergers. Analyses based on the “state-level x higher service offer” commonly 
aggregated distance education students as parts of the overall “higher educational” market. For an example, see Brazil (2008b). 

08012.004730/2009-07; 

08012.006789/2008-41; 

08012.007066/2009-40 

(CHINAGLIA, 

(MATTOS, 

(RIBEIRO, 

2013d); 

2008b; 

2013b; 

2012b; 

2008a; 

2012a; 

2013a; 

2013c; 

2010); 

2010); 

2008; 

2009; 

 
alternatively  observed 
this  merger,  CADE’s 
superintendence  general  (structured  by  the  text  of  law  12.529/2011)  issued  the  non-binding  technical 
report  n°  172  (Brazil,  2012a),  which  established  the  first  parameters  for  differentiating  distance  from 
presence higher educational market. In it, three distinguishing factors were presented as arguments:  

in  distance  courses  (VERÍSSIMO,  2012d).  For 

16 

1) Access regulation: Act 5622/2005, article 9, mandates a separate accrediting and legalization 
process  for  an  educational  institution  that  already  offers  presence  services  to  also  offer 
distance education;  

2) Geographic  market:  perhaps  the  most  substantial  factor  that  differentiates  presence  from 
distance education. A private HEI can apply for a distance course register at a national level, 
whereas  there  is  a  state  limitation  for  presence  courses  related  to  the  location  off  its  unit. 
Moreover, since classes are taken through video-classes, the student studies at home with the 
sole  assistance  of  a  computer  with  internet  access,  and  only  10%  of  all  lessons  must  be 
classrooms activities, the geographic scope would be national45.  

3) Student profile: since infrastructure is less costly for this segment, prices tend to be to 30% to 
50% lower in comparison with presence courses. Being that the case, usually those who seek 
distance education come from lower income classes. (p. 4-9). 

 
Such characteristics have been used to both to adopt a product market that differentiates presence 
from  distance  educational  services  as  to  determine  the  geographic  market  of  private  distance  higher 
educational mergers as national. Moreover, on this report SEAE transposed the product market definition 
from  the  presence  educational  segment  to  the  distance  educational  segment,  following  the  parameters 
exposed  in  the  previous  section:  while  each  specific  undergraduate  course  was  considered  a  singular 
product market, graduate courses were grouped based on their respective knowledge area (as delimited in 
Veríssimo,  2012d).  Following  these  prescriptions,  not  only  merger  08012.004112/2012-04  but  also 
mergers  08012.001288/2012-54  (VERÍSSIMO,  2012a);  08012.000125/2012-54  (VERÍSSIMO,  2012e); 
08012.003886/2011-87 (LUIS, 2013b); and 08012.009861/2011-97 (RIBEIRO, 2013d) have considered a 
national geographic market and a separate course-based (for undergraduate) or broad knowledge area (for 
graduate) product market for private distance higher educational antitrust analyses. 
 
In spite of the sequential use of such methodology, the recent merger between Anhanguera and 
Kroton  was  responsible  for  changing  the  analytical  paradigm  concerning  CADE’s  interpretation  of 
distance  private  educational  relevant  markets.  The  size  of  the  Parties  (which  after  merger  are  now  the 
largest  national  educational  group)  and  their  broad  network  of  distance  educational  centers  lead 
Commissioner Ana Frazão to request an extension in the judgment deadline in order to better comprehend 
and  assess  the  resulting  competitive  impacts  (BRAZIL,  2013).  With  the  assistance  of  CADE’s 
Department of Economic Studies, the Commissioner was issues a vote (FRAZÃO, 2014a) which exposed 
a new methodology and interpretation for defining distance higher educational relevant markets.  
 
If the product dimension remained the same, still accounting for different undergraduate courses 
and  graduate  knowledge  areas,  major  changes  were  bestowed  upon  the  geographical  dimension  for 
undergraduate  services.  Instead  of  following  the  jurisprudential  use  of  national  dimensions,  differences 
between structural (supply) and functional (demand) conditions justified a double segmentation in local 
(municipal)  and  national  levels.  On  the  one  hand,  it  was  explained  that  private  HEIs  usually  adopt  a 
singular national pricing, service and marketing strategy, in which the same service (standardized course) 
is  offered to  all consumers “students”. Thus, structural  conditions  connected with  supply  characteristics 
would justify the adoption of a national relevant market. Nevertheless, the Commissioner emphasized that 
the  demand  side  exposed  a  local  characteristics  (which  was  deemed  as  municipal,  accordingly  to  the 
jurisprudential ‘average radius of influence’ of 15-25km), mainly due to: complexity and sluggishness of 
the accrediting process; in loco evaluation rules; and mainly a regulatory component which forces, even 
for distance courses, the offer of a minimum of 10% of presence educational activities for undergraduate 
courses. In addition, it was argued that private HEIs usually increases the number of presence activities as 

                                            
45  Commissioner  Eduardo  Pontual  Ribeiro  considered,  however,  when  analyzing  merger  08012.002734/2012-48,  that  the 
existence  of  obligatory  classroom  activities  would  restrict  the  geographic  market  to  a  regional  level  similar  to  the  influence 
radius methodology (Ribeiro, 2012a). 

17 

 
a  strategy  of  market  segmentation.  Thus,  it  was  stated  that  both  local  and  national  levels  must  be 
conjointly  analyzed  as  geographical  dimensions  for  CADE’s  assessment  of  the  merger’s  likely 
competitive  impacts  (p.  40-46)46.  As  for  the  graduate  market,  the  Commissioner  maintained  solely  the 
national  definition,  once  the  presence  activities  were  not  as  strict  as  those  on  the  undergraduate  market 
and the students also presented characteristics. 
 
The  ‘double  segmentation’  method  was  also  used  by  Commissioner  Frazão  when  analyzing 
merger  n°  08700.009198/2013-34  (FRAZÃO,  2014b).  Even  though  the  analysis  of  distance  higher 
educational market is still relatively new, this new methodology represents the current state of affairs and 
its future impact and use on CADE’s decisions present an interesting topic for future studies. 
 
5. CONCLUSION 
 
 
Ever since 2007, the evolution in CADE’s methodology for defining private higher educational 
markets has been remarkable. Fostered by a wave of increasingly complex mergers and acquisition in this 
segment,  Brazilian  antitrust  agency  has  developed  several  different  methods  in  order  to  overcome  the 
technical  challenge  of  accurately  defining  the  space  in  which  competition  among  education  institutions 
actually take place.  
 
Product  market  definition  became  increasingly  narrower  by  acknowledging  specificities 
associated with every different level of higher educational which represent technical non-substitutability 
among  different  courses,  thus  culminating  in  market  delimitation  at  a  course-level.  Additionally,  a 
growing  emphasis  on  quantitative  methods  drove  geographic  market  delimitation  from  a  reasonability 
approach  towards  a  statistical  method  based  upon  the  concept  of  “influence  radius”.  Those  recent 
methodologies  are  seen  as  both  more  pragmatic  and  accurate  vis-à-vis  the  “state-level  x  higher 
educational” definition firstly proposed by Commissioner Paulo Furquim de Azevedo. 
 
Notwithstanding  these  developments,  several  shortcomings  are  still  present  in  CADE’s 
methodology, giving room for further improvements. First, while a course-level product substitutability is 
capable  of  pinning  a  very  specific  market,  it  can  be  too  limiting  as  well.  Such  narrow  definition  can 
ignore  demand  and  supply  conditions  that  evidence  similarities  among  courses  within  a  given  field  of 
knowledge,  such  as  engineering  courses,  which  would  then  obscure  partial  substitutability  among 
different courses.  
 
Secondly, whereas the methodology for presence market has already been established and moved 
towards  a  quantitative  approach,  distance  education  is  still  a  relatively  new  object  in  CADE’s  analysis, 
resulting in a large space for methodology improvements. This novelty was recently faced in the analysis 
of  case  08700.005447/2013-12,  giving  opportunity  for  the  development  of  a  new  methodology  that 
considered not one, but two different geographical dimensions simultaneously in order to   cope with the 
complexities associated with competition in the distance higher education market, from both supply and 
demand sides. Moreover,  further inquiries on the potential substitutability among distance and presence 
education have not  been addressed by the regulatory agency, providing an opportunity for extension on 
the current market definition.  
 
Finally, the current method considers only students that are already signed on specific education 
institutions and through their residence the geographic market is analyzes. However, present studies have 
not  yet  considered  the  potential  competitive  hazards  that  mergers  within  the  higher  educational  market 
affect  those  who  are  still  deciding  which  university  to  attend,  mainly  those  people  finishing  secondary 
education.  While  such  shortcomings  must  be  faced  in  future  time,  emphasis  should  be  granted  to  the 
evolution  in  CADE’s  analysis,  which  has  became  more  based  on  data  analysis,  instead  of  reasonability 
approaches,  therefore  evolving  into  more  capable  evaluation  of  horizontal  integrations’  potential 
competitive impacts on higher educational relevant markets. 
 
 

                                            
46 Through this methodology, on the national level 11 relevant markets with activities intersection were analyzed. On the local 
(municipal) level, 341 different relevant markets were analyzed across 78 cities (FRAZÃO, 2014a). 

18 

° 

1, 

n° 

n° 

n° 

n° 

n° 

in: 

in: 

in: 

in: 

11, 

19, 

20, 

28, 

20, 

Act 

Law 

Law 

Law 

Law 

June 

from 

from 

from 

from 

from 

from 

1997. 

1996. 

1968. 

1961. 

1994. 

2.306, 

9.394, 

5.540, 

4.024, 

8.884, 

August 

January 

Available 

Available 

Available 

Available 

Available 

December 

December 

November 

 
REFERENCES 
 
AZEVEDO, P. F. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.011611/2007-31. 2007. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.010741/2008-37. 2008. 
BAUMOL,  W.  J.  Contestable  Market:  an  uprising  in  the  theory  of  industry  structure.  The  American 
Economic Review, v. 72, n. 1, p. 1-15, 1982. 
BRAZIL. 
<http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/leis/l4024.htm>. Accessed on: March 09, 2014. 
_______. 
<http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/leis/l5540.htm>. Accessed on March 09, 2014.  
_______.  Constitution  (1988).  Constituição  da  República  Federativa  do  Brasil.  Brasília,  DF:  Senado 
Federal, 1988. 
_______. 
<http://www.leidireto.com.br/imprimir.php?fonte=lei/8884>. Accessed on March 01, 2014.  
_______. 
<http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/leis/l9394.htm>. Accessed on March 09, 2014.  
_______. 
<http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/decreto/D2306.htm>. Accessed on: March 09, 2014. 
_______. Ministry of Education. National Council of Education. Board of Higher Education.  Resolução 
CES 
in: 
http://portal.mec.gov.br/cne/arquivos/pdf/CES0199.pdf. Accessed on: May 11, 2014. 
_______. 
2001a. 
<http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/decreto/2001/D3860.htm>. Accessed on: March 09, 2014. 
_______.  Guia  para  análise  econômica  de  atos  de  concentração  horizontal.  Portaria  Conjunta 
SEAE/SDE 
in: 
<http://www.seae.fazenda.gov.br/central_documentos/guias. 2001>. 
in: 
_______. 
<http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/_ato2004-2006/2005/Decreto/D5622.htm>.  Accessed  on:  March 
09, 2014. 
in: 
_______. 
<http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/_Ato2004-2006/2006/Decreto/D5773.htm>.  Accessed  on:  March 
09, 2014. 
in: 
_______. 
<http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/_ato2011-2014/2011/Lei/L12529.htm>.  Accessed  on  March  01, 
2014. 
_______. Ministry of Treasure. SEAE. Technical document n° 06519/2007/RJ, 2007a. 
_______. Ministry of Treasure. SEAE. Technical document n° 06538/2007/RJ, 2007b. 
_______. Ministry of Treasure. SEAE. Technical document n° 06164/2008/RJ, 2008a. 
_______. Ministry of Treasure. SEAE. Technical document n° 06277/2008/DF, 2008b. 
_______. Ministry of Treasure. SEAE. Technical document n° 06524/2011/RJ, 2011. 
_______. CADE. Superintendency General. Technical document n° 172, 2012a. 
_______. Ministry of Treasure. SEAE. Technical document n° 06143/2012/RJ, 2012b. 
_______.  Ministry  of  Education.  Educação 
http://www.brasil.gov.br/educacao/2011/02/extensao>. Accessed on: May 11, 2014. 

-  Extensão.  Online.  2012c.  Availabe 

12.529/2011, 

November 

December 

Available 

Available 

Available 

Available 

Available 

Availabe 

August 

2001b. 

3.860, 

5.622, 

5.773, 

2001. 

1999. 

1999. 

2001. 

2005. 

2006. 

2011. 

from 

from 

from 

from 

from 

May 

Law 

July 

Act 

Act 

Act 

19, 

30, 

27, 

50, 

in: 

in: 

in: 

n° 

n° 

n° 

n° 

nº 

9, 

9, 

1, 

19 

< 

in: 

2014. 

CADE. 

Ranking 

Pesquisa 

Available 

Processual. 

 
_______.  CADE.  Superintendence  General.  Expedition  n°  1.046.  Brasília:  Diário  Oficial  da  União,  n. 
202, from October 17, 2013.  
_______. 
http://www.cade.gov.br/Default.aspx?a8889b6caa60b241d345d069fc> . Accesed on: February 25, 2014. 
CABANELLAS, G. Derecho Antimonopólico y de Defensa de la Competencia. Buenos Aires: Heliasta, 
1983  apud  ROSA,  J.;  SCHUARTZ,  L.  Mercado  relevante  e  direito  da  concorrência.  Revista  de  Direito 
Econômico, CADE, 1995. 
CARVALHO,  V.  M.  Vote  on  Concentration  Act  n°  08012.010747/2008-12.  2008.  Available  in: 
<http://www.cade.gov.br/temp/D_D000000402851739.pdf>. Accessed on: March 09, 2014. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.005387/2009-18. 2009. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.011705/2010-13. 2010. 
CAVES,  R.  E.;  PORTER,  M.  E.  From  Entry  Barriers  to  Mobility  Barriers:  conjunctural  decision  and 
Contrived Deterrence to New Competition. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Cambridge, v. 91, n. 2, 
p. 241-262, 1977. 
CHINAGLIA,  O.  C.  Vote  on  Concentration  Act  n°  08012.006864/2008-73.  2008a.  Available  in: 
<http://www.cade.gov.br/temp/D_D000000390711000.pdf>. Accessed on: March 09, 2014. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.010746/2008-60. 2008b. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.009801/2010-93. 2010. 
FRAZÃO, A. C. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08700.005447/2013-12. 2014a. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act ° 08700.009198/2013-34. 2014b. 
FOLHA. 
http://ruf.folha.uol.com.br/2013/rankinguniversitariofolha/>. Accessed on: May 10, 2014.  
FURLAN, F. M. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.010748/2008-59. 2008. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.009902/2009-31. 2010a. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.006147/2010-66. 2010b. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.003968/2010-41. 2010c. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.011748/2010-91. 2011. 
LUIS, A. S. O. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.003076/2011-21. 2011. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.012129/2011-02. 2012a. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.009947/2011-10. 2012b. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.004503/2011-98. 2013a. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.003886/2011-87. 2013b. 
MATTOS, C. C. A. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.011435/2008-18. 2009a. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.007066/2009-40. 2009b. 
MENDONÇA, E. C. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.004591/2011-28. 2011a. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.004592/2011-72. 2011b. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.000046/2011-62. 2011c. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.008300/2011-71. 2011d. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.004447/2011-91. 2011e. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.001613/2012-89. 2012. 
NETO, A. A. M. F.; ISSLER, J. V. As evidências da integração dos mercados relevantes domésticos aos 
internacionais  e  suas  implicações  para  os  efeitos  da  concentração  de  mercado:  o  caso  CVRD.  In: 
MATTOS,  C.  A  Revolução  do  Antitruste  no  Brasil:  a  teoria  econômica  aplicada  a  casos  concretos  -  2. 
Cidade: Singular, 2008, p. 59-94. 

Universitário 

Available 

Folha. 

in: 

< 

20 

 
POSNER, R. A.; LANDES, W. M. Market Power in Antitrust Cases. Harvard Law Review, v. 94, n. 5, p. 
937-996, 1981 
POSSAS,  M.  Os  conceitos  de  mercado  relevante  e  de  poder  de  mercado  no  âmbito  da  defesa  da 
Concorrência.Revista de Direito Econômico, CADE, 1995. 
PRADO, L. C. T. D. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.001740/2008-00. 2008a. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.006180/2008-71. 2008b. 
RAGAZZO, C. E. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.006789/2008-41. 2008. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.004730/2009-07. 2009a. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.004486/2009-74. 2009b. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.006686/2010-03. 2010. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.003088/2011-55. 2011a. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.008463/2011-53. 2011b. 
RIBEIRO, E. P. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.002734/2012-48. 2012a. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.006610/2011-51. 2012b. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.008694/2011-67. 2013a. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.004979/2011-29. 2013b. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.006400/2011-62. 2013c. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.009861/2011-97. 2013d. 
RUIZ, R. M.. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.003407/2010-41. 2010. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.002864/2011-08. 2011. 
SALOMÃO FILHO, C. Direito Concorrencial: as estruturas (2ª ed.). São Paulo: Malheiros editores Ltda. 
2002, 374p. 
SÉCCA, R. X.; LEAL; R. M. Análise do setor de ensino superior privado no Brasil.  BNDES setorial, v. 
30, 
in: 
<http://www.bndes.gov.br/SiteBNDES/export/sites/default/bndes_pt/Galerias/Arquivos/conhecimento/bn
set/set3003.pdf>. Accessed on: March 10, 2014. 
US  DOJ;  FTC,  1997  Horizontal  Merger  Guidelines.  Washington,  2010,  34  p.  Available  in: 
<http://www.ftc.gov/sites/default/files/attachments/merger-review/100819hmg.pdf>.  Accessed  on  March 
09, 2014.  
US  DOJ;  FTC,  2010  Horizontal  Merger  Guidelines.  Washington,  1997,  34  p.  Available  in: 
<http://www.justice.gov/atr/public/guidelines/hmg.htm>. Accessed on March 09, 2014.  
VASCONCELLOS, L. F. R. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.001741/2008-46. 2008. 
VERÍSSIMO, M. P. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.001288/2012-54. 2012a. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08700.004060/2012-68. 2012b. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.008706/2011-53. 2012c. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08700.004112/2012-04. 2012d. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.000125/2012-54. 2012e. 
_______. Vote on Concentration Act n° 08012.005791/2012-89. 2013. 
 

Available 

103-156, 

2009. 

p. 

