Bubbles in the prices of housing? Evidence to Brazil’s economy
July de 2016
JEL: C00, G12, R20

Nelson Leitão Paes
Universidade Federal de Pernambuco - PIMES/UFPE
E-mail: nlpaes@gmail.com

Cássio da Nóbrega Besarria
Universidade Federal da Paraíba - UFPB
E-mail: cassiodanobrega@yahoo.com.br

Marcelo Eduardo Alves da Silva
Universidade Federal de Pernambuco - PIMES/UFPE
E-mail: marcelo.easilva@ufpe.br

Bubbles in the prices of housing? Evidence to Brazil’s

economy

Abstract

This research aims to test the hypothesis of price bubbles in Brazilian housing. The empirical
formulation adopted will be divided into two steps. The ﬁrst will analyze the ratio price / rent
and cointegration tests. The results show that there is evidence of validity of the model rational
bubbles as opposed to the present value model. The second step shows, through Monte Carlo
simulation, that the results obtained by cointegration analysis can be biased for small samples,
indicating that it is still early to reach the conclusion that there are price bubbles in Brazilian real
estate.

Keywords: Rational bubbles. Linear cointegration. Monte Carlo simulation.

Resumo

Esta pesquisa tem o propósito de testar a hipótese de existência de bolhas nos preços das habitações
brasileiras. A formulação empírica adotada irá se subdividir em duas etapas. A primeira irá se
limitar a análise da razão preço/aluguel e dos testes de cointegração. Os resultados mostram que
há evidência de validade do modelo de bolhas racionais em oposição ao modelo de valor presente.
A segunda etapa mostra, por meio de simulação de Monte Carlo, que os resultados obtidos pela
análise de cointegração podem ser viesados para pequenas amostras, indicando que ainda é cedo
para se chegar a conclusão que há bolhas nos preços dos imóveis brasileiros.

Palavras-Chave: Bolha racional. Cointegração linear. Simulação Monte Carlo.

Área 8 - Microeconomia, Métodos Quantitativos e Finanças

JEL: C00, G12, R20

1

1 Introduction

In recent years, housing prices in the Brazilian economy increased substantially and, based on the
characteristics of the subprime crisis, it has been hypothesized that Brazil is presenting a bubble
in real estate. Despite this behavior, is important to note that not necessarily rapid and prolonged
increases in prices implicate in the presence of a bubble, as well as drastic price reduction does not in-
dicate a bubble rupture. The increase in prices can, for example, only reﬂect changes in fundamental
economic factors such as a reduction in interest rates or credit facilities.

In the Brazilian context, the concern about a bubble in housing prices has been the subject of
debate by authorities as the former president of Brazil’s Central Bank, Meirelles (2013), who states
that:

"(...), Brazil faces a housing bubble problem. The fact is clearly in some regions of Rio

de Janeiro and parts of São Paulo, markets where real estate prices have skyrocketed".

Later, Shiller (2013), said:

"I suspect that there is a housing bubble in Brazil. The buildings more than doubled in
price in Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo in the last ﬁve years. What happened in ﬁve years
that made the prices increase so much like this? Inﬂation was not much less? Prices felt
25% in Los Angeles and New York in the same period. And why did the prices increase
in Brazil uninterruptedly? I can not stick that there is a bubble in Brazil because I do not
know in depth the characteristics of the local market. But comparing Brazilian data with
those of other countries, I can say that the increase in prices suggests caution. Property
prices in Japan had the same movement in the late 1980s and later, in the early 1990s, it
began to fall without stopping and lost two-thirds of value so far".

Aligned to alerts issued by the authorities, we consider that the importance of this study is linked
to the fact that the housing bubble is the most recent example of growth excessive asset price. This
is a spurious component, often responsible for destabilizing effects on national ﬁnancial systems
and for contributing to a prolonged recession. In this sense, Reinhart e Rogoff (2009) conducted a
comparison table between the phases of collapse in housing prices cycles, including the US episode
and a signiﬁcant number of other countries who have faced or are facing banking crises: Austria,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Spain and the UK.

The results showed that the cumulative decline in housing prices compared to the peak was on
average 35.5%. And the most severe falls in the prices of dwellings were presented by Finland,
the Philippines, Colombia and Hong Kong. Their reductions were 50 to 60%, measured from the
peak to the minimum value reached. In relation to the United States, the decline in housing prices
in the subprime crisis is already more than the double recorded during the Great Depression. In
particular, the duration of housing prices fall is quite long, with average of six years. Even excluding
the Japanese experience (with 17 consecutive years of prices falls), the average remains over ﬁve
years.

In addition, the discussion of bubbles in the real estate market differs from analysis in other
assets because housing, as highlighted Poterba (1984), presents a dual nature, being commodity and
investment assets, normally responsible for a signiﬁcant fraction of the families? equity. It brings
another component to the analysis, given not only by the economic perspective, but also by the
social question.

Related to this discussion, Mendonça e Sachsida (2012) had discussions both at the microeco-
nomic level and at the macro level in order to verify the possibility of a bubble in the Brazilian real

2

estate market. Based on the fundamentals of the Austrian School of economics, these suggested that
there is a bubble evidence in this market and that the federal government, through tax policies and
credit stimulus, was primarily responsible for the emergence of this bubble.

Thus, unlike the discussion proposed by Mendonça e Sachsida (2012), this discussion intends to
present some evidence, based on the models of rational bubbles, which can contribute to this debate.
This analysis will be held in the period from March 2001 to March 2015, according to data availability.
Models of rational bubbles show that the relationship between asset prices and its dividends can
be used to investigate the existence of bubbles, in both real estate market and stock market, and
there are a number of authors who have used this relationship to investigate the presence of rational
bubbles in markets active (Campbell e Shiller (1986), Diba e Grossman (1988), Froot e Obstfeld (1989),
Evans (1991), Timmermann (1995), Wu et al. (1997), Crowder e Wohar (1998), Bohl (2003), Nasseh e
Strauss (2004), Cuñado et al. (2005), Mokhtar (2006), Chang et al. (2007), among others).

The occurrence of rational bubbles means that there is no long-term relationship between asset
prices and their dividends. Seeking to determine whether asset prices and dividends have long-
term relationship, mostly empirical studies have used co-integration techniques. To that end, the
cointegration tests of Engle-Granger and Johansen Phillips-Ouliaris were applied, and all of them
suggest that there is not a long-term relationship between the prices of housing and dividends, ie,
they indicate that there are bubbles in housing prices.

As much as it may seem, this is not the ﬁnal result of this discussion, because there are some
limitations on this analysis that should be kept in mind before drawing conclusions. Some of these
are linked to the limited number of price data real estate for Brazil. Because this component, some
studies1 have questioned the validity of the results obtained for estimating a long-term relationship
involving short series. For this reason, it is important to investigate more properly the performance
results in cointegration analysis for small samples.

In this sense, the second part of this study attempts to show, through Monte Carlo simulation,
that the results obtained by cointegration analysis are biased to small samples, indicating that it is
still early to reach the conclusion that there are bubbles in the prices of Brazilian homes.

Besides this introduction, the article has ﬁve other sections. The next section presents the theoret-
ical discussions about the deﬁnition of bubbles and the model of rational bubbles. Then, it shows the
cointegration method and set to strategy empirical identiﬁcation bubbles. In particular, it presents
the used databases and their limitations. Section 4 shows and discusses the main results of the strat-
egy empirical. In addition, we investigate, through Monte Carlo simulation, if the results generated
from the cointegration tests are biased for small samples. Lastly, the ﬁnal considerations of this work
are woven.

2 Rational bubbles in the assets prices and the cointegration im-

plications

The discussion of rational bubbles presented in this section was proposed by Gürkaynak (2008) e
Mikhed e Zemˇcík (2009). The wording proposed by Gürkaynak (2008) assumes that economic agents
are paid by the job offer and the appreciation of assets in period t + k. The consumer optimization
problem can be used to derive the relative pricing of assets, assuming cases of non-arbitration and
rational expectations. It is assumed that the expected utility consumption derived from u(ct) is max-
imized from the following budget constraint:

1For more details on this discussion see Cheung e Lai (1993), Montalvo (1995), Dhrymes e Dimitrios (1997)

3

∞(cid:88)

k=0

maxEt

βk [u(ct+k)]

(1)

s.a.

ct+k = wt+k + (Pt+k + Dt+k)zt+k − (Pt+k)zt+k

(2)
where wt is the income; β is the discount rate of future consumption; zt is the stock of assets; Pt is the
price of assets and Dt are the dividends. In this research, the focus is given to the rooms where Pt is
the price of housing and Dt is the dividends; for the housing sector, this indicator can be represented
by the rental price, as Kivedal (2013), Himmelberg et al. (2005) and Besarria (2014).

This association between housing prices and rents, as Klyuev (2008) analyzed, is best described
when it goes on to describe the house as an asset that combines the aspects of a good durable con-
sumer with the characteristics of an investment asset . But the rent is an alternative for individuals
who do not intend or do not have money to buy the house itself, which produces a ﬂow of hous-
ing services for a family. From a ﬁnancial point of view, the rent is the price to pay for that stream
or the opportunity cost of renting a home instead of buying it. The price-rent must equalize the
costs and beneﬁts of owning a home or renting and should, over time, maintaining a broadly stable
relationship between house prices and income.

When applying the ﬁrst order conditions in the optimization problem, it has:

Et [β[u(cid:48)(ct+k)][Pt+k + Dt+k] = Etβ[u(cid:48)(ct+k−1)][Pt+k−1]

(3)

Assuming that the utility function is linear2, it follows that equation (1) can be represented by:

(4)
Admitting the existence of the link between the risk free assets with the interest rate, it has the
standard model of present value. Where the determination of asset prices involves their expected
values and dividends, according to the following speciﬁcation:

βEt [Pt+k + Dt+k] = Et[Pt+k−1]

Et[Pt+k−1] = (

1

1 + R

)Et[Pt+k + Dt+k]

(5)

where R is the interest rate.

Gürkaynak (2008) points out that equation (5) is the starting point of most empirical tests of assets

pricing. Assuming the non-bubble condition, as proposed Mikhed e Zemˇcík (2009),

lim
k→∞[(

1

1 + R

)kEt[Pt+k + Dt+k] = 0

Then, the solution to this difference equation results in:

∞(cid:88)

k=0

P F

t =

(

1

1 + R

)kEt[Dt+k]

(6)

(7)

which is often referred as the value of fundamentals or fundamental asset prices.
Following Campbell e Shiller (1986) and Wang (2000), as proposed Mikhed e Zemˇcík (2009), it
deﬁnes the spread between the price of housing and the dividend ﬂow as St ≡ [Pt − ( 1
1+R )Dt]. If Pt
and Dt are I(1),this implies that St is also ﬁrst order steady. This result can be shown by rewriting St

2Linear utility function implies constant marginal utility and risk neutrality.

4

∞(cid:88)

k=0

as:

∞(cid:88)

k=1

(

Si,t = (

)Et

1
R

1

1 + R

)k∆Dt+k+1 = (

)Et[∆Pt+k+1]

1
R

(8)

The ﬁrst equality stems from the fact that the conditional expected value of future dividend ﬂows
is given by its current value. The second equality follows the equation (7). It can be seen that the
stationarity of St implies the stationarity of Pt/Dt (and its inverse), since St = 0 implies in, Pt/Dt =
R ).
( 1

Assuming that the non-bubbles proposal condition is violated in equation (7) , in this case, hous-

ing prices and the ﬂow of income are not cointegrated, and can be represented by:

Pi,t =

(

1

1 + R

)kEt[Dt+k] + Bt

(9)

Et[Bt+k] = (1 + R)Bt

(10)
Thus, in case of bubbles existance, Gilles e LeRoy (1992) determined the expression (9) as a dy-
namic pricing system that may be divided into two components: essential and blister component.
In other words, the expression (9) shows that the price of the asset (housing) must be equal to the
present value of all future dividend payments (rent). Discussions on this issue show that the fun-
damental value associated with housing prices is the price of rent, and the long-term divergence
between these indicators may suggest the presence of a bubble in the housing market.

Kivedal (2013) shows that, when analyzing the period leading up to the Subprime crisis, we found
that the increase in housing prices in the United States was not accompanied by increases in the same
proportions in the prices of rents, when these should be moving together.

2.1 Literature review
The bubble detection methods have been extensively studied in the literature. By observing the
development of methods of identiﬁcation, it is emphasized that this analysis basically left over from
tests of variance and covariance proposed by cross Shiller (1980) and Blanchard e Watson (1982).
The analysis proposed by Shiller (1980) has been developed originally for the stock market and this
test was used to verify if the asset price variance exceeds the differential of dividends. If there is
a difference among these measures, then the excess variance of asset prices is identiﬁed, providing
evidence of the existence of speculative bubbles in the price formation.

But the cross-covariance test presented by Blanchard e Watson (1982) came from hypothesized
that the presence of bubble decreases the correlation between the fundamentals and the price of
active. However, the results obtained by the tests given above are strongly connected with the spec-
iﬁcation adopted for the equilibrium model and, therefore, the acceptance possibility of the bubble
can be due to model speciﬁcation and not the existence of bubbles.

Based on analysis of studies aimed at identifying bubbles, we found the most frequently used
detection methods are model derived from present value and rational bubble assumption. Yiu et al.
(2013) summarizes a series of studies that adopted the co-integration method as rational bubbles
identiﬁcation process. This discussion comes from the study proposed by Campbell e Shiller (1986)
in which the authors propose an alternative method based on the idea that the difference between the
asset price and the fundamental value will exhibit explosive behavior during the process of bubble
formation.

5

In particular, Campbell e Shiller (1986) showed a unit root test as ﬁrst step to test the explosive
potential and the presence of a bubble. If there is a bubble, the price of the asset and the fundamental
value can be characterized in two possible cases.
In the ﬁrst case, the price of the asset is non-
stationary, but the fundamental value is stationary. In the second case, both the price of the asset and
the fundamental value are not stationary. However, for the second case there is not enough evidence
for the presence of a bubble, and therefore, the cointegration test is adopted as a supplementary
method. As described above, if there is a bubble, then the price of the asset and its fundamental
value are not cointegrated.

Diba e Grossman (1988) also indicate that the explosion on the difference between the price of
asset and the fundamental value is sufﬁcient for detection of bubbles, and the unit root tests and
cointegration are the tools for the identiﬁcation of this overgrowth. Since its proposal, the unit root
and cointegration tests have been widely used for the detection of active bubbles.

As highlighted Yiu et al. (2013), the unit root and cointegration tests were applied to detect bub-
bles in the housing market in several economies in the two decades. For example, Drake (1993) used
this method to study the boom prices in the mid-1980s, in the housing market in the UK, and Ar-
shanapalli e Nelson (2008) use the cointegration test to identify the housing bubble in the mid-2000s,
in the US housing market. As for Market Real Estate Hong Kong, Peng (2002) used this method to
detect the bubble 1997 in the residential real estate market. The test was also extended to different
forms over time, such as using data panel and regime change techniques.

Directing the analysis for the Brazilian economy, this is a little explored discussion and most part
of the discussions related to this theme is focused on the analysis of the stock market. The fact that
there are few studies focusing on housing market might be explained not by the lack of importance
of this sector, but by the limited number of dwellings pricing information in Brazil (the options
that exist have emerged recently) and by the recent growth of this sector, started with the housing
program Minha Casa Minha Vida.

At the current stage of this research, only the studies of Leister (2011), Mendonça e Sachsida (2012)
and Besarria et al. (2014) were found, which are meant for the analysis of bubbles in the housing
market. The discussion proposed by Leister (2011) came from the debate about the deﬁnition of
asset bubbles on the theory of efﬁcient markets and theory irrationality / ﬂaw in the behavior of
economic agents. Subsequently, these sought to analyze the behavior of central banks in conducting
monetary policy when there are bubbles of real estate assets. Associating theory of behavioral ﬁnance
to ﬁnancial deregulation environment, Leister (2011) described the behavior of economic agents in
this environment as well as the advantages and disadvantages of adopting a passive monetary policy
and proactive before the bubbles. Finally, it was analyzed how Brazilian economic agents behave
in this context, the potential for generating bubbles in the domestic economy and which are the
difﬁculties that may be faced by Brazil’s Central Bank in the case of speculative bubbles appearance.
But the study by Mendonça e Sachsida (2012) aimed to evaluate, exclusively, the possibility of a
speculative bubble in the Market Brazilian real estate. The theoretical basis that these authors used in
their analysis was the one proposed by the Austrian School of economics. According to these, from
the perspective of School Austrian, a market bubble does not appear because of an irrational behav-
ior, but results exogenously a created signal which causes the agents to target wrongly investments
in a particular segment of the economy, making with prices in this market follow a strongly upward
trend. Such lifting can not extend indeﬁnitely, causing the agents at some instant (breaking point)
realize that the return on investment is lass than expected.

The empirical approach adopted by these authors was based, ﬁrstly, on a conjunctural analysis in
which these sought to determine whether the conduct of some variables related to construction and
real estate (industrial product construction, real estate developments, sale price and rental, credit de-

6

velopments banking, construction costs, among others) has some evidence detachment the evolution
of these variables in relation to the rest of the economy.

Subsequently, sought to estimate the current real estate prices and the construction structure of
cost, using the ordinary least squares method, instrumental variable and methods of moments, based
on the data of sales prices real estate, rental price, interest rate and expected appreciation of the asset.
These estimates were used to test the hypothesis that the causality is towards Property price towards
its cost and not on the contrary, as proposed by the School Austrian. And, based on exogeneity and
endogeneity tests, the authors concluded the the property price puts pressure on the cost, and not
the reverse, which constitutes as a favorable argument to the perception of the Austrian School.

Recently, Besarria et al. (2014) evaluated the response of the Central Bank to the effects of a bubble
in the prices of Brazilian homes. This study started from obtaining the structural parameters of the
DSGE model, using the generalized method Moments (GMM) and, through these, it was carried out
the simulation of the shocks effects in the prices of dwellings in the artiﬁcial economy, developed
on the basis of Brazilian economy data. Subsequently, it was used the autoregressive model Vec-
tors (VAR), in which the shocks were identiﬁed by signal restriction based on the theoretical model.
The results showed that the effects of bubble in the Market Brazilian housing positively affected the
subsequent movements in the product and inﬂation, however, the effect of this shock occurred tran-
siently on these variables, bringing lasting effects only on the interest rate, where the answer given
by the Central Bank was the increase of interest rates.

3 Methodological procedures

Based on the model of rational bubbles described in section (2), the methodology proposed to capture
the relationship between asset prices and their fundamental values is given by tests of linear and
structural break cointegration.

The ﬁrst step in the establishment of cointegration is given by the stationarity of series test. For
that purpose, it is applied the Dickey-Fuller (1981) and KPSS (Kwiatkowski, Phillips, Schmidt and
Shin) test. It has been exhaustively discussed in the literature that the Dickey-Fuller test (1981) can
not reject the hypothesis of stationarity for a multitude of economic series, and for this reason it is
important to compare the results obtained by this test with others who can distinguish the unit root
series whose data are not enough conclusive.

The next step is to verify if the house price series and rental prices are cointegrated. The most
traditional methodologies to test the cointegration are: Engle e Granger (1987) and Johansen (1991).
The ﬁrst methodology states that the variables in studies will be cointegrated, if they are integrated
on the same order d (where d > 1) and if there is a linear combination of these variables to be
stationary. This technique is not suitable for testing the cointegration when there is the possibility
of existing more than one cointegration vector. In this case, the recommended approach is the one
proposed by Johansen (1991).

In the tests shown above, it will be implemented the method of identifying cointegration pro-
posed by Phillips e Ouliaris (1990). This method aims to test the null non-cointegration hypothesis
against the presence integration alternative, using unit root tests applied to waste. The idea is basi-
cally conﬂicting the results generated from different cointegration tests.

It is important to highlight two components that are not taken into account in the tests presented
above. The ﬁrst is that in the presence of structural changes in the serial data, the results obtained
from the tests of stationarity presented above may be biased. This may lead to the acceptance of a
false hypothesis, like, accepting the hypothesis of unit root in the series when these are stationary

7

around a broken trend.

To work around this limitation, we adopted the unit root test proposed by Lee e Strazicich (2003).
The authors propose a test that allows the evaluation of the presence of unit root in the possibility of
structural breakage, based on Lagrange minimum multiplier. In this case, the moments of breakages
are determined endogenously.

The second limitation is related to the results of cointegration tests in structural changes presence
in the temporal series. Bierens (1997) pointed out that the conventional cointegration tests may not
be suitable for identifying the relationship of cointegration, since these tests consider that the ad-
justment process is symmetrical, without considering the fact that the true nature of the adjustment
process may be non-linear. Furthermore, the presence of structural breaks, it increases the chances of
the tests accepting null hypothesis, although there is a stable relationship between the co-integration
parameters.

So, if it is identiﬁed the presence of a structural break in the series, it will be adopted the coin-
tegration test Gregory e Hansen (1996), which explicitly incorporated a structural break in the coin-
tegration relationship of the series. The test statistics can be viewed as a univariate extension of
endogenous structural break tests.

In addition, the analyzed period of time is very short to draw convincing conclusions about the
existence of bubbles, considering the fact that the analysis methods proposed above require more
than a sufﬁciently long sample, but also a long period of time to provide adequate results. This
discussion is very well addressed in Shiller e Perron (1985). Thus, the second part the study analyzes
the performance of the cointegration analysis for short samples. The importance of this discussion
is linked to the fact that the cointegration tests are derived from asymptotic results and statistical
inferences in endless samples.
In this case, the critical values of short data derivative tests may
generate unreliable results.

3.1 Data base
The data base used in this analysis is composed by the monthly price observations sale and leasing
of Brazilian households, covering the period from March 2001 to March 2015. It is noteworthy that
the selection of these variables was made based on the work of Himmelberg et al. (2005) and Kivedal,
2013, in which these show that the relationship between housing prices and the rent can be used to
investigate the existence of a bubble in real estate. The period of analysis was determined by the
availability of data.

The number of property prices is represented by the Guarantee and Exchange index Financed
Real Estate Residential (IVG-R) of the Central Bank and the real estate lease index can be represented
by three different series, IPCA (housing), IGP-M and the index real estate leasing the Economic Re-
search Institute Foundation (FIPE).

The real estate lease series FIPE covered the period from January 2008 to March 2015. However,
the temporal dimension of the sample to the cost series of national rent does not cover the entire
period from 2001 to 2015, presenting less than ninety observations, a factor that compromises the
results obtained in analysis.
In order to enlarge the data set was adopted interpolation method
linear, making the rental cost to have the same periodicity obtained for prices of dwellings.

8

Figure 1: Lease cost represented by the IPCA (housing), IGP-M and FIPE.

Source: Prepared

As shown in Figure (1), there are no signiﬁcant differences between sets. Thus, the IGP-M was
used as the main determinant of the rent, since this is the index used for the correction of rental
agreements in Brazil.

4 Empirical Evidence

This section will refer to the discussions about the proposed methods for bubbles analysis in the
prices of Brazilian homes. Figure (2) presents the monthly series of selling price indices and rental of
dwellings, as well as the ratio price / rent, from March 2001 to March 2015.

9

IGPMIPCARent(Interpolated)2001200320052007200920112013050100150200250300Figure 2: Price, rent and rent price ratio of the Brazilian real

Source: Prepared

In Figure (2) you can see that the average selling price of housing and the average rental showed
strong recovery from 2008. One can not deny that situational factors, such as GDP growth, hous-
ing credit, income available, interest rates, international events like the World Cup in 2014 and the
Olympics in 2016 contributed to the recovery of real estate. But the recent US experience has shown
that, in addition to cyclical factors, it is possible that the prices of houses are inﬂuenced by the emer-
gence of bubbles.

Regarding the ratio price / rent, the analysis that can be drawn from this indicator comes from
the value model presented above, in which the determination of housing prices is linked to earnings
ﬂow from the real state rental. In this case, it is expected that property prices and rent grow together
or accordingly, considering that if the cost of dwelling use exceeds the cost of rent, it is expected
that individuals start to rent the buildings rather than buying them. This result is observed when
individuals are indifferent between renting or owning their own property, as described by Poterba
(1984).

By observing the ratio price / rent, present in Figure (2), you can check that this condition is
rejected for the Brazilian economy, since there is an uptrend tendency on this indicator started in
2007, and currently it is about 20% lower than the last peak reached in 2012. This discussion suggests
that house prices in Brazil are overvalued, as observed for the American economy in the period
before the Subprime crisis.

This is a ﬁrst indication that the asset price exceeds its fundamental value by apparently large
margins. However, it is necessary to analyze other factors before drawing conclusions about the
presence of speculative components in prices of housing.

An analysis that has been widely used in the literature is the cointegration. This methodology
will be used to test the model of rational bubbles, deﬁned by Gilles e LeRoy (1992) in the expression
(5), , in which, in addition to the key value, it is inserted a bubble component in the determination
of asset prices. Dickey Fuller and Kwiatkowski Phillips-Schmidt Shin-(KPSS)3tests were initially

3The null hypothesis Dickey Fuller test is that the series is not stationary, unlike the KPSS test, whose null hypothesis

10

PricePrice realRent200120032005200720092011201350100150200250300350400450Nominal ratioReal ratio200120032005200720092011201380100120140160180200220240260applied for comparison reasons, in order to determine the stationarity and integration order of the
used variables. As can be seen in Table (1), for the case analyzed, the Dickey-Fuller and KPSS tests
showed that the selling and rental price series of dwellings have unitary (non-stationary) root level
and are stationary in difference.

Table 1: Testing stationarity

Dickey-Fuller

tα
-1.45
Price
-0.60
Location
-3.22
∆P rice
∆Location -3.05
Source: Authors’ calculations.

tcritical
-2.87
-2.87
-2.87
-2.87

KPSS
ηµ
0.21
0.21
0.21
0.21

ˆηµ
0.47
0.40
0.19
0.16

Lee-Strazicich
tα
Break
2008:03
-3.21
-2.79
2011:11

-
-

-
-

Although there is no divergence between test results as the acceptance of series stationarity in the
ﬁrst difference, it is important to note that these lose validity in the presence of a series structural
break. Thus, the following step of Research refers to the application of unit root tests with endoge-
nous structural break proposed by Lee e Strazicich (2003), in the series of selling and rental prices
(level). As it can be seen, the results of the Lee-Strazicich test show that the calculated value Student-t
statistic was less than the critical value -4.45, to the signiﬁcance level of 5%. It represents that the null
hypothesis of a unit root with structural break was accepted and that the structural change period
identiﬁed in the series of sales prices and rental corresponds to March 2008 and November 20114,
respectively.

The subsequent discussion is focused on the cointegration tests between the prices housing and
rents. In order to provide robustness to the obtained results, it is prepared a comparison table be-
tween the cointegration tests of Engle-Granger, Johansen and Phillips-Ouliaris, as shown in Table (2)
, on the appendix of this study. The results of the cointegration tests presented in Table (2) show that
there is a target bubble in the Brazilian housing prices, since no test suggested the acceptance of the
hypothesis of association between prices and dividends series for the analyzed period.

However, it is known that conventional cointegration tests such as those used in the previous
year are not able to capture the true nature of the adjustment process of the series when this process
is given in a non-linear form or when there is a regime change. For this purpose, it was adopted the
nonlinear cointegration test with structural break proposed by Gregory e Hansen (1996).

is that the series is stationary.

4Among the factors that may have inﬂuenced the regime change in sales price of series housing, there is the release
announcement of the Growth Acceleration Program (PAC) to January 2007, having as a major goal the increased vol-
ume of credit intended for housing sector. Regarding the number of rentals, it turns out that the Price-Market General
Index (IGP-M), generally used to adjust the lease agreements, had accumulated value of 10.78% per annum, against the
accumulated value of -1.72% in 2009.

11

Figure 3: Gregory-Hansen Cointegration Tests

Source: Prepared

When analyzing the results of the cointegration test with structural break proposed by Gregory
e Hansen (1996) , we can see that the calculated value of the statistic Z∗
α(C/S) was under the critical
value of 95% signiﬁcance. It represents that the null hypothesis of non-cointegration was accepted
and that there was a structural change in the relation between housing prices and their dividends in
2009.

We emphasize that this result is reinforced by policies that were aimed at the housing sector in
Brazil from the year 2008, considering that the Brazilian ﬁnancial system, as well as the most part of
the world economies, has been exposed to the effects of volatility in international markets, especially
the credit ones. And, among the anti-cyclical measures adopted in reaction to the subprime crisis in
Brazil, it stands out the stimulating policy to the construction sector.

4.1 Monte Carlo Simulation
The results from the cointegration analysis showed that the price series and dividends are not coin-
tegrated and that there are indications of bubbles in the Brazilian economy. Is this result robust? Do
we really have a bubble in housing prices? Taking into consideration that the bubbles identiﬁcation
process given above was carried out from a sample of only 168 observations, this section intends to
investigate whether the results generated from the cointegration tests are biased for small samples.
The importance of this analysis is linked to the fact that the results generated from the cointe-
gration tests are biased, generating potentially underestimated results or overestimated for the true
cointegrating factor. This discussion will be held from Monte Carlo experiments. This is not a recent
debate in the literature. Considering the studies that addressed this issue, the analysis performed
by Toda (1995) are highlighted. The discussion proposed by Toda (1995) emerges from a bivariate
relationship, as well as the most part of Monte Carlo studies, and it is worried only about the likeli-
hood ratio (LR) test. Their results show unequivocally that for achieving an acceptable performance
for the LR test, a relatively large sample is required. He also thinks that the underestimation of the
cointegration rank occurs quite frequently for small samples.

12

Gregory-Hansen Cointegration Tests2003200420052006200720082009201020112012-4.0-3.5-3.0-2.5-2.0-1.5-1.0-0.50.0It assumes the following data generating process to the price series of housing and rents:

P1,t = µ1 + β1D2,t + α1P1,t−1 + ˆu1t

D2,t = µ2 + D2,t−1 + ˆu2t

(11)

(12)

where u1t and u2t are random variables.

It is noticed that the data generating process imposes a relationship between the variables. From
this relationship, it was possible to artiﬁcially generate two time series with dimension of 3400 peri-
ods, as illustrated in Figure (4).

Figure 4: Simulated data

Source: Prepared

Two sample sizes are considered for the remainder of the analysis, T = 168 [Concerning the data
set available for the ﬁrst analysis and illustrated by the shaded portion of Figure (4)] and T = 3400.
The choice of different sample sizes intendes to provide information on the performance of cointe-
gration tests used as bubbles identiﬁcation method. The choice of the sample T = 3400 was given to
evaluate the performance of such tests on large samples so that the results approximate the actual
distribution of the estimators and the test statistics.

The Table (3), presented in Appendix A, shows the results of several cointegration tests discussed
in the previous sections for a ﬁnite sample of simulated data. The results obtained show that when
analyzing the complete series of data, it is veriﬁed that there is cointegration between the series.
However, when the analysis is directed to the subset of data, represented by the 168 observations, it
can see that the results are changed, indicating that the series are not cointegrated. This fact is related
to the asymptotic properties of the estimators of the cointegrating vector, in which, in the case of not
having long series to justify the use of methods based on the principles of the asymptotic theory,
there are strong evidences that the results generated in this analysis will be biased.

With regards to testing, as it can be observed, there were changes in the obtained results when
the sample size increased from 168 observations to 3400 periods. This suggests that the analysis of

13

PriceRent500100015002000250030000255075100125bubbles in Brazil, presented above, is not yet conclusive, considering the temporal limitation of data.

5 Conclusion

The subprime crisis is an important example of the effects that ﬂuctuations in housing prices can
make to economic performance. Based on this fact, this study sought to determine if there is evidence
of rational bubbles in the Brazilian housing prices, and adopted some indicators that can assist in this
analysis, which are: why price / income and cointegration tests.

At the current stage of this research, it was possible to verify that this is the ﬁrst discussion that
aims to identify rational bubbles in the prices of Brazilian homes through cointegration tests. For this
reason, and also because of the difﬁculties associated with the properties of the methods applied to
relatively short time series, the test results must be interpreted with some caution.

Based on this, a number of conclusions can be drawn. Among the analyzed indicators, there is
reason to price / rent and, from that, it was found that housing prices grew rapidly in respect of
income, suggesting dissociation between asset prices and their fundamentals.

Subsequently, the analysis was described from the dynamic co-movements between selling price
series of housing and rent prices. The results of the cointegration tests have shown that there may be
rational bubbles in the prices of these assets, as these series do not show a common stochastic trend
of long-term, ie, they are not cointegrated.

In short, despite being early to ensure that there is a bubble in housing prices, for all the reasons
that were earlier presented, one can not neglect that since 2008 ﬁscal and monetary stimulus pack-
ages have been adopted (strong credit expansion) in the Brazilian economy that contributed to the
excessive growth in property prices.

References

Arshanapalli, Bala e William Nelson (2008), “A cointegration test to verify the housing bubble.” The

International Journal of Business and Finance Research, 2, 35–43.

Besarria, Cássio, Nelson Paes, e Marcelo Silva (2014), “Como o banco central tem reagido aos choques
(bolhas) nos preços das habitações brasileiras? uma análise por meio do modelo dinâmico estocás-
tico de equilíbrio geral (dsge).” XV Encontro Brasileiro de Finanças.

Besarria, Cássio N (2014), Bolha de ativos e os seus efeitos macroeconômicos. Recife: PIMES/UFPE, 2014.

Ph.D. thesis, Tese (Doutorado em Economia.

Bierens, Herman J (1997), “Testing the unit root with drift hypothesis against nonlinear trend sta-
tionarity, with an application to the us price level and interest rate.” Journal of Econometrics, 81,
29–64.

Blanchard, Olivier J e Mark W Watson (1982), “Bubbles, rational expectations and ﬁnancial markets.”

Bohl, Martin T (2003), “Periodically collapsing bubbles in the us stock market?” International Review

of Economics & Finance, 12, 385–397.

Campbell, John Y e Robert J Shiller (1986), “Cointegration and tests of present value models.” Tech-

nical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

14

Chang, Tsangyao, Chi-Chen Chiu, e Chien-Chung Nieh (2007), “Rational bubbles in the us stock
market? further evidence from a nonparametric cointegration test.” Applied Economics Letters, 14,
517–521.

Cheung, Yin-Wong e Kon S Lai (1993), “Finite-sample sizes of johansen?s likelihood ratio tests for

cointegration.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and statistics, 55, 313–328.

Crowder, William J e Mark E Wohar (1998), “Stock price effects of permanent and transitory shocks.”

Economic Inquiry, 36, 540–552.

Cuñado, Juncal, Luis Alberiko Gil-Alana, e F Perez De Gracia (2005), “A test for rational bubbles
in the nasdaq stock index: a fractionally integrated approach.” Journal of Banking & Finance, 29,
2633–2654.

Dhrymes, Phoebus J e Thomakos D Dimitrios (1997), “Small sample properties of certain cointegra-

tion test statistics: A monte carlo study.” Columbia University Econ Dept Discussion Paper.

Diba, Behzad T e Herschel I Grossman (1988), “Explosive rational bubbles in stock prices?” The

American Economic Review, 520–530.

Drake, Leigh (1993), “Modelling uk house prices using cointegration: an application of the johansen

technique.” Applied Economics, 25, 1225–1228.

Engle, Robert F e Clive WJ Granger (1987), “Co-integration and error correction: representation,

estimation, and testing.” Econometrica: journal of the Econometric Society, 251–276.

Evans, George W (1991), “Pitfalls in testing for explosive bubbles in asset prices.” The American Eco-

nomic Review, 922–930.

Froot, Kenneth A e Maurice Obstfeld (1989), “Intrinsic bubbles: The case of stock prices.” Technical

report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gilles, Christian e Stephen F LeRoy (1992), “Bubbles and charges.” International Economic Review,

323–339.

Gregory, Allan W e Bruce E Hansen (1996), “Residual-based tests for cointegration in models with

regime shifts.” Journal of econometrics, 70, 99–126.

Gürkaynak, Refet S (2008), “Econometric tests of asset price bubbles: Taking stock*.” Journal of Eco-

nomic Surveys, 22, 166–186.

Himmelberg, Charles, Christopher Mayer, e Todd Sinai (2005), “Assessing high house prices: Bub-
bles, fundamentals, and misperceptions.” Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Re-
search.

Johansen, Søren (1991), “Estimation and hypothesis testing of cointegration vectors in gaussian vec-

tor autoregressive models.” Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 1551–1580.

Kivedal, Bjørnar Karlsen (2013), “Testing for rational bubbles in the us housing market.” Journal of

Macroeconomics, 38, 369–381.

15

Klyuev, Mr Vladimir (2008), What goes up must come down? House price dynamics in the United States.

8-187, International Monetary Fund.

Lee, Junsoo e Mark C Strazicich (2003), “Minimum lagrange multiplier unit root test with two struc-

tural breaks.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85, 1082–1089.

Leister, Mauricio Dias (2011), Bolhas e política monetária: evidências para a economia brasileira. Ph.D.

thesis, Universidade de São Paulo.

Meirelles, Henrique (2013), “Entrevista [nov. 2013]. entrevistadora: Paula pacheco.” Entrevista conce-

dida ao Portal iG.

Mendonça, Mário Jorge e Adolfo Sachsida (2012), “Existe bolha no mercado imobiliário brasileiro?”

Technical report, Texto para Discussão, Instituto de Pesquisa Econômica Aplicada (IPEA).

Mikhed, Vyacheslav e Petr Zemˇcík (2009), “Testing for bubbles in housing markets: A panel data

approach.” The Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 38, 366–386.

Mokhtar, Suraya Hanim (2006), Detection of Rational Speculative Bubbles in the Malaysian Stock Market.

Ph.D. thesis, Universiti Putra Malaysia.

Montalvo, Jose G (1995), “Comparing cointegrating regression estimators: Some additional monte

carlo results.” Economics Letters, 48, 229–234.

Nasseh, Alireza e Jack Strauss (2004), “Stock prices and the dividend discount model: did their

relation break down in the 1990s?” The quarterly review of economics and ﬁnance, 44, 191–207.

Peng, Wensheng (2002), “What drives property prices in hong kong?” HKMA Quarterly Bulletin, 8,

19–33.

Phillips, Peter CB e Sam Ouliaris (1990), “Asymptotic properties of residual based tests for cointe-

gration.” Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 165–193.

Poterba, James M (1984), “Tax subsidies to owner-occupied housing: an asset-market approach.” The

quarterly journal of economics, 729–752.

Reinhart, Carmen M e Kenneth Rogoff (2009), This time is different: eight centuries of ﬁnancial folly.

princeton university press.

Shiller, Robert (2013), “Entrevista [out. 2013]. entrevistadora: Julia wiltgen.” Entrevista concedida EX-

AME.com.

Shiller, Robert J (1980), “Do stock prices move too much to be justiﬁed by subsequent changes in

dividends?”

Shiller, Robert J e Pierre Perron (1985), “Testing the random walk hypothesis: Power versus fre-

quency of observation.” Economics Letters, 18, 381–386.

Timmermann, Allan (1995), “Cointegration tests of present value models with a time-varying dis-

count factor.” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 10, 17–31.

Toda, Hiro Y (1995), “Finite sample performance of likelihood ratio tests for cointegrating ranks in

vector autoregressions.” Econometric theory, 11, 1015–1032.

16

Wang, Peijie (2000), “Market efﬁciency and rationality in property investment.” The Journal of Real

Estate Finance and Economics, 21, 185–201.

Wu, Yangru et al. (1997), “Rational bubbles in the stock market: accounting for the us stock-price

volatility.” Economic Inquiry, 35, 309–319.

Yiu, Matthew S, Jun Yu, e Lu Jin (2013), “Detecting bubbles in hong kong residential property mar-

ket.” Journal of Asian Economics, 28, 115–124.

A Appendix

17

Table 2: Linear cointegration tests for prices and rents of Brazilian real estate

Johansen

Engle-Granger

Phillips-Ouliaris

Eigenvalue Maximum eigenvalue Trace Trace (95%)

0
1

0.085
0.003

14.57
0.46

15.03
0.46

15.41
3.84

Stat. test

Critical value

-2.21
-3.37

Stat. test

Critical value

-1.55
-3.37

1
8

Table 3: Tests for linear cointegration simulated data

Johansen

Engle-Granger

Phillips-Ouliaris

0.085
0.073

3400 obs. Eigenvalue Maximum eigenvalue Trace Trace (90%)
0
1
168 obs.
0
1

572.42
264.54

307.87
264.54

15.41
3.84

0.087
0.004

13.14
0.58

15.41
3.84

13.72
0.58

Stat. test

Critical value

-17.52
-3.33

Stat. test

Critical value

-18.58
-3.33

Stat. test

Critical value

-2.73
-3.37

Stat. test

Critical value

-3.46
-3.83

1
9

