Debt-financed knowledge capital accumulation, 

capacity utilization and economic growth* 

 
 

 

    Laura Carvalho 
 
    Department of Economics   
 
    University of São Paulo 
    lcarvalho@usp.br 
 
 

 

   Gilberto Tadeu Lima 
   Department of Economics 
   University of São Paulo 
   giltadeu@usp.br 

 

 
 
  
 

    Gustavo Pereira Serra 
    Department of Economics 
    University of São Paulo 
    gserra@usp.br 

 

 
 

Abstract:  Motivated  to  some  extent  by  the  empirical  significance  of  student  loans  to  human  capital 
accumulation,  this  paper  incorporates  debt-financed  knowledge  capital  accumulation  to  a  demand-led 
model  of  capacity  utilization  and  growth.  Average  labor  productivity  varies  positively  with  the  average 
stock of knowledge capital across the labor force. Even though employed workers obtain a full wage return 
on  their  knowledge  capital,  insufficient  aggregate  effective  demand,  by  generating  unemployment,  gives 
rise to underutilization of the stock of knowledge capital. The stability properties and financial fragility (in 
the  Minskyan  sense)  of  the  long-run  equilibrium  configuration  of  the  economy  depend  on  how  the  debt 
servicing  of working  households  is  specified. The same dependence  applies  to how the  rates of physical 
capital  utilization  and  labor  employment  (with  the  latter  also  measuring  the  rate  of  knowledge  capital 
utilization) respond to variations in the ratio of working households’ debt to physical capital. 
 
Keywords: Knowledge capital; debt; capacity utilization; employment. 
 

Resumo:  Motivado,  em  certa  medida,  pela  relevância  empírica  de  empréstimos  estudantis  à  acumulação 
de capital humano, o artigo incorpora acumulação de capital conhecimento financiada por endividamento a 
um  modelo  de utilização da capacidade e  crescimento  liderado pela demanda. A produtividade média da 
mão  de  obra  varia  positivamente  com  o  estoque  médio  de  capital  conhecimento  na  força  de  trabalho. 
Embora os trabalhadores empregados obtenham pleno retorno salarial sobre seu capital conhecimento, uma 
demanda efetiva agregada insuficiente, ao gerar desemprego, gera uma subutilização do estoque de capital 
conhecimento.  As  propriedades  de  estabilidade  e  a  fragilidade  financeira  (no  sentido  Minskyano)  da 
configuração  de  equilíbrio  de  longo  prazo  da  economia  dependem  de  como  é  especificado  o  serviço  do 
endividamento das famílias de trabalhadores. A mesma relação de dependência se aplica à maneira como 
as taxas de acumulação de capital físico e de emprego da mão de obra (esta última também representando a 
taxa de utilização do capital conhecimento) respondem a variações na razão entre a dívida das famílias de 
trabakhadores e o estoque de capital físico. 
 
Palavras chave: Capital conhecimento; dívida; utilização da capacidade; emprego. 
 

J.E.L. Classification Codes: E12, E22, E24. 
 
Classificação Anpec: Área 6 – Crescimento, Desenvolvimento Econômico e Instituições. 
 

* A preliminary version of this paper was presented at the Meetings of the Eastern Economic Association, 
New  York  City,  February  2017.  We  are  grateful  to  conference  participants  –  and  in  particular  Roberto 
Veneziani – for their helpful comments. Any remaining errors are our own. 

1. Introduction 

The role of human capital accumulation as a source of economic growth has been extensively explored in 
mainstream growth theory. In an early contribution, Lucas (1988), building upon Uzawa (1965), assumes 
that individuals choose periodically how to allocate their non-leisure time between current production and 
skill  acquisition  (or  schooling),  where  the  latter  raises  productivity  in  future  periods.  Human  capital 
accumulation,  by  involving  constant  returns  to  the  existing  stock  of  human  capital,  arises  as  a  source  of 
sustained  long-run  growth.  Mankiw,  Romer  and  Weil  (1992)  incorporate  accumulable  human  capital, 
along with physical capital and labor, as an additional production factor into an otherwise standard Solow 
model. As a result, the level of output per worker varies positively with both the level of physical capital 
per worker and the level of human capital per worker. Analogously to the accumulation of physical capital, 
in  Mankiw,  Romer  and  Weil  (1992)  the  rate  of  human  capital  accumulation  is  fully  and  automatically 
determined by the availability of savings brought about by foregone consumption by individuals. 

Admittedly,  such  mainstream  growth  approach,  by  assuming  that  the  economy  always  grows  at  full 
capacity, does neglect both the role of aggregate effective demand in growth dynamics and the impact of 
human capital accumulation in and of itself in aggregate effective demand. Ironically, however, demand-
driven  approaches  to  macrodynamics  have  typically  relegated  any  closer  attention  to  human  capital 
formation through education (and to ‘knowledge’ capital accumulation more broadly) as narrowly supply-
sided.  One  notable  exception  is  Dutt  (2010),  who  formalizes  the  process  of  skill  acquisition  in  a  neo-
Kaleckian framework so that both the number of high-skilled and low-skilled workers and their respective 
wages  vary  over  time  and  affect  the  interaction  between  income  distribution  and  economic  growth. 
Meanwhile,  Lima  and  Carvalho  (2016)  embed  accumulation  of  human  capital  through  the  provision  of 
universal  public  education  by  a  balanced-budget  government  in  a  neo-Kaleckian  dynamic  model  of 
capacity utilization, income distribution and growth. The level of education, as represented by the stock of 
human  capital,  positively  affects  both  workers’  productivity  in  output  production  and  (partly  also  as  a 
result of it) their bargaining power in the labor market. 

Given  that  the  making  of  costly  investments  in  human  capital  formation  through  education  is  one of  the 
key forms of productivity-enhancing knowledge accumulation, this paper explores several implications of 
debt-financed  accumulation  of  knowledge  capital,  along  with  its  resulting  impact  on  labor  productivity, 
within  a  demand-led  dynamic  macromodel  of  capacity  utilization  and  growth.  The  model  features  debt-
financed knowledge capital accumulation as a further source of effective demand along with expenditures 
in investment in physical capital and consumption. Analogously to the determination of investment plans 
in  physical  capital  as  independent  from  any  existing  saving,  the  model  features  a  likewise  independent 
investment function with respect to knowledge capital formation. This independence of the accumulation 
of knowledge capital by workers’ households is accommodated by an endogenous supply of credit money, 
and  hence  the  debt-financed  nature  of  the  desired  investment  in  such  another  accumulable  capital  asset. 
Since the aggregate stock of knowledge capital remains uniformly distributed in the labor force, which is 
always in excess supply, it follows that unemployed labor also means unutilized knowledge capital. As a 
result,  the  economy  operates  with  excess  capacity  not  only  in  physical  capital  and  labor,  as  in  most 
demand-led growth macromodels, but also in knowledge capital. 

Meanwhile, as for the debt servicing by workers’ households who finance knowledge capital accumulation 
through debt, we first assume that workers’ households allocate to consumption their entire wage income 
net  of  debt  service.  That  is,  working  households  give  prior  claim  to  debt  servicing  obligations  on  their 
current  wage  income,  and  hence  treat  their  consumption  spending  as  a  residual,  although  we  further 
assume  that  consumption  so  determined  is  always  positive.  We  later  explore  the  implications  of  the 
alternative  assumption  that  debt  servicing  by  working  households  is  specified  according  to  an  income-
driven  repayment  plan  bearing  some  similarity  to  repayment  plans  applicable  to  federal  student  loan 
payments in the U.S. For this version, we explore dynamic implications of debt-financed accumulation of 
 
 

1 

 

knowledge capital by drawing upon the financial instability approach developed by Minsky (1975, 1982), 
especially  his  suggestive  taxonomy  of  hedge,  speculative  and  Ponzi  financing  regimes.  One  interesting 
possibility  that  arises  is  the  existence  of  a  long  run  characterized  by  multiple  equilibria,  with  both 
equilibria situated in the Ponzi financing regime. Revealingly, though the long-run equilibrium with higher 
debt  ratio  is  stable, it is situated  in  the Minskyan regime of highest  financial fragility  as it is  the saddle-
point unstable one with lower debt ratio. 

Although our model is not intended to describe specifically debt-financed knowledge capital accumulation 
through  student  loans,  the  recent  U.S.  experience  with  student  debt  is  arguably  illustrative  of  the 
significance of working households’ financing of human capital formation through debt and how this is a 
possible route to financial fragility in the Minskyan sense.  In fact, data from the New York Fed Consumer 
Credit  Panel  show  that  student  debt  reached  US$1.2  trillion  in  the  U.S.  in  2015,  an  amount  which  was 
higher  than  household  debt  with  credit  card  and  auto  loans.1  Moreover,  the  average  annual  real  growth 
between  2005  and  2015  was  10%.  The  average  outstanding  balance  also  rose,  to  US$  27,900  in  2015, 
which represented a real increase of 4% between 2005 and 2015 (see Figure 1). 

More  U.S.  students  have  been  borrowing  and  they  have  been  borrowing  more.  The  number  of  full-time 
undergraduates using loans to attend college increased from 45.6% in 1999-2000 to 56.7% in 2011-2012. 
Consequently,  in  2011-2012,  84.4%  of  full-time  college  students  were  receiving  some  type  of  financial 
support  to  study,  while  this  proportion  was  71.9%  in  1999-2000.  Expectedly,  younger  adults  are 
responsible for a significant part of the total outstanding balance related to student loans, and in 2015, 39% 
of  student  loan  borrowers  were  under  the  age  of  30  years  old  (see  Figure  2).  As  a  negative  sign  for  the 
sustainability of student debt, the proportion of borrowers having repayment troubles shows an increasing 
trend. In 2015, for instance, 10.7% of them defaulted on their repayment, the same figure as in 2014, but 
one higher than in the previous years; in 2005, the default rate was 5.8%. In fact, recent evidence has found 
that  many  borrowers  have  only  managed  their  repayment  due  to  personal  savings  or  family  support 
(Lochner and Monge-Naranjo, 2016). Also, given that the methodology to calculate delinquency rates on 
student loans does not consider those students who are out of the repayment cycle (which includes loans in 
deferment, in grace period or in forbearance), these results on default rates tend to underestimate effective 
delinquency rates (FRBNY, 2016).2 

More recent data reveals that total household debt increased by 1.8% in the fourth quarter of 2016, rising 
$226 billion to reach $12.58 trillion. Balances increased across all debt varieties, with a 1.6% increase in 
mortgage balances, a 1.9% increase in auto loan balances, a 4.3% increase in credit card balances, and a 
2.4% increase in student loan balances in the same quarter. Mortgage balances, the largest component of 
household debt, stood at $8.48 trillion, an increase of $130 billion from the previous quarter. Balances on 
home equity lines of credit were roughly constant and now stand at $473 billion. All types of non-housing 
debt balances grew in that same quarter, with a $22 billion increase in auto loan balances and $32 billion 
increase  in  credit  card  balances.  Meanwhile,  outstanding  student  loan  balances  rose  by  $31  billion,  and 
reached $1.31 trillion as of December 31, 2016. Moreover, 11.2% of aggregate student loan debt was 90+ 
days delinquent or in default in the fourth quarter of 2016 (see FRBNY, 2017). 

In  this  paper,  we  assume  that  any  increase  in  labor  productivity  which  results  from  knowledge  capital 
accumulation  is  fully  passed  on  to  the  real  wage.  Hence,  while  insufficient  effective  demand  causes  the 
aggregate stock of knowledge capital to be underutilized, it turns out that employed workers receive a full 
wage return on their knowledge capital. In fact, in our model the wage share in income, which is computed 

                                                 
1 FRBNY (2015, 2016) are both reports based on the New York Fed Consumer Credit Panel, which is constructed 
from a nationally representative random sample drawn from Equifax credit report data. 
2 FRBNY (2016) even admits that this methodology implies that among loans in the repayment cycle  delinquency 
rates are roughly twice as high. 
 
 

2 

 

as the ratio of real wage to labor productivity, gives a simplified measure of the wage return on knowledge 
capital.  As  any  increase  in  labor  productivity  brought  about  by  knowledge  capital  accumulation  is  fully 
passed on to the real wage, employed workers are able to collect the full wage return on their knowledge 
capital. Nevertheless, we are able to explore changes in the distribution of income in the economy by using 
an index of inequality given by the ratio of the income of profit-cum-interest recipients to the net income 
of working households.  For both  specifications of  debt  servicing  explored in  this paper, we find  that  the 
index  of  inequality  varies  positively  with  the  interest  rate  and  the  working  households’  debt  to  physical 
capital ratio and negatively with the wage share. 

The  sequence  of  the  paper  is  structured  in  the  following  way.  Section  2  lays  out  the  model  structure. 
Section  3  solves  for  the  short-run  equilibrium  values  of  the  rates  of  physical  and  knowledge  capital 
utilization, assuming that the existing stocks of debt (and the respective flow of debt service) and physical 
and knowledge capital are all given. Section 4 introduces long-run issues by following the dynamics of the 
ratios of physical capital to knowledge capital and working households’ debt to physical capital. While in 
this section we assume that workers’ households allocate to consumption their entire wage income net of 
debt service, in Section 5 we alternatively assume that debt servicing by working households is specified 
as following an income-driven repayment program. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper. 

2. The structure of the model 

The  model  will  deal  with  a  closed  economy  that  produces  a  single  good/service  for  both  investment  (on 
physical and knowledge capital) and consumption. Two homogeneous factors of production are used in the 
production  process,  physical  capital  and  labor,  and  the  stock  of  knowledge  capital  is  assumed  to  remain 
uniformly  embodied in  the available labor  force. These  production inputs  are  combined through  a fixed-
coefficient technology: 

   

 

 

 

 

(1) 

 is the output level, 

 is the employment level, 

 is the stock of physical capital, 

 is 
where 
the knowledge capital stock to labor force ratio (or average knowledge capital) and 
 is the output to 
labor  ratio  (or  labor  productivity),  which  varies  endogenously  with  the  average  knowledge  capital.  For 
simplicity,  the  technical  coefficient 
  will  be  normalized  to  a  constant  equal  to  one.  In  the  production 
function in (1), we also  assume that 
. Given that we are dealing with a 
single good/service economy, the ‘production’ of knowledge capital does not constitute another production 
process or even productive sector. Indeed, it is assumed herein that the single good/service that can be used 
for  both  physical  capital  accumulation  and  consumption  can  also  be  used  for  knowledge  capital 
accumulation.3 Moreover, given that  unemployed  workers are as skilled (or  knowledge capital  endowed) 
as  employed  ones,  the  rate  of  labor  employment,  which  is  determined  by  aggregate  effective  demand, 
measures  the  degree  of  knowledge  capital  utilization.  Though  we  consider  only  the  case  in  which 
aggregate effective demand is insufficient to yield full utilization of the existing productive capacity (either 
in capital or labor) at the ongoing price and wage rate, we abstract from (physical and knowledge) capital 
depreciation and labor deskilling. Moreover, the model is cast in real terms. 

 and 

, 

The  economy  is  composed  of  two  classes  of  households,  capitalists  and  workers,  who  earn  profits  and 
wages, respectively. The functional division of aggregate income is then given by: 

   

 

 

 

 

 

(2) 

                                                 
3 Indeed, a more inclusive model could drop the assumption of homogeneous labor – e.g. by bringing in low-skilled 
and high-skilled workers, who would be paid differently, as in Dutt (2010). However interesting, a more inclusive 
specification along these lines will be the subject of future research – for which we invite the reader to stay tuned. 
 
 

3 

 

XVLrK,()XminKLahXKL/hHN()ah(0)0a'()0ah''()0ahwhere 
proportion of the physical capital stock. From (1) and (2), the share of labor in income, 

 is the rate of profit on physical capital, which is the flow of profits, 

 is wage rate and 

, is given by: 

, as a 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(3) 

To  focus  on  the  issue  of  possible  better  employability  prospects  opened  up  by  knowledge  capital 
accumulation,  we  assume  that  any  increase  in  labor  productivity  which  results  from  knowledge  capital 
accumulation  is  fully  passed  on  to  the  wage  rate.  Hence,  while  insufficient  aggregate  effective  demand 
causes the existing aggregate stock of knowledge capital to be underutilized, employed workers receive a 
full wage return on their knowledge capital. In fact, the wage share in income, as specified in (3), provides 
a  simplified  measure  of  the  wage  return  on  knowledge  capital.  Given  that  any  increase  in  labor 
productivity brought about by knowledge capital accumulation is fully passed on to the wage rate, so that 
employed  workers  are  always  able  to  collect  the  full  wage  return  on  their  knowledge  capital,  the  wage 
share  (and  hence  income  distribution  between  wages  and  profits)  remains  unchanged.  Nonetheless,  we 
later  draw  on  Dutt  (2006)  to  discuss  changes  in  the  distribution  of  income  in  the  economy  by  using  an 
index of inequality given by the ratio of the income of profit-cum-interest recipients to the net income of 
working households. 

Firms  produce  (and  hire  labor)  according  to  aggregate  effective  demand.  As  we  model  only  the  case  in 
which  excess  productive  capacity  (in  labor  and  capital  in  general)  prevails,  labor  employment  is 
determined by production: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(4) 

At a point in time, the technological parameters are given, having resulted from previous  knowledge and 
physical  capital  accumulation.  Over  time,  however,  knowledge  capital  accumulation  takes  place  as 
described later, which results in labor productivity growing at a proportionate rate 

. Formally: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(5) 

 is the proportionate growth rate of the knowledge capital stock to labor force ratio, with 

where 
. 

The  employment  rate, 
way: 

,  is  linked  to  the  state  of  the  market  for  goods/services  in  the  following 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(6) 

 is the rate of physical capital capacity utilization and 

where 
capital stock to labor force in productivity units, that is, 

 stands for the ratio of physical 
 and 
 resulting from the fixed-coefficient nature of the technology implies that a rise in output in the short run, 
 is  given, is  necessarily  accompanied by an increase in  employment. Moreover, as the  aggregate 
when 
knowledge  capital  stock  is  uniformly  distributed  in  the  available  labor  force,  the  employment  rate  also 
measures  the  degree  of  utilization  of  the  aggregate  knowledge  capital  stock.  For  simplicity,  we  treat  the 
labor force, 
, as constant (but nonetheless always in excess supply) and normalize it to one, and further 
assume  that  the  level  of  labor  productivity  has  a  one-to-one  correspondence  with  the  average  stock  of 

. This formal link between 

knowledge capital, 

, so that 

 and, hence 

. Moreover, it follows that 

. 

 
 

4 

 

VRˆˆ()ah'(.)0/eLNLXKeukXKNuekNh()ahhH/kKHˆˆˆahHrVah()XLahˆaˆh/uXKk/(())kKNahFirms’  decisions  regarding  accumulation  of  physical  capital  are  made  independently  from  any  prior 
savings. The implied desired growth rate of the stock of physical capital, 
, assuming no depreciation, is 

given by: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(7) 

where 

  denotes  firms’  desired  investment  in  physical  capital, 

  is  a  positive  autonomous  component 

and 

 is a positive parameter. 

Analogously  to  the  determination  of  investment  in  physical  capital  as  independent  from  prior  savings, 
working  households’  decisions  to  accumulate  knowledge  capital  are  also  assumed  to  be  so  independent. 
This  independence  of  knowledge  capital  accumulation  is  accommodated  by  an  endogenous  supply  of 
credit  money,  which  ensures  the  debt-financed  nature  of  the  desired  investment  in  such  another 
accumulable capital asset. Working households’ desired level of investment in knowledge capital is given 
by: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(8) 

where 
  is  a  positive  parameter.  Analogously  to  specifications  of  the  desired  investment  in  physical 
capital  in  the  Cambridge  U.K.  tradition,  which  typically  have  total  profits  (or  their  expected  value)  as  a 
positive determinant, the desired level of investment in knowledge capital in (7) varies positively with the 
wage  bill.  The  implied  desired  growth  rate  of  the  stock  of  knowledge  capital, 
,  assuming  no 

depreciation, is given by: 

   

 

 

 

(9) 

 is given by (6). Recall that the knowledge capital stock is uniformly distributed in the labor force, 
where 
so that the employment rate also measures the degree of utilization of such stock. Thus, the specification in 
(9)  can  be  interpreted  as  incorporating  an  accelerator  effect,  but  applied  to  the  investment  in  knowledge 
capital instead of physical capital.4 Meanwhile, for future reference, working households’ desired level of 
investment in knowledge capital as a proportion of the physical capital stock is given by: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(10) 

Following  the  tradition  of  Kalecki  (1971),  Kaldor  (1956),  Robinson  (1962)  and  Pasinetti  (1962),  we 
assume that workers and capitalists have different consumption behavior. Workers provide labor and earn 
wage  income,  of  which  net  value  (recall  that  workers  have  to  meet  debt  servicing  obligations)  they 
consume a constant fraction. Although we assume that the labor force, 
, is a constant normalized to one, 
workers are  always in  excess  supply.  Firm-owner capitalists’ households  receive  not  only  profit income, 
which  is  the  entire  surplus  over  the  wage  bill,  but  also  interest  income  as  recipients  of  workers’  debt 
servicing, and spend in consumption a constant proportion of it, 
 denotes capitalists’ 
saving rate. We further assume that neither capitalists nor workers borrow for consumption purposes. 

, where 

                                                 
4  Although  we  simplify  matters  by  assuming  no  depreciation  of  knowledge  capital, the  expression  in  (9) could  be 
interpreted as referring to the growth rate of the net stock of knowledge capital in the presence of de-skilling due to 
unemployment. In this broader interpretation, a higher employment rate yields a higher growth rate of the net stock 
of  knowledge  capital  by  also  implying  less  labor  de-skilling.  Yet another  broader  interpretation  is that  knowledge 
capital accumulation involves on-the-job learning externalities. 
 
 

5 

 

KgKKIguKKIHIVLHgHHIVLXKgeHXKHeHIVLXuKXKN011ss3. Short-run equilibrium 

The  short-run  is  defined  as  the  time  period  along  which  the  stock  of  physical  capital, 
knowledge capital, 
can all be taken as given. Equilibrium in the market for goods/services is given by: 

, the output-labor ratio, 

, and the wage rate, 

 (and therefore the wage share, 

,  the  stock  of 
), 

  

 

 

 

 

(11) 

where 

  and 

  stand  for  aggregate  consumption  by  workers’  households  and  capitalists’  households, 

respectively.  Therefore,  knowledge  capital  accumulation  by  working  households  is  an  extra  source  of 
aggregate  effective  demand  alongside  with  investment  in  physical  capital  and  consumption  by  the  two 
classes  of  households.  For  future  reference,  the  equilibrium  condition  in  (12)  as  a  proportion  of  the 
physical capital stock is given by: 

 

 

 

 

 

(12) 

As for  debt  servicing by workers’ households who finance  knowledge capital  accumulation by  means of 
debt, we start by assuming that workers’ households allocate to consumption their entire wage income net 
of  debt  service.  Later  on,  however,  we  alternatively  assume  that  debt  servicing  by  working  households 
follows an income-based repayment plan bearing some similarity to certain repayment plans applicable to 
federal student loan payments in the U.S. Thus, working households’ consumption is firstly given by: 

   

 

 

 

 

 

(13) 

 is the stock of debt held  by working households and 

 is the interest rate. While the former is 
where 
given  in  the  short  run,  but  varies  over  time,  the  latter,  for  simplicity,  is  assumed  to  stay  constant 
throughout.  Quite  reasonably,  we  assume  that  working  households  always  have  a  strictly  positive 
 throughout. Given our previously made  assumption 
consumption level, which then requires that 
that  capitalists’  households  allocate  to  consumption  a  constant  proportion, 
,  of  their  profit  and  interest 
income, it follows that: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(14) 

Meanwhile,  the  debt-financed  nature  of  the  desired  investment  in  knowledge  capital  by  working 
households implies that: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(15) 

where 
  denotes  the  change  in  the  stock  of  debt  held  by  working  households.  Given  that 
aggregate  output  is  determined  by  aggregate  effective  demand,  and  labor  (along  with  the  knowledge 
capital uniformly embodied in the labor force) is always in excess supply at the ongoing wage rate, the rate 
of physical  capital  capacity utilization, 
, adjusts for the  equilibrium in the market  for goods/services  in 
(11)  to  obtain.  By  normalizing  (13)  and  (14)  by  the  physical  capital  stock  and  substituting  the  resulting 
expressions (along with (7) and (10)) into the normalized goods/services-market equilibrium condition in 
(12), we obtain: 

  

 

(16) 

) to  re-write the  rate of 
, in terms of the physical capital capacity utilization and substituting the resulting expression 

Using  (2)  and  (3)  (along with  the previously made assumption that 
profit, 
into (16), we can solve for the short-run equilibrium rate of physical capital capacity utilization to obtain: 
 
 

6 

 

VwcHKXCCIIwCcCwcHKCCIugKKKwCVLiDDiVLiDs(1)()cCsRiDHDI/DdDdtu(1)VLXiDRiDusuuXKKKK()ahhH/RKKHa 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(17) 

  is  the  debt  ratio  and 

where 
.  To  ensure  that  the  demand-led  output-
adjustment  stability  condition  known  as  the  Keynesian  stability  condition  is  satisfied,  we  further  assume 
that saving as a proportion of the physical capital stock, which is given by 
 is more 

responsive  to  changes  in  physical  capital  capacity  utilization  than  investment  (in  both  physical  and 
knowledge  capital)  as  a  proportion  of  the  physical  capital  stock,  which  is  given  by 
.  This 

condition  is  equivalent  to  a  positive  denominator  in  (17),  so  that  we  have  to  further  assume  that  the 
numerator in (17) is positive to ensure a positive value for the short-run equilibrium rate of physical capital 
utilization. 

Meanwhile,  using  (6),  the  short-run  equilibrium  employment  rate,  which  also  measures  the  rate  of 
knowledge capital capacity utilization, is given by: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(18) 

As invariably assumed in one-good macroeconomic models featuring physical capital and labor as factors 
of  production,  we  have  made  the  conveniently  simplifying  assumption  that  the  single  good/service 
produced  in  the  economy  can  be  alternatively  used  for  consumption  or  physical  capital  accumulation 
purposes. To add further convenience, however, we assume that such single good/service can also be used 
for knowledge capital accumulation. In the long-run equilibrium, therefore, the growth rate of output, 
, 
can  be  measured  by  the  growth  rate  of  either  kind  of  capital,  given  that  both  physical  and  knowledge 
capital grow at the same rate in the long-run equilibrium: 

   

 

 

 

 

 

(19) 

By  virtue  of  the  demand-led  nature  of  the  model,  the  short-run  equilibrium  rates  of  physical  capital 
capacity utilization and employment (and therefore the long-run equilibrium growth rate of output) all vary 
positively with  the parameters 
, and negatively with  the  capitalists’ saving rate,  the interest 
rate and the debt ratio. Meanwhile, the effect of a rise in the wage share (which, per (3), also measures the 
wage  return  on  knowledge  capital)  on  the  short-run  equilibrium  value  of  the  rate  of  physical  capital 
utilization is given by: 

 and 

, 

 

 

 

 

 

(20) 

Therefore, ceteris paribus, a rise in the wage share, by redistributing income from capitalists’ households 
who  save  to  workers’  households  who  spend  in  consumption  all  of  their  net  wage  income,  raises  both 
consumption  demand  and  aggregate  effective  demand  and  thereby  boosts  the  rates  of  physical  capital 
utilization  and  employment.  In  fact,  since  investment  demand  includes  a  double  accelerator  effect  (one 
working through investment in physical capital, the second operating via investment in knowledge capital), 
aggregate effective demand increases even further. Also, per (19), an increase in the wage share raises the 
growth rate of output in the long-run equilibrium. Meanwhile, (17)-(18) show that, ceteris paribus, a rise 
in  the ratio of physical  capital  to  knowledge capital, 
, despite leaving the  short-run equilibrium rate of 
physical capital utilization unchanged, raises the short-run equilibrium rate of employment. 

As we assume that employed workers are always able to collect the full wage return on their knowledge 
capital, the distribution of income between wages and profits remains unchanged. Yet we can still explore 
changes in the distribution of income by using the following index of inequality given by the ratio of the 

 
 

7 

 

*siu/DK(1)s(/)(/)wcuCKCK(/)HKIKg*()sike*g***KHggg*2()()0ussikincome of profit-cum-interest recipients to the net income of working households, which we borrow from 
Dutt (2006): 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(22) 

Therefore,  the  wage  share  in  income, 
,  affect  the  index  of 
inequality in (22) both directly and, by affecting physical capital capacity utilization, indirectly. Note that, 
ceteris  paribus,  a  rise  in  physical  capital  capacity  utilization,  by  raising  total  income  from  production, 
reduces the extent of inequality. It can then be checked that in the short run the extent of inequality varies 
positively with the interest rate and the debt ratio, and negatively with the wage share. 

,  and  the  debt  ratio, 

,  the  interest  rate, 

4. Long-run equilibrium 

In the long run we assume that the short-run equilibrium values of the variables are always attained, with 
the economy moving over time due to changes in the stocks of physical capital, 
, 
and  working  household’s  debt, 
.  Recall  that  we  have  assumed  that  the  aggregate  stock  of  knowledge 
capital  remains  uniformly  distributed  in  the  labor  force  (whose  measure  we  have  normalized  to  constant 
equal to one), and that the level of labor productivity is equal to the average stock of  knowledge capital, 
which together imply that the proportionate growth rates of the aggregate stock of knowledge capital and 
labor productivity remain one and the same. Thus, one way of following the behavior of the system over 
time  is  by  investigating  the  dynamic  behavior  of  the  short-run  state  variables 
,  the  ratio  of  physical 
capital stock to knowledge capital stock, and 
, the ratio of working households’ stock of debt to physical 
capital  stock.5  It  is  logically  possible  that  the  debt  ratio  is  negative  in  a  given  short  run,  with  working 
households  being  net  creditors,  but  we  abstract  from  this  possibility.  From  the  definition  of  these  two 
variables, we have the following state transition functions in terms of proportionate growth rates: 

, knowledge capital, 

And: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Substitution of (7) and (9) into (22) yields: 

 

 

where 

 is given by (17). 

Meanwhile, (23) can be re-written as follows: 

 

 

 

 

 

Therefore, substitution from (7) and (10) into (25) yields: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(22) 

(23) 

(24) 

(25) 

(26) 

                                                 
5  Of  course,  in  a  long-run  equilibrium  with  constant  values  of  the  ratios  of  physical  capital  stock  to  knowledge 
capital stock and working households’ stock of debt to physical capital stock, the ratio of working households’ stock 
of debt to knowledge capital stock is also constant. Moreover, since in a long-run equilibrium the rate of physical 
capital  utilization  (as  measured  by  the  ratio  of  output  to  physical  capital)  is  constant,  the  ratio  of  working 
households’ stock of debt to output is constant as well. 
 
 

8 

 

(1)uiluiiDkˆˆˆkKHˆˆˆDK*()ˆkkuˆˆHKIDKKgKDK**ˆuuKH*uwhere 

 is given again by (17). 

Equations  (24)  and  (26),  after  using  (17),  constitute  a  planar  autonomous  two-dimensional  system  of 
 and 
differential equations in which the proportionate growth rates of 

 depend on the levels of 

 and 

 and parameters of the system. 

Solving (26) for the steady state where 

 is equivalent to solving the following quadratic equation for 

: 

 

 

 

 

(27) 

In  an  Appendix  (obtainable  upon  request),  we  demonstrate  that  the  quadratic  equation  in  (27)  has  two 
strictly  positive  solutions, 
.  In  this  Appendix  we  also  show  that  the  sign  of  the 

,  with 

  and 

partial  derivative 

  in  (31)  below  is  negative  (positive)  when  evaluated  at 

  (

).  However,  a 

necessary condition for a positive 

 is 

, which implies a strictly negative value for the short-

run  equilibrium  value  of  physical  capital  utilization, 
satisfied,  as  discussed  right  after  (17).  As  a  result, 

,  when  the  Keynesian  stability  condition  is 
,  which  implies  a  negative  sign  for 
,  is  the 

only economically relevant solution of the quadratic equation in (27). In fact, given that the state transition 
function for 
 is actually the only strictly positive long-run equilibrium 

 in (27) does not depend on 

, 

value for 

 which is economically relevant. 

The Jacobian matrix of partial derivatives for the system of differential  equations composed by  (24) and 
(26), after using (17), and evaluated at the only economically relevant stationary point, is given by: 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(28) 

(29) 

(30) 

(31) 

where 

,  which  is  negative  when  evaluated  at  a  positive  stationary  solution  for 

,  as 

discussed  in  the  preceding  section.  In  principle,  it  seems  that  not  all  of  these  partial  derivatives  can  be 
, ceteris paribus, 
unambiguously signed. The sign of 

 is unambiguously negative, given that a higher 

by  lifting  the  employment  rate,  raises  the  growth  rate  of  the  stock  of  knowledge  capital  while  leaving 
unchanged the growth rate of the stock of physical capital. The sign of 
 seems to be ambiguous, given 

that, ceteris paribus, a higher 
 lowers both the rate of physical capital utilization (and hence the growth 
rate of the stock of physical capital) and the rate of employment (and hence the growth rate of the stock of 
knowledge  capital).  The  reason  for  the  sign  of 
  is  that  neither  workers’  households  desired  level  of 

investment in knowledge capital as a proportion of the stock of physical capital nor the growth rate of the 
 is 
stock of physical capital depend on the employment rate (and hence on 

). At first sight, the sign of 

ambiguous,  given  that  a  higher  debt  ratio,  ceteris  paribus,  by  having  a  negative  effect  on  the  rate  of 
physical  capital  utilization, lowers  workers’ households desired level  of investment  in  knowledge capital 
 
 

9 

 

kkˆ0()()0si*1*2**1222J*1*222J*/si*u*1022Jk*1*11)0ˆ(ksiJk*12()ˆksikJ21ˆ0Jk***22**2ˆ()uuJu**(/)uu11Jk12J21Jk22J*uas  a  proportion  of  the  stock  of  physical  capital  and  the  growth  rate  of  the  physical  capital  stock.  Note, 
however, that (31) can be re-written as follows: 

 

 

 

(31’) 

Meanwhile, setting (24) to zero to obtain a relationship between 
obtain  a  relationship  between 
equilibrium values of the two state variables of the respective dynamic system: 

, and then setting (26) to zero to 
,  we  obtain  the  following  relationship  between  the  long-run 

  and 

 and 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(32) 

Thus, we can further re-write (31’) by manipulating the term in parentheses in it to obtain: 

 

 

 

 

 

(31’’) 

which  confirms  that  the  sign  of 

  is  negative  when  evaluated  at  the  economically  relevant 

. 

Meanwhile,  by  similarly  manipulating  the  term  in  parentheses  in  (29),  we  can  re-write  this  equation  as 
follows: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(29’) 

which confirms that the sign of 

 is positive. 

Therefore,  given  that  the  Jacobian  matrix  represented  by  (28)-(31)  has  a  positive  determinant, 
,  the  long-run  equilibrium  configuration 

,  and  a  negative  trace, 

with 

, which is given by 

, is locally stable. In fact, as portrayed in Figure 3, this 

long-run  equilibrium  is  a  locally  stable  node.  Given  that 

  is  positive,  the  slope  of  the 

  isocline, 

which  is  given  by 

,  is  positive.  Since 

  is  positive, 

  undergoes  a  steady  rise  as 

 

increases, so that the sign of 

 is negative (positive) to the right (left) of the 

 locus, which explains 

the  direction  of  the  horizontal  arrows.  Meanwhile,  the  slope  of  the 

  isocline,  which  is  given  by 

, is equal to zero. Given that 

, it follows that 

 undergoes a steady decrease as 

 

increases, so that the sign of 
direction of the vertical arrows. 

 is positive (negative) below (above) the 

 isocline, which explains the 

5. Alternative specification of working households’ debt servicing 

The  specification  in  (13)  assumes  that  workers’  households  (who  accumulate  knowledge  capital  through 
debt)  allocate  to  consumption  all  their  disposable  wage  income  (which  is  the  entire  wage  bill  net  of  any 
debt service). In this section, we explore the implications of the alternative assumption that debt servicing 
by  working  households  follows  an  income-driven  repayment  plan  bearing  some  similarity  to  repayment 

 
 

10 

 

**22*2**2*ˆ()()usisiusiJk*u*u**1k*22*2*ˆ0()usiJu22J*012*ˆksiJu12J1122()0DetJJJ1122()0TrJJJˆˆ0k**(,)(,)kk12Jˆ0k)/(1211JJˆ/kˆkˆkˆ0kˆ0)/(2221JJˆ/0ˆˆˆ0plans  applicable  to  federal  student  loan  payments  in  the  U.S.6  More  precisely,  working  households’ 
consumption is now given by: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(33) 

where 
the stock of debt held by working households is now given by: 

 is a parameter, and we refer to 

 as repayment coefficient. Thus, the change in 

Following  the  same  steps  leading  to  (17),  but  using  (33)  instead  of  (13),  we  can  solve  for  the  short-run 
equilibrium rate of physical capital utilization to obtain: 

 

 

 

 

 

(34) 

 

 

 

 

 

(35) 

To save on notation,  we define  the denominator  in  (35) as 
. To ensure 
that  the  demand-led  output-adjustment  stability  condition  known  as  the  Keynesian  stability  condition  is 
satisfied, we assume that aggregate effective demand as a proportion of the physical capital stock, which is 
given  by  the  sum  of  the  three  parameterized  terms  in 
,  is  less  responsive  to  changes  in  the  rate  of 
physical  capital  utilization  than  aggregate  supply  as  a  proportion  of  the  physical  capital  stock,  which  is 
equivalent to a positive value for 

. 

Using (6), the short-run equilibrium rate of employment (or knowledge capital utilization) can be obtained: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(36) 

Meanwhile, the growth rate of output in the long-run equilibrium is again given by (19), but with the short-
run equilibrium physical capital utilization being given by (35) instead of (17). 

As  in  the  preceding  section,  the  demand-led  nature  of  the  model  implies  that  the  short-run  equilibrium 
rates of physical capital utilization and knowledge capital utilization (and hence the long-run equilibrium 
rate  of  growth  of  output)  all  vary  positively  with  the  parameters 
,  and  negatively  with  the 
capitalists’ rate of saving. Yet these endogenous variables now vary positively instead of negatively with 
each  of  the  separate  variables  which  compose  the  debt  service,  which  are  the  interest  rate  and  the  debt 
ratio. The intuition is that, per (33)-(34), the debt service received (and partially spent on consumption) by 
capitalists’  households  does  not  represent  a  deduction  of  wage  income  (whose  net  value  is  all  spent  on 
consumption). In fact, (34) shows that what represents a deduction of wage income is now the repayment 
. Consequently, if the amount of wage income 
amount, which depends on the repayment coefficient, 
allocated to debt servicing is insufficient to fully serve the outstanding debt, i.e. 
, the stock 

  and 

, 

                                                 
6  The  main  safety  net  available  to  U.S.  borrowers  of  federal  student  loans  facing  excessive  monthly  payments  is 
income-driven repayment. Income-Based Repayment (IBR), available since 2009, is the most widely available such 
repayment plan for federal student loans (which comprise about 55% of the total stock of student loans). Monthly 
payments are 10% or 15% of discretionary income, and are recalculated each year based on the updated income and 
family size. Any outstanding balance will be forgiven if not repaid in full after 20 or 25 years. Mueller and Yannelis 
(2017)  provide  evidence  that  the  IBR  program  has  been  successful  at  reducing  student  loan  defaults.  Another 
program  is  Income-Contingent  Repayment  Plan  (ICR),  in  which  monthly  payments  are  the  lesser  of  20%  of 
discretionary  income  or  the  amount  that  would  be  paid  on  a  repayment  plan  with  a  fixed  payment  over  12  years, 
adjusted according to the borrower’s income. Any outstanding balance will be forgiven if not repaid in full after 25 
years. 
 
 

11 

 

wCVL01011(1)HDIiDVL*(1)1(1)(1)()sius1(1)(1)()s*[(1)]sike1(1)VLiDof debt held by working households will increase due not only to knowledge capital accumulation, but also 
to insufficient repayment provision. Meanwhile, the impact of a rise in the wage share in income (which, 
per (3), also measures the wage return on knowledge capital) on the short-run equilibrium rate of physical 
capital utilization is given by: 

 

 

 

(37) 

The  intuition  for  the  ambiguity  in  the  sign  of  (37)  is  straightforward.  A  rise  in  the  wage  share,  ceteris 
paribus,  by  redistributing  income  from  capitalists’  households  who  save  to  workers’  households  who 
spend in consumption all of their net wage income, may or may not raise consumption demand. The reason 
is  that  the  working  households’  repayment  provision  given  by 
  represents  a  leakage  of 
consumption demand analogous to any act of pure saving by workers. Meanwhile, a rise in the wage share 
in income, by raising working households’ desired investment in knowledge capital as a proportion of the 
physical  capital  stock,  expands  aggregate  effective  demand  as  a  proportion  of  the  physical  capital  stock 
and  thereby  exerts  an  upward  pressure  on  the  rates  of  physical  capital  utilization  and  employment. 
Therefore,  a  rise  in  the  wage  share  produces  an  increase  in  the  short-run  equilibrium  rates  of  physical 
capital  utilization  and  employment  (and  hence  in  the  long-run  equilibrium  value  of  the  rate  of  output 
growth) provided that 

.  

Recall that the wage share, the interest rate, and the debt ratio all affect the index of inequality in (22) both 
directly  and,  by  affecting  physical  capital  utilization,  indirectly.  Recall  also  that,  ceteris  paribus,  an 
increase  in  the  physical  capital  utilization  reduces  the  extent  of  inequality.  In  the  case  of  the  alternative 
specification  of  the  debt  servicing  in  (33),  although  the  short-run  equilibrium  physical  capital  utilization 
varies positively with the interest rate and the debt ratio, it can be checked that the index of inequality in 
(22) ultimately varies positively with any of these two separate components of the debt servicing, as in the 
original specification in (13). Besides, although the alternative specification in (33) implies that the impact 
of a rise in the wage share on physical capital utilization is ambiguous, it can be checked that the index of 
inequality in (22) ultimately unambiguously vary negatively with the wage share. 

5.1 Long-run dynamics again 

As in the preceding section, in the long-run analysis we follow the dynamic behavior of the short-run state 
,  the  ratio  of  working  households’ 
variables 
stock of debt to physical capital. The state transition function for 
 now 
given by (35), whereas the new state transition function for 

,  the  ratio  of  physical  capital  to  knowledge  capital,  and 

 is still given by (24), but with 

, given (34), is the following: 

where 

 is likewise given by (35). 

 

 

 

 

(38) 

Equations  (24)  and  (38),  after  using  (35),  constitute  a  planar  autonomous  two-dimensional  system  of 
differential equations in which the proportionate growth rates of 
 and 
  and  parameters  of  the  system.  As  in  the  original  specification  of  the  debt  servicing  in  the  preceding 

 depend on the levels of 

 and 

section, it follows that solving 

 implies solving a quadratic equation in 
.  Yet  unlike  in  that  specification,  in  which  one  of  the  solutions  (which  are  both  positive)  is  ruled  out 
because  it  implies  a  negative  rate  of  physical  capital  utilization,  the  quadratic  equation  in  (27)  can  have 
two economically relevant solutions (recall that we abstract from the logical possibility that the debt ratio 

 for the steady state where 

 
 

12 

 

*2()(1)(1)ssiu(1)VL()(1)skk*u**(1)ˆuuikkˆˆ0*uis  negative).  As  there  are  reasonable  parameters  values  that  ensure  the  emergence  of  multiple  long-run 
equilibria, we explore this interesting possibility in what follows.7 

The Jacobian matrix of partial derivatives for the system of differential  equations composed by  (24) and 
(38), after using (35), and evaluated at a positive stationary point, is given by: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(39) 

(40) 

(41) 

(42) 

   

 

 

The  sign  of 

  is  negative,  as  a  higher 

,  ceteris  paribus,  by  boosting  the  employment  rate,  raises  the 

growth  rate  of  the  stock  of  knowledge  capital  while  leaving  unchanged  the  growth  rate  of  the  stock  of 
physical capital.  In principle, the sign of 
 raises 

 is ambiguous, given that, ceteris paribus, a higher 

both the rate of physical capital utilization (and hence the growth rate of the stock of physical capital) and 
the rate of employment (and hence the growth rate of the stock of knowledge capital). Setting (24) to zero, 
though, it follows that 
 is negative. Intuitively, the positive effect 

, so that the sign of 

of a rise in the debt ratio is stronger on the growth rate of the knowledge capital stock than on the growth 
rate of the physical capital stock (compare (7) and (9), both evaluated at a positive long-run equilibrium). 
The justification for the sign of 
 is that neither working households’ investment in knowledge capital as 

a proportion of the stock of physical capital nor the growth rate of the stock of physical capital depend on 
the employment rate (and hence on 
, however, is ambiguous, given that a higher debt 

). The sign of 

ratio,  ceteris  paribus,  by  positively  affecting  the  rate  of  physical  capital  utilization,  raises  both  working 
households’ level of investment in knowledge capital as a proportion of the stock of physical capital and 
the rate of growth of the physical capital stock. Thus, if the accelerator effect operating through investment 
in  knowledge  capital  (see  (9))  and  the  demand-injection  effect  operating  through  net  wage  income  (see 
(33)-(34)), when combined, are strong enough to imply 
 is negative. Note that 

, it follows that 

the same condition is sufficient (but not necessary) for the rates of physical capital utilization, employment 
 can be 
and growth to vary positively with the wage share in the long-run equilibrium (see (37)). Also, 

negative  even  if 
  (which  does  not  imply,  also,  that  the  the  rates  of  physical  capital  utilization, 
employment and growth vary negatively with the wage share in the long-run equilibrium). Though the sign 
 is ambiguous, the parameters values that we assume to ensure the occurrence of multiple long-run 
of 

equilibrium  imply  that 
multiple equilibria configuration is shown in Figure 4.8 

  is  positive  when  evaluated  at 

,  and  negative  when  evaluated  at 

.  This 

                                                 
7  The possible such  set of reasonable  parameters  that we  use  for illustrative  purposes  is  the following: 

; 
.  For  the  plausibility  of  the  latter  value,  which 

; 

; 

; 

; 

;  and 

implies that the repayment coefficient is equal to 
8  The  set  of  parameter  values  specified  in  the  preceding  footnote  yields  long-run  equilibrium  values  given  by 
.  In  an  Appendix  (obtainable  upon  request),  we  show  through  simulation  that  in  this 

, see footnote 6. 

  and 

 
 

13 

 

*11((1))0ˆksiJk*12ˆ(1)()0kiskJ21ˆ0Jk22*2ˆ1(1)(1)()Jsi11Jk12J*/ku12J21Jk22J122J22J122J22J*1*20.020.050.050.50.7s0.03i0.80.2*10.898*23.713Let  us  first  consider  the  dynamic  implications  of  a  negative  sign  for 

.  Since  the  Jacobian  matrix 

represented  by  (39)-(42)  would  have  a  positive  determinant, 

,  and  a  negative  trace, 

, the long-run equilibrium configuration with 

, given by 

, is 

a locally stable node. Since 

 is negative, 

 undergoes a steady fall as 

 increases, so that the sign 

of 

  is  negative  (positive)  to  the  right  (left)  of  the 

  locus,  which  explains  the  direction  of  the 

horizontal arrows. Meanwhile, the slope of the two 

 isoclines, given by 

, is equal to zero. 

As 

 is  negative  when evaluated at 

, and positive when evaluated at 

, it follows that 

 first 

undergoes  a  steady  increase  and  later  a  steady  decrease  as 

  increases.  Thus,  the  sign  of 

  is  negative 

(positive)  below  (above)  the 

  isocline,  and  positive  (negative)  below  (above)  the 

  isocline, 

which  explains  the  direction  of  the  vertical  arrows.  The  long-run  equilibrium  with 

  given  by 
 is then saddle-point unstable. In fact, the Jacobian matrix in (39)-(42), when evaluated at 

such equilibrium, has a negative determinant, 

. This unstable long-run equilibrium with 

lower debt ratio is also characterized by lower rates of physical capital utilization, employment and growth 
(and a higher index of inequality) than the stable equilibrium with higher debt ratio. 

Note  that  the  long-run  configuration  with  multiple  equilibria  portrayed  in  Figure  4  vanishes  if  we 
alternatively  assume,  ceteris  paribus,  that  the  desired  investment  in  physical  capital  in  (7)  has  no 
autonomous  component,  so  that 
.  In  an  Appendix  (obtainable  upon  request),  we  show  that 
convenient  restrictions  in  the  parameters  ensure  that  the  quadratic  equation  in  (38)  has  only  one 
economically  relevant  solution  characterized  by 
  (recall  that  although  a  negative  debt  ratio  is 
logically possible, in which case working households are net creditors, we abstract from  this possibility). 
Meanwhile,  this  alternative  assumption  does  not  change  the  comparative  static  results  for  the  short-run 
equilibrium rates of physical capital utilization and employment in (35) and (36) obtained earlier (except, 
of course, the results concerning the autonomous component 
). The same applies to the results regarding 
,  also  derived  earlier.  Also,  it  can  be 
the  index  of  inequality  associated  with  (35)  evaluated  at 
checked  that  the  Jacobian  matrix  given  by  (39)-(42),  when  evaluated  with 
,  has  a 
positive determinant and a negative trace, so that the long-run equilibrium is a locally stable node similar 
to the one given by 

 in Figure 4.  

  and  at 

To  gain  further  insight  on  the  qualitative  behavior  of  the  model,  in  the  next  sub-item  we  make  another 
alternative  assumption.  Ceteris  paribus,  we  assume  that  capitalist  households  save  all  of  their  profit  and 
interest income. This allows us to tractably explore the relevant issue of the relationship between working 
households’ financial fragility and macroeconomic instability. 

5.2 Minskyan taxonomy and financial fragility 

The simplified version intimated in the preceding paragraph, in which capitalists’ households are assumed 
to  save  all  of  their  profit  and  interest  income,  allows  us  to  tractably  explore  the  significant  issue  of  the 
relationship  between  macroeconomic  instability  (in  the  sense  of  the  preceding  dynamic  analysis)  and 
working  households’  financial  fragility.  Indeed,  according  to  the  financial  instability  view  nicely 
developed  by  Hyman  Minsky  (1975,  1982),  the  capital  development  of  a  market  economy  involves 
exchanges of present money for future money.  In the case of physical capital accumulation by firms,  the 

                                                                                                                                                                             
situation the sign of 
 rises from zero to upper 

 actually falls monotonically from positive to negative values as 

economically relevant values.  
 
 

14 

 

22J1122()0DetJJJ1122()0TrJJJˆˆ0k**22(,)(,)kkˆ/kˆkˆkˆ0kˆ0)/(2221JJˆ/*2*1ˆˆ1ˆ02ˆ0ˆˆ0k**11(,)(,)kk1122()0DetJJJ0*000*0**22(,)(,)kk22Jpresent  money  is  required  to  pay  for  resources  that  participate  in  the  production  of  investment  output, 
whereas the future money is the amount of profit income that will accrue to firms as their capital assets are 
utilized  in  production.  Consequently,  it  is  fitting  to  conceive  of  working  households’  knowledge  capital 
accumulation via debt in a similar way. As laid out in our model, the present (credit-)money is required to 
finance investment spending in knowledge capital accumulation by workers, whereas the future money is 
the  sum  of  wage  income  that  workers  will  receive  when  their  knowledge  capital  assets  are  actually 
employed  in  production.9  Given  the  process  by  which  investment  in  knowledge  capital  by  workers  is 
financed,  the  liabilities  on  their  balance  sheet  determine  a  series  of  prior  payment  commitments,  while 
their  knowledge  capital  assets  generate  a  series  of  conjectured  cash  inflows.  Given  that  investment  in 
knowledge capital accumulation is financed by credit-money generated by workers’ borrowing, the flow of 
credit-money to workers is a response to their expectations of higher future wage income, whereas the flow 
of  debt  service  from  workers  is  financed  out  of  wage  income  that  is  actually  realized.  Thus,  the  debt-
financed nature of the investment in knowledge capital considered in this paper is consistent with Minsky’s 
understanding  of  his  financial  instability  theory  as  an  explanation  of  both  the  impact  of  debt  on  system 
behavior and the manner in which debt is validated. 

According to Minsky’s (1982) broad characterization, hedge financing units are those that can fulfill all of 
their contractual payment obligations out of their cash flows, whereas speculative units are those that can 
meet  their  interest  payment  commitments  on  outstanding  debts,  even  as  they  are  unable  to  repay  the 
principle out of income cash flows. For Ponzi units, though, the cash flow from operations is insufficient to 
fulfill  either  the  repayment  of  principle  or  the  interest  due  on  outstanding  debts.10  To  formalize  this 
taxonomy  of  finance  regimes  in  terms  of  a  working  household’s  cash  flow  accounting  categories,  we 
follow the manner in which Foley (2003) and Lima and Meirelles (2007) neatly do so for a firm. 

In a highly aggregated form, the relevant cash flow identity in this paper equates the working household’s 
source of funds from net wage income, 
, to its uses of funds for investment in 
knowledge capital accumulation, 

, and new borrowing, 

, and debt service, 

: 

Therefore, the change in debt, 

, is given by new borrowing: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Minskyan taxonomy, meanwhile, can be derived as follows: 

Hedge: 

 or 

Speculative: 

 

or 

Ponzi: 

 or 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(43) 

(44) 

(45) 

(46) 

(47) 

                                                 
9 In fact, as noted by Minsky himself: “In the modern world, analyses of financial relations and their implications for 
system  behavior  cannot  be  restricted  to  the  liability  structure  of  businesses  and  the  cash  flows  they  entail. 
Households (by the way of their ability to borrow on credit cards for big ticket consumer goods such as automobiles, 
house  purchases,  and  to  carry  financial  assets),  governments…  and  international  units…have  liability  structures 
which the current performance of the economy either validates or invalidates.” (1992, pp. 4-5) 
10 Therefore, in the specification of debt servicing  used in Section 3, in which working households are assumed to 
consume their entire wage income net of debt service (see (13)), our further assumption that  working households’ 
consumption  is  always  strictly  positive  is  equivalent  to  imposing  restrictions  on  the  parameters  that  ensure  that 
workers are never in a Ponzi financing regime. 
 
 

15 

 

WBHIFHWBIFdtdDD/HDBIFW WHIF0B WHFIF0HIB WFHBIIn  this  section,  we  have 
correspondingly given by (34), which we reproduce below for easier reference: 

  and 

,  so  the  change  in  the  working  household’s  debt  is 

Therefore,  as  a  proportion  of  the  physical  capital  stock,  the  Minskyan  taxonomy  in  (45)-(47)  can  be 
expressed as follows: 

 

 

 

 

 

(34) 

Hedge: 

Speculative:

Ponzi:

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(48) 

(49) 

(50) 

As intimated in the end of the preceding section, let us assume that capitalists save all of their profit and 
interest income. Under this assumption, it follows from the revised version of (35) that the rate of physical 
capital  utilization  (but  not  the  rate  of  employment  and  the  equilibrium  rate  of  output  growth  in  the  long 
run)  becomes  exogenous,  though  the  revised  version  of  (37)  shows  that  a  higher  wage  share  is 
accompanied by higher rates of physical capital utilization, employment and output growth in the long-run 
equilibrium. We can solve for the respective demarcation lines in the 

space to obtain: 

And: 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(51) 

(52) 

where 
exogenous) rate of physical capital utilization. Note that (51) and (52) do not depend on 
demarcation lines are parallel to each other and the horizontal axis. 

,  which  is  assumed  to  be  positive  to  ensure  a  positive  value  for  the  (now 
, so that these 

Meanwhile,  in  this  simplified  specification  the  long-run  equilibrium  with 
following pair: 

  is  given  by  the 

And: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(53) 

(54) 

To  ensure  that  (51)  is  positive,  which  implies  that  the  speculative  finance  regime  arguably  involves 
positive  levels  of  the  debt  ratio,  we  further  assume  that 
  is 
  (which  is  required  to  ensure  a  positive  rate  of  physical  capital 
positive,  whereas  a  positive  value  for 
  implies  a  positive 
utilization)  requires  that 
.  Meanwhile,  the  assumption  that 
value  for  the  numerator  in  (54),  so  that  a  positive  value  for  (54)  requires 
,  a  necessary 

.  This  condition  also  ensures  that 

condition for which is 
then be checked that this further condition implies that 

. As we further assume that the condition for a positive 

 is satisfied, it can 
. In fact, there are reasonable parameters 

 
 

16 

 

(1)WVLFiD(1)HDIiDVL**(1)uui**(1)iuui*(1)ui(,)k(1)HSi(1)SPi1()kˆˆ0k*1()k*(1)()i1*k()11()ii**HSvalues that ensure that 

.11 As a result, the unique long-run equilibrium in this further simplified 

version with capitalists saving all their income is situated in the Ponzi financing regime. 

This long-run configuration is shown in Figure 5. It can be checked that the Jacobian matrix in (39)-(42) 
features  a  negative  determinant,  so  that  the  unique  long-run  equilibrium  is  saddle-point  unstable.  Given 

that 

 is  negative, 

 undergoes a steady  decrease as 

 increases, so that the sign of 

 is  positive 

(negative)  to  the  left  (right)  of  the  vertical 

  locus,  which  explains  the  direction  of  the  horizontal 

arrows. Meanwhile, given that 

 is positive, 

 undergoes a steady increase as 

 increases, so that 

the sign of 

 is negative (positive) below (above) the horizontal 

 isocline, which then explains the 

direction of the vertical arrows. Thus, the unstable arm of the saddle point is the vertical 

 locus, while 

the stable arm is the horizontal 

 locus. 

6. Conclusion 

The role of human capital as a source of economic growth has been extensively explored in the literature. 
As it is typically assumed that economies are always growing at full capacity, though, it is neglected both 
the role of aggregate demand in growth dynamics and the impact of human capital accumulation in and of 
itself  in  aggregate  demand.  Ironically,  meanwhile,  demand-driven  approaches  to  growth  dynamics  have 
typically relegated any closer attention to human capital formation through education (and to ‘knowledge’ 
capital accumulation more broadly) as narrowly supply-sided. 

As the making of costly investments in human capital formation through education is one of the key forms 
of  productivity-enhancing  knowledge  accumulation,  this  paper  explores  several  implications  of  debt-
financed accumulation of knowledge capital, along with its resulting impact on labor productivity, within a 
demand-led  macromodel.  Even  though  our  model  is  not  intended  to  describe  specifically  debt-financed 
knowledge  capital  accumulation  through  student  loans,  the  recent  U.S.  experience  with  student  debt  is 
arguably illustrative of the very significance of working households’ financing of human capital formation 
through debt and how this is a possible route to financial fragility. The model features knowledge capital 
accumulation  as  an  additional  source  of  aggregate  demand  along  with  expenditures  in  consumption  and 
investment in physical capital. Given that the aggregate stock of knowledge capital is uniformly distributed 
in the labor force, it follows that unemployed labor also means unutilized knowledge capital.  

We assume that any increase in labor productivity which results from knowledge capital accumulation is 
fully passed on to the real wage. Nevertheless, we are able to explore changes in the distribution of income 
by using an index of inequality given by the ratio of the income of profit-cum-interest recipients to the net 
income of working households. For all the specifications of working households’ debt servicing explored 
in the paper, we obtain that the index of inequality varies positively with the interest rate and the working 
households’ debt to physical capital ratio and negatively with the wage share. 

                                                 
11 The possible such set of reasonable parameters that we use for illustrative purposes is the following: 

; 
.  For  the  plausibility  of  the  latter,  which  implies 

; 

; 

; 

; 

;  and 

that  the repayment  coefficient is equal to 

,  see  footnote  6. This  set of  parameter  values  yields 

,  whereas  the  demarcation  lines  in  (51)  and  (52)  are  given,  respectively,  by 

  and 

  and 

. Meanwhile, going back to the multiple long-run equilibria in Figure 4, in an Appendix (obtainable 

upon  request)  we  also  show  through  simulation  that  both  equilibria  are  located  in  the  Ponzi  financing  region,  as 
already  shown  in  that  figure.  In  Figure  4,  therefore,  although  the  long-run  equilibrium  with  higher  debt  ratio  is 
locally stable, it is nonetheless situated in the Minskyan regime of highest financial fragility. 
 
 

17 

 

*SPˆ/kkˆkkˆkˆ0kˆ/ˆˆˆ0ˆ0kˆ00.020.050.050.51.0s0.03i0.80.2*0.35*23k0.003HS0.004SPFigure 1: Household debt balance: total and composition (In trillions of dollars)* 

Appendix 

*HE Revolving: Home Equity Revolving. Percentage values alongside the 2016Q4 bar indicate the composition of household 

Source: FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel / Equifax. 

 

debt in that quarter only. 

 

Figure 2: Average Debt per Capita by Age in 2015 (in 2015 dollars)* 

Source: Brown et al. (2015) with data from FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel / Equifax. 

*HELOC: Home Equity Line of Credit. 

 

 
 

18 

 

0369121503691215MortgageHE RevolvingAuto LoanCredit CardStudent LoanOther2016Q4Total: $12.58 Trillion2016Q3 Total: $12.35 Trillion3%10%6%9%4%67%01000020000300004000050000600000200040006000800010000120002025303540455055606570Mortgage+HELOCStudent loanCredit cardAutoMortgage + HELOCFigure 3: Stable long-run equilibrium with standard debt repayment 

Figure 4: Multiple long-run equilibria with income-driven debt repayment 

 

 

Figure 5: Saddle-point unstable long-run equilibrium with income-driven debt repayment by 

workers and capitalists saving all their income 

 

19 

 

 

 

 

 
 

00,10,20,30,40,50,60,70,80,9101020304050607000,511,522,533,544,50,62,64,66,68,610,612,614,616,618,600,20,40,60,8100,10,20,30,40,50,60,70,80,91References 

Brown, M., Haughwout, A., Lee, D., Scally, J. and van der Klaauw, W. (2015): “Payback time? Measuring 
progress  on  student  debt  repayment”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  Liberty  Street  Economics. 
Acessed January 16, 2017. 

(http://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2015/02/payback_time_measuring_progress_on_student_de
bt_repayment.html) 

Brown, M., Lee, D., Scally, J., Strair, K. and van der Klaauw, W. (2016): “The graying of American debt”, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Liberty Street Economics. Acessed January 16, 2017. 

(http://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2016/02/the-graying-of-american-debt.html) 

Dutt,  A.  K.  (2010):  “Keynesian  growth  theory  in  the  21st  century”,  in  P.  Arestis  and  M.  Sawyer  (Eds.): 
Twenty-first Century Keynesian Economics, Macmillan Palgrave, London, pp. 39-80. 

Federal Research Bank of New York (FRBNY) (2016): “Quarterly Report on Household Debt and Credit”, 
November. 

Federal Research Bank of New York (FRBNY) (2017): “Quarterly Report on Household Debt and Credit”, 
February. 

Foley,  D.  (2003):  “Financial  fragility  in  developing  economies”,  in:  A.  K.  Dutt  and  J.  Ros  (Eds.) 
Development Economics and Structuralist Macroeconomics, Edward Elgar, Aldershot. 

Kaldor, N. (1956): “Alternative theories of distribution”, Review of Economic Studies, 23(2), pp. 83-100. 

Kalecki,  M.  (1971):  Selected  essays  on  the  dynamics  of  the  capitalist  economy,  Cambridge  University 
Press, Cambridge. 

Lima, G. T. and Carvalho, L. (2016): “Human capital, income distribution and economic growth in a Neo-
Kaleckian model”, Department of Economics of the University of São Paulo, mimeo. 

Lima,  G.  T.  and  Meirelles,  A.  J.  A.  (2007):  “Macrodynamics  of  debt  regimes,  financial  instability  and 
growth”, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 31(4), pp. 563-580. 

Locher, L. and Monge-Naranjo, A. (2016): Student loans and repayment: theory, evidence and policy, in: 
E.  A.  Hanushek,  S.  Machin  and  L.  Woessman  (Eds.):  Handbook  of  the  Economics  of  Education,  vol.  5, 
North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 397-478. 

Lucas,  R.  E.  (1988):  “On  the  mechanics  of  economic  development,”  Journal  of  Monetary  Economics, 
22(1), pp. 3-42. 

Mankiw, G., Romer, D. and Weil, D. (1992): “A contribution  to  the empirics of economic  growth”,  The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(2), pp. 407-437. 

Minsky, H. (1975): John Maynard Keynes, Columbia University Press, New York. 

Minsky, H. (1982): Can “it” happen again? Essays on instability and finance, M. E. Sharpe, New York. 

Minsky, H. (1992) The financial instability hypothesis, The Levy Economics Institute, Working Paper No. 
94, May. 

Mueller, H. and Yannelis, C. (2017): ‘Students in distress: Labor market shocks, student loan default, and 
federal insurance programs”, NBER Working Paper No. 23284, March. 

Pasinetti, L. (1962): “The rate of profit and income distribution in relation to the rate of economic growth”, 
Review of Economic Studies, 29, pp. 267-79. 

Robinson, J. (1962): Essays in the theory of economic growth, Macmillan, London. 

Uzawa, H. (1965): “Optimal technical change in an aggregative model of economic growth”, International 
Economic Review, 6(1), pp. 18-31. 

 
 

20 

 

