Birth Endowments and Parental Investments: New Evidence from Twins 

 

         Danyelle Branco 
 Universidade Federal de Viçosa             Universidade Federal de Viçosa                            IPEA 
    danyelle.branco@ufv.br                      bladimir.bermudez@ufv.br                  jose.feres@ipea.gov.br  

            Bladimir Carrillo                                   José G. Féres 

 

Abstract 

 

It  is  now  widely  recognized  that  birth  endowments  can  have  long-lasting  effects  on  the  accumulation  of 
human  capital.  An  important  question  is  how  parents  respond  to  shifts  in  child  endowments.  Some  of  the 
estimates in literature may be affected by small samples and  unobservable mother-specific factors, limiting 
the power of policy implications. We exploit variation within twins to estimate the effect of birth weight on 
health  investments  in  children.  Using  data  from  68  developing  countries,  we  find  that  lower  birth  weight 
babies  receive  less  health  care  investments  in  infancy.  These  effects  are  larger  for  countries  with  higher 
infant  mortality  rates,  lower  life  expectancy,  and  poorer  sanitation  facilities.  Collectively,  the  findings 
suggest  that  parental  behaviors  contribute  to  amplify  the  baseline  effects  of  birth  endowments  on  the 
accumulation of human capital.   

Keywords: Human capital; birth endowments; parental investments  

Resumo 

Os  efeitos  persistentes  que  as  dotações  iniciais  podem  ter  na  acumulação  de  capital  humano  é  um  fato 
amplamente reconhecido. Uma importante questão é como os investimentos dos pais respondem à mudanças 
nas  dotações  iniciais  das  crianças.  Algumas  das  estimativas  na  literatura  podem  ser  afetadas  por  pequenas 
amostras e variáveis omitidas, o que limita o poder de implicações políticas. Este artigo usa variações entre 
gêmeos  para  estimar  o  efeito  do  peso  ao  nascer  sobre  os  investimentos  dos  pais  nas  crianças.  Usando 
microdados de 68 países em desenvolvimento, encontra-se que bebês que nascem  com baixo peso recebem 
menos  investimentos  de  saúde  nos  primeiros  anos  de  vida.  Estes  efeitos  são  maiores  em  países  com  altas 
taxas  de  mortalidade  infantil,  baixa  expectativa  de  vida,  e  pobres  condições  sanitárias.  Em  conjunto,  os 
resultados sugerem que o comportamento dos pais contribui para amplificar os efeitos das dotações inicias na 
acumulação de capital humano.   

Palavras chaves: Capital humano; dotações inicias; investimentos dos pais.   

Área ANPEC: Economia Social e Demografia Econômica 

Classificação JEL: D1, I1, J1 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 

1.  Introduction 

It  is  now  widely  recognized  that  poor  environmental  conditions  in  utero  can  have  long-lasting  effects  on 
later-life  outcomes.  Children  born  with  poor  endowments  exhibit  lower  earnings,  worse  socioeconomic 
status,  and  reduced  cognitive  abilities  (BLACK;  DEVEREUX;  SALVANES,  2007;  FIGLIO  et  al.,  2014; 
OREOPOULOS et al., 2008). Yet an important question remains. How parent’s investments respond to shifts 
in  child endowments?  Learning on  this behavioral  response  provides a window into mechanisms  by  which 
parents contribute to lessen or exacerbate the biological effects of in utero shocks. Becker and Tomes (1976) 
provided theoretical  insights on the sign of this relationship,  arguing that  parents  are likely to  devote more 
investments  in  their  better-endowed  children  in  order  to  maximize  returns  to  investing.  In  a  different  vein, 
Behrman  et  al.  (1982)  emphasized  the  role  of  parents’  aversion  to  sibling-inequality  and  point  out  that 
parents invest disproportionately in the less-endowed child to ameliorate inequalities. More generally, Yi et 
al.  (2014)  state  that  parents  adopt  compensating  and  reinforcing  investments  along  different  dimensions  of 
human capital.  
 
Despite the long theoretical debate, there is still a relatively small body of empirical work about the 
impact  of  child  endowments,  commonly  proxied  by  birth  weight,  on  parents’  investments.  A  number  of 
recent  studies  finds  a  positive  relation  between  these  variables  (AIZER;  CUNHA,  2012;  DATAR; 
KILBURN;  LOUGHRAN,  2010),  while  others  document  the  opposite  (BHARADWAJ;  EBERHARD; 
NEILSON,  2013;  DEL  BONO;  ERMISCH;  FRANCESCONI,  2012).  However,  the  majority  of  these 
empirical analyses cannot establish causation. A major empirical challenge in conducting such a test is that 
birth  endowments  are  endogenous  and  determined  by  family  background  characteristics  that  may  be 
determinants of postnatal investments. For example, health at birth is influenced by maternal behaviors, such 
as  smoking,  alcohol  use  and  restricted  nutrition,  which  differ  between  more-educated  and  less-educated 
mothers.  In  addition,  birth  endowments  may  be  affected  by  other  important  features,  including  parent’s 
knowledge  or  awareness  about  health  care,  all  of  which  are  difficult  to  control  for  but  impact  subsequent 
investments.  Many  previous  studies  have  adopted  sibling-fixed  effects  estimators,  thereby  controlling  any 
time-invariant  family  qualities.  Yet  this  approach  would  be  inadequate  if  birth  endowments  and  postnatal 
investments  are  correlated  with  time-varying  characteristics  of  the  mother.  For  example,  a  very  stressful 
event  during  pregnancy  (e.g,  parental  job  loss)  may  directly  affect  both  birth  endowments  and  postnatal 
investments, creating a correlation between these variables even in the absence of a causal link. In general, it 
is difficult to solve the endogeneity problem using cross-sectional or sibling comparisons.   

In  this  paper,  we  revisit  this  discussion  with  an  investigation  of  the  effect  of  child  endowments  on 
health investments  using  a  within-twin  identification  strategy  for  a large set  of  developing  countries.  As in 
prior literature, we proxied birth endowments by birth weight, an indicator that is easily observed by parents 
and that has been linked to poor health and impaired cognitive development. The differences in birth weight 
within  twins  provide  us  with  an  empirical  strategy  that  limits  the  scope  for  omitted  variables  bias.  Since 
twins share the same pregnancy, it is impossible for parents to treat differently their twins during the prenatal 
period.  Rather,  the  differences  in  birth  weight  are  largely  driven  by  idiosyncratic  factors,  such  as  different 
nutritional  sources  at  different  umbilical  cord  insertion  points  within  the  placenta  (PHILLIPS,  1993; 
ZHANG; BRENNER; KLEBANOFF, 2001). Importantly for identification, there are striking differences in 
birth  weight  within  twins.  In  our  sample,  about  of  20  percent  of  variation  in  birth  weight  is  explained  by 
unobserved individual differences within twins. The reasons why one of them up with a higher birth weight 
and the other one did not can be considered as random. Thus, any differences we observe in terms of parents’ 
investments can be plausibly attributed to birth endowments. 

While a few studies have used the “twins” approach, they suffer from some key limitations. First, the 
sample of twins used in most of previous studies are relatively small. An example is Rosenzweig and Zhang 
(2009) who use a sample of 1,000 Chinese twins, finding perhaps unsurprisingly imprecise estimates of the 
effect  of  birth  weight  on  parental  investments.  Second,  these  studies  have  typically  used  poor  measures  of 

 

2 

investments.  An  early  study  by  Behrman  et  al.  (1994)  uses  completed  years  of  schooling  as  a  measure  of 
parental  investment.  Empirically  this  is  problematic  in  view  of  evidence  indicating  that  child  endowments 
can affect directly this outcome independently of parental inputs.  

Our  study  overcomes  each  of  these  limitations.  First,  we  use  a  large  dataset,  comprising 
approximately 17,000 twins, which enables us to observe both birth weight and health investments and adds 
a  strong  statistical  power  to  the  analysis.  This  sample  is  extracted  from  200  comparable  Demographic  and 
Health  Surveys  (DHS)  conducted  in  68  countries  where  detailed  information  about  parental  inputs  are 
consistently recorded for all children under five. As far as we know, this is the largest dataset on twins with 
information  on  both  birth  weight  and  parental  investments.  Second,  we  measure  more  directly  post-natal 
investments  by  using  vaccination  for  specific  diseases  as  our  primary  outcome  of  interest.  Necessary 
vaccinations as polio and measles have been shown to be effective in preventing ill health and mortality, so 
they  are  important  health  inputs  in  developing  countries  where  access  to  appropriate  medical  treatment  is 
limited.  

The results indicate that lower birth weight babies are less likely to receive necessary vaccines. This is 
in marked contrast to the findings of earlier twin studies, which generally find no significant effects of birth 
weight.  In  addition,  the  results  suggest  significant  nonlinearities  across  the  birth  weight  distribution,  with 
stronger effects among children in the low end of the birth weight distribution. Taking advantage of the great 
diversity of countries in the data, we also assess whether these effects vary heterogeneously by the country's 
level  of  development.  We  show  that  families  in  poorer  countries  are  more  likely  to  engage  in  differential 
health investments than families in richer countries. The effects of birth weight are particularly stronger for 
countries  with  higher  infant  mortality  rates,  lower  life  expectancy,  and  poorer  sanitation  facilities.  In  these 
countries, the effects generally increase by 17 to 80 percent.  

These findings have implications for our understanding of why initial capabilities matter so much for 
later life outcomes. Previous studies document positive effects of health investments on several measures of 
human  capital.1  This,  combined  with  our  results,  suggests  that  the  relationships  between  birth  weight  and 
adult  socioeconomic  status  reflect  partially  different  resource  allocations  that  parents  make  among  their 
better  and  worse  endowed  children.  It  implies  of  course  that  the  effects  of  birth  weight  on  long-term 
outcomes  are  unlikely  to  be  only  the  result  of  biological  mechanisms.  The  family  responses  to  child 
endowments should be taken into account to understand the distributional effects of early childhood policies.   
Within  our  empirical  framework,  the  most  natural  concern  is  that  of  selective  mortality.  Indeed,  a 
selection  issue  arises  because  children  experiencing  mortality  simply  are  not  included  in  the  analysis.  Any 
selection bias that results from using this select group most likely will bias our estimates of the effect of birth 
weight  toward  zero,  so  our  estimates  should  be  taken  to  be  lower  bounds.  We  present  evidence  consistent 
with this. Unlike other studies, we have information on investments even for children who had died before 
the interview, allowing us to investigate the potential impacts of such bias. Additional to including deceased 
children  to  the  analyses,  we  also  addressed  this  issue  by  imputing  the  missing  information  under  best  and 
worst possible scenarios. We find that selection issue potentially produces large biases. The effects of birth 
weight on health investments could be approximately 70 percent larger than our baseline estimates suggest. 

Our study is related to the recent contribution by Figlio et al. (2014). As part of a larger analysis, they 
compare  school  attendance  among  twins  and  observe  that  twins  who  attend  higher  quality  schools  tend  to 
have heavier birth weights than those attending lower quality schools. While this is an interesting finding, it 
cannot be interpreted as evidence conclusive of reinforcing behaviors because many schools partially select 
their  students  based  on  academic  ability.  We  also  build  on  the  recent  work  by  Adhvaryu  and  Nyshadham 
(2014),  who  assess  parental  responses  to  shifts  in  cognitive  endowments  induced  by  an  iodine 
supplementation program. They document positive effects on health investments and find evidence of sibling 

                                                           
1 See, for example, Almond et al. (2010) and Bharadwaj et al. (2013b). In addition, see Nores and Barnett (2010) for an inventory 
of  the  effects  of  early  childhood  interventions  conducted  in  developing  countries  on  several  domains,  including  cognition  and 
health. 

3 

 

spillovers.  Our  paper  is  also  related  to  the  literature  examining  variations  in  environmental  conditions  in 
utero  to  infer  parental  responses.  These  studies  generally  rely  on  uncommon  and  severe  historical  events, 
such  as  influenza  epidemic,  and  changes  in  local  environment  caused  by  accidents.  Examples  include 
Almond et al. (2009), Parman (2013), and Venkataramani (2012). They tend to find evidence in favor of the 
interpretation  that  parents  adopt  reinforcing  responses.  These  studies  are  important  and  have  undoubtedly 
advanced our knowledge of the parental responses to child endowments, but there are still concerns on that 
we  can  generalize  from  them.  In  addition,  studies  in  this  area  rarely  use  direct  measures  of  parental 
investments and have used rather indirect strategies to deduce parental behaviors. An example is Almond et 
al.  (2009)  who  find  that  the  effect  of  the  prenatal  radioactive  fallout  on  cognitive  ability  was  concentrated 
among low education parents and interpret this as an indication that parents adopt reinforcing strategies. This 
interpretation is provocative but requires corroboration.   

The  rest  of  the  paper  is  structured  as  follows.  In  section  2,  we  provide  background  literature 
information  on  the  relationship  between  birth  endowments  and  parental  investments.  In  section  3,  we 
describe our data and empirical approach. In section 4, we present our findings, including robustness checks. 
Section 5 concludes. 

2.  Background  
2.1. Birth weight and initial endowments 

In  this  study,  we  define  child  endowments  as  an  initial  stock  of  health  and  cognitive  capacities  that  are 
determined at birth. Consistent with previous work, we use birth weight as an overall measure of this initial 
stock  of  capacities.  Medical  literature  has established a strong link between  low birth weight  and  impaired 
development of the brain. Children born with very low birth weight are more likely to suffer from attention 
deficit,  dyspraxia,  and  impaired  learning  (MARLOW;  ROBERTS;  COOKE,  1989,  1993).  Abernethy  et  al. 
(2002)  provide  evidence  that  these  learning  disabilities  among  lower  birth  weight  children  stem  from 
differences in global brain growth and the development of brain structures related to memory. A vast medical 
literature has also associated low birth weight to health problems such as cerebral palsy, deafness, epilepsy, 
blindness, asthma, and lung disease (BROOKS et al., 2001; KAELBER; PUGH, 1969; LUCAS; MORLEY; 
COLE, 1998; MATTE et al., 2001; NELSON; GRETHER, 1997; PANETH, 1995; RICHARDS et al., 2001). 
Most  of  these  health  and  cognitive  problems  tend  to  persist  over  time  and  thereby  have  the  potential  to 
explain low levels of human capital.2  

Taken together, this brief survey of medical studies indicates that birth weight is a reliable measure of 
initial  endowments.  Importantly  for  the purposes  of this  paper, birth weight  is  an objective  measure  that is 
easily observed by parents. Some health problems in lower birth weight babies are visible within a few days 
after  birth.  In  fact,  once  a  baby  is  born  with  very  low  birth  weight,  doctors  generally  warn  parents  about 
potential health risks associated to this condition. It has also been widely documented the ability of mothers 
to identify birth endowments of their infant children from very early ages (ADHVARYU; NYSHADHAM, 
2014). For instance, an early study by  Brazelton (1984) demonstrates a wide variability in maternal reports 
on observable behaviors in their infants even at one week after birth. These behaviors include the ability of 
babies  to  relate  situations  to  themselves,  which  is  a  feature  attributable  to  the  cognitive  abilities  of  babies 
(MELTZOFF; MOORE, 1983, 1997).  

2.2. Previous estimates of the effects of child endowments on parental investments    

Much  of  the  growing  literature  about  the  effects  of  birth  weight  on  parental  investments  has  used  sibling-
fixed  effects  to  mitigate  concerns  regarding  omitted  variable  bias.  Datar  et  al.  (2010)  is  one  of  the  first 
studies to use this approach. They employ U.S data and find that low birth weight children are less likely to 

                                                           
2 See, for example, Botting et al. (1997) and Powls et al. (1995).   

 

4 

be breast-fed, receive vaccinations and attend a preschool program relative to normal birth weight children. 
Subsequent studies have investigated the effect of birth weight on time investments, such as reading, playing, 
and  doing  hobbies  (HSIN,  2012),  and  investments  based  on  the  quality  of  the  mother-child  interaction 
(AIZER; CUNHA, 2012). These studies tend to find positive effects of birth weight on parents’ investment. 
Most  notably,  Hsin  (2012)  finds  that  that  less-educated  mothers  are  more  likely  to  reinforce  initial 
endowments  compared  to  most-educated  mothers,  suggesting  that  socioeconomic  status  plays  an  important 
role in determining parental responses. Differently from these studies, Del Bono et al. (2012) use a structural 
dynamic model of family resource allocations and find compensatory behaviors in breastfeeding. While the 
use  of  variation  within  siblings  eliminates  the  bias  attributable  to  time-invariant  omitted  factors,  this 
approach will be biased if there are sibling-specific unobserved events correlated with both birth weight and 
postnatal investments. Therefore, causality should be viewed with caution.     
 
As  solution  to  omitted  variable  bias,  a  few  studies  have  used  variation  within  twins.  A  pioneering 
work in  this area is  Behrman et  al.  (1982) who  use data on 1,021 twins  and try  to  infer parental  responses 
from a wage equation. They conclude that parents adopt compensatory responses. An important limitation is 
that  they  do  not  use  any  direct  measure  of  initial  endowments  or  parental  investments.  In  a  later  paper, 
Behrman et al. (1994) use educational attainment as a measure of parental investment. Using a sample of 900 
twins, these authors find that initial endowments is positively associated with years of schooling, interpreting 
this as an evidence that parents adopt reinforcing behaviors. Nevertheless, years of schooling are an outcome, 
not  an  input,  and  parental  control  over  it  is  limited.  Completed  years  of  education  is  the  result  of  parental 
inputs, but also of other factors such as child’s perseverance, which may differ among children for biological 
or other reasons.         

In  a  study  about  the  effects  of  family-size  on  human  capital  investments,  Rosenzweig  and  Zhang 
(2009)  incorporate  the  effects  of  birth  weight  on  schooling  expenditures  as  part  of  their  analysis.  They  are 
among the first studies to directly measure both child endowments and parental investments among twins. In 
a  sample  of  1,169  twins,  these  authors  find  a  slightly  significant  effect  of  birth  weight  on  schooling 
expenditures. A parallel study by Royer (2009) finds insignificant estimates of the effects of birth weight on 
breastfeeding  and  the  number  of  days  in  a  hospital.  In  addition,  Currie  and  Almond  (2011)  use  the  same 
sample and generally document insignificant effects on a wider set of investment measures, including amount 
of  praise  and  affection  offered,  and  disciplinary  practices.  Bharadwaj  et  al.  (2013)  use  a  relatively  larger 
sample  (about  5,000  twins)  and  find  insignificant  effects  of  birth  weight  on  cognition  investments  such  as 
reading  or  educational  encouragement.  They  also  use  data  on  siblings  and  find  evidence  that  parents 
participate in  compensatory behaviors.  Bharadwaj  et  al.  (2013) argue that the inputs examined have a high 
degree of public goods within the household and that it could explain  why birth weight have no significant 
effects among twins.   

Overall,  these  studies  provide  mixed  results,  ranging  from  no  effects  to  reinforcing  responses.  A 
complication with these studies  is that they  are based on relatively small sample sizes and this may lead to 
imprecise  estimates.    For  example,  Rosenzweig  and  Zhang  (2009)  also  estimate  the  effect  of  birth  weight 
separately for exempt and non-exempt from the one-child-per-family policy and find insignificant impacts in 
both subsamples (which is in contrast to their results in the combined sample). In addition, most of previous 
studies  using  the  twin  strategy  rely  on  indirect  measures  of  parental  investments.  As  Royer  (2009) 
emphasizes, the number of days in a hospital could be hardly a reliable measure of parents’ investment, as it 
may  simply  reflect  medical  decisions  made  by  health  professionals  rather  than  parents.  We  attempt  to 
overcome both empirical challenges. First, we use data on 17,000 twins from a wide range of countries. The 
advantage of using this relatively large sample is  that a larger sample size implies greater statistical  power 
than these previous studies. Second, we measure directly health investments by using vaccination coverage. 
Our study is the first to examine the effects of birth weight on these inputs using within-twin variation.  

 

 

5 

 

3.  Data and empirical strategy 
3.1.Data 

The  source  of  data  for  this  study  comes  from  Demographic  and  Health  Surveys  (DHS).3  The  DHS  are 
nationally  representative  surveys  of  women  ages  15  to  49.  While  these  surveys  have  been  implemented  in 
more than 80 countries since 1984, they are comparable across countries and years. The main strength of this 
dataset is that it contains detailed information about birth histories and child healthcare for all children under 
three, four or five years (depending on the wave). For this paper, we use all surveys from rounds II, III, IV, V 
and VI with available information on birth weight and vaccination history. We exclude data from the round I 
because it does not contain data on birth weight. Countries where information about birth weight was never 
collected are also excluded. In total, the analysis includes 200 waves from 68 countries. We pool these files 
into a single file. We identify twins based on whether they were declared as twins by their mother. In total, 
there are 30,425 twins. Triplets are also included in the sample. Available measures of vaccination reported 
consistently  across  the  different  rounds  of  the  DHS  include  BCG,  DPT,  polio  and  measles.4  Our  main 
variables of interest are number of immunizations, at least one immunization, and completely immunized. We 
exclude  twins  with  missing  information  on  these  variables.  This  restriction  results  in  dropping  about  2 
percent of the sample.  

Although the DHS are a rich source of data, they also have limitations. In particular, at the interview, 
mothers were asked to provide information on birth weight and the use of this retrospective information may 
rise  some  concerns.  Recall  bias  may  be  important  if  mothers  are  less  likely  to  accurately  remember  birth 
weight  for  births  that  are  distant.  Furthermore,  many  mothers  in  developing  countries  do  not  give  birth  in 
hospitals,  so  birth  weight  information  for  these  births  are  subject  to  considerable  recall  errors.  More 
importantly, the measurement error might be systematic if parents selectively think of their “better” child as 
the one having higher birth weight. We further discuss below  these issues  and perform some  robustness  to 
address the potential impact of the measurement error on our results.  

We exclude twin pairs where at least one birth had no information on birth weight. Our final dataset 
consists  of  17,779  twins  who  were  born  between  1985  and  2014.  While  our  analyses  focuses  on  twins,  we 
also  present  some  results  for  singletons.  There  are  308,522  singleton  children  with  at  least  one  sibling  and 
with information about both birth weight and health investments. Table 1 presents basic descriptive statistics 
splitting  the  sample  between  twins  and  singletons.  Both  groups  of  births  are  similar  respect  to  mother’s 
characteristics,  such  as  education,  age  and  marital  status.  In  terms  of  birth  weight,  there  are  substantial 
differences  between  twins  and  singletons.  Birth  weight  is  higher  for  singletons,  with  the  average  at  3,218 
grams compared to 2,523 grams for twins. This is a difference of more than 27 percent. The incidence of low 
birth  weight  (defined  as  birth  weight  less  than  2,500  grams)  is  five  times  higher  in  twins.  Figure  1  makes 
clearer the differences in birth weight between twins and singletons.   

The  basis  of  our  identification  strategy  relies  on  the  fact  that  twin  pairs  differ  in  birth  weight,  and 
sometimes the difference is substantial. As already hinted at in the Introduction, medical literature indicates 
that one major reason for intra-pair variation in birth weight is differences in placental cord insertion, which 
leads  to  different  nutritional  intakes  and  blood  perfusion  (ZHANG  ET  AL;  2001).5  Since  parental  control 
over these factors is limited, the birth weight within a given twin pair is as good as randomly assigned. Figure 
2 shows the distribution of the twin birth weight-difference. The mean birth weight difference is 330 grams, 
or 13 percent of the average twin’s birth weight. This figure is remarkably similar to the 320 grams found for 
Norway (BLACK et al; 2007), the 290 grams  for U.S  (ALMOND et  al; 2005) and the 284 grams recently 

                                                           
3 DHS data are available for download by registering at: http://www.measuredhs.com/. 
4 BCG protects against tuberculosis and DPT protects against diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus.  
5 See Breathnach and Malone (2012) for a survey on the factors causing twin birth weight-differences. 

6 

 

reported for Florida (FIGLIO et al; 2014). Our data also reveal that 59.1 percent of twin pairs exhibit a birth 
weight  difference  higher  than  200  grams,  and  17.3  percent  have  a  birth  weight  difference  higher  than  600 
grams.  Furthermore,  about  of  20  percent  of  variation  in  birth  weight  among  twins  cannot  be  explained  by 
unobservable  mother-specific  factors.  Therefore,  it  is  apparent  that  there  is  a  fair  amount  of  variation  for 
identification. 

We make use of additional information to test some forms of heterogeneity. We collect country level 
data  on  the  percentage  of  households  with  access  to  improved  sanitation,  total  health  expenditure  as 
percentage  of  GDP,  infant  mortality  rate,  life  expectancy  at  birth,  and  real  GDP  per  capita  (in  2005  US 
dollars).6  The  information  on  these  data  is  provided  by  the  World  Bank,  which  constructs  an  annual  panel 
comprising  247  countries  from  1960  to  2014,  though  not  all  variables  are  available  for  all  countries  in  all 
periods.7 We take the average of each of these variables over time, ignoring missing years.8    

3.2.Empirical strategy 

Our strategy to estimate the effect of birth weight on parental investments is to use the sample of twins and to 
include family-fixed effects. Since twins share the same mother, the inclusion of family-fixed effects controls 
for family background, prenatal investments, and any unobservable family-specific factor which may affect 
both  birth  endowments  and  parental  investments.  Therefore,  the  impact  of  birth  endowments  is  identified 
using idiosyncratic differences in birth weight within twin pairs. We use the following specification:  

                                                                                                                                      (1) 

where y represents our measures of parental investments of the twin i who was born from the mother j. X is a 
vector that contains additional child-specific controls such sex, and birth order. The inclusion of the mother-
fixed,   , will absorb all the above-mentioned unobservable mother-specific factors that affect birth weight 
and parental investments.     is an idiosyncratic error term assumed orthogonal to birth weight. The primary 
parameter  of  interest  is   ,  which  represents  the  impact  of  birth  weight  on  parental  investments.  Positive 
values for this parameter are interpreted as reinforcing responses while that negative ones are interpreted as 
compensatory behaviors.  

4.  Results  
4.1. Baseline results  

Table 2 reports estimates from equation (1). Each coefficient is from a separate regression. We have 
multiplied the coefficients  and standard  errors by 1,000 to  make them  easier to  read.  Table  2 also presents 
OLS  and  sibling-fixed  effects.  OLS  regressions  control  for  year  and  month-of-birth,  mother’s  education, 
mother’s  age,  mother’s  marital  status,  country,  urban  residence,  year  and  month-of-survey,  child’s  sex  and 
age, and  gender-specific  birth order. With the sibling-fixed effects,  we  control for  child’s  sex  and age,  and 
gender-specific birth order (all time-invariant variables are differenced out).   

For  at  least  one  immunization,  the  OLS  coefficient  of  7.224  implies  that  a  10  percent  increase  in  birth 
weight  increases  the  likelihood  of  receiving  ate  least  one  immunization  by  0.07  percentage  points.  This 
estimate is slightly larger when twin-fixed effects are included. Conversely, we find dramatic differences for 
the other outcomes. Panel A shows that the estimated coefficient is negative in the OLS specification, but it 
switches to positive when are incorporated twin-fixed effects. A similar pattern is found for the probability of 
                                                           
6  Total  health  expenditure  are  computed  as  the  sum  of  public  and  private  health  expenditure.  It  refers  to  the  provision  of  health 
services (preventive and curative), family planning activities, nutrition activities, and emergency aid designated for health but does 
not include provision of water and sanitation. 
7 Available online at http://data.worldbank.org/indicator  
8 The results are qualitatively similar if we use the median values of these variables.  

7 

 

being completely immunized. In general, the OLS results provide little evidence of a systematic relationship 
between  birth  endowments  and  parental  investments.  The  variability  in  the  sign  across  outcomes  suggests 
that omitted variables may play an important role. In contrast, the results from the twin-fixed effects strategy 
are  more  conclusive.  They  suggest  that  birth  endowments  have  a  positive  and  significant  effect  on  health 
investments,  with  all  coefficients  significant  at  the  five  percent  level.  Relative  to  the  mean,  the  largest 
estimates  from  the  twin  approach  imply  that  a  10  percent  increase  in  birth  weight  would  increase  the 
likelihood of being completely immunized by 0.35 percent.  

The results from our twin sample are somewhat similar to those reported using the sibling sample. For 
example, the coefficient of 104 in the sibling-fixed effects specification is not statistically indistinguishable 
from the 96 point estimate obtained using the twin sample. The coefficients from the sibling-fixed effects are 
more precisely estimated. This is not surprising given that the singleton sample is substantially larger. These 
similarities  across  the  point  estimates  suggest  that  the  omitted  variable  bias  might  be  small  and  that  the 
results from the twin sample may have external validity to the rest of population. However, we cannot rule 
out  the  possibility  that  the  causal  effects  of  birth  endowments  differ  between  twins  and  singletons,  but  the 
sibling  fixed  effects  results  are  biased  so  that  they  are  similar  to  those  from  the  twins.  The  differences 
between  the  cross-sectional  results  between  twins  and  singletons  suggest  that  this  may  be  indeed  the  case. 
Therefore, some caution is required with respect to generalizability.  

In Table 3, we take a closer look at of the results. Now, we estimate the effects of birth weight separately 
for  each  of  the  vaccinations.  The  magnitudes  vary  depending  on  the  vaccination  but  we  find  that  heavier 
babies are more likely to be vaccinated than lighter babies are. In Appendix Table A1, we run equation (1) 
disaggregating  these  vaccinations  by  individual  doses.  Specifically,  we  estimate  the  effects  of  birth  weight 
for  each  of  the  three  polio  and  DPT  doses  separately.  The  results  clearly  show  that  birth  weight  remains  a 
strong determinant of receipt of individual vaccinations, replicating qualitatively our main findings.   

4.2.Heterogeneity     

The  ample  variation  in  socioeconomic  characteristics  across  the  68  countries  examined  here  allow  us  to 
explore  heterogeneity  in  the  effects  of  birth  weight.  It  is  naturally  interesting  to  understand  whether  the 
effects  of  birth weight  vary by the country’s level  of development.  If the elasticity  of substitution  between 
consumption and child investments is higher for poorer families, then reinforcing responses would be more 
pronounced in less-developed countries.9 Furthermore, since credit constraints are more severe for families in 
developing countries, the inability to smooth consumption may lead families to concentrate their resources on 
the  better-endowed  children  in  the  developing  world.  Alternatively,  if  child  endowments  and  health 
investments  are  complementary  in  the  production  function  for  child  quality,  then  one  might  expect  larger 
effects in richer countries because the investments parents make have higher returns.10 
 
We  next  investigate  these  hypotheses  in  Table  4  by  estimating  our  twin-fixed  effects  estimator  for 
children from countries in the bottom tertile of measures of economic development. If these hypotheses are 
valid,  we  would  expect  see  different  impacts  in  magnitude  on  these  subsamples.  Panel  A  replicates  our 
baseline estimates. In Panel B, we run our specification for countries in the low end of the per capita GDP 
distribution. The coefficient for number of immunizations is positive and significant, but decreases somewhat 
in magnitude relative to the baseline. The same is true for at least one immunization and in fact the estimated 
effect  is  no  longer  statistically  significant.  We  find  a  larger  effect  on  the  likelihood  of  being  completely 
immunized. Overall, there is inconclusive evidence that birth weight have heterogeneous impacts on parental 
investments  for  families  from  lower  GDP.  Likely  this  is  because  the  GDP  is  not  the  best  measure  of 
economic development.  

                                                           
9 See Almond and Mazumder (2013) for a more detailed discussion.  
10 For a detailed discussion on the role of complementarities in the models of human capital, see Cunha and Heckman (2007), and 
Conti and Heckman (2010).   

8 

 

In the next set of panels, we look at alternative measures of economic development. Specifically, we 
estimate  the  model  for  countries  with  lower  levels  of  improved  sanitation,  life  expectancy,  health 
expenditure,  and  infant  survival  rates.  Qualitatively,  the  results  for  these  regressions  replicate  the  patterns 
found before. The estimated coefficients tend to be higher for these countries, particularly so for number of 
immunizations and the probability of receiving all immunizations. The effects of birth weight on these inputs 
increase by 17 to 80 percent relative to the baseline estimates, suggesting that families in poorer countries are 
more likely to adopt reinforcing behaviors than are families in richer countries. As a final exercise, we use as 
an aggregate measure the first principal component from a principal components analysis on these measures 
of economic development, including per capita GDP. This aggregate measure captures 70 percent of the total 
variance of the variables. Again, we find larger impacts for countries in the low end of the country’s level of 
development. It could be argued that these differential effects of birth weight across countries are driven by 
differential mortality selection into the sample. This is highly unlikely given the discussion in section 4.4.2. 
As  discussed  below,  any  selection  bias  from  selective  mortality  most  likely  lead  to  underestimates  of  the 
effects of birth weight. Since infant mortality rates are higher in poorer countries, it is reasonable to believe 
that  the  bias  from  selective  mortality  goes  precisely  in  the  opposite  direction  of  the  differential  impacts 
observed in Table 4.  

4.3.Parental responses and mother’s education 

Previous  studies  have  discussed  a  role  for  mother’s  education  in  determining  parental  responses  to  child 
endowments,  arguing  that  low-education  parents  are  more  likely  to  adopt  reinforcing  behaviors.  This  is 
consistent  with  the  evidence  presented  in  Table  4  that  the  effects  of  birth  weight  are  generally  higher  in 
poorer  countries.  If  low-education  parents  are  credit  constrained  or  have  a  high  elasticity  of  substitution 
between  consumption  and  investments,  then  they  may  be  more  likely  to  reinforce  for  differences  in 
endowments  (ALMOND;MAZUMDER,  2013).  However,  previous  studies  showing  evidence  in  favor  of 
these  interpretations  rely  on  sibling-fixed  effects  estimators  and  their  results  may  be  confounded  if  sibling 
unobserved factors vary by socioeconomic status.11 The question is of particular interest in view of literature 
supporting the provocative results that the effects birth endowments on later life outcomes differ by parent’s 
education  (ALMOND;  EDLUND;  PALME,  2009;  FIGLIO  et  al.,  2014).  Learning  whether  parental 
responses  to  child  endowments  is  different  between  less  educated  and  better  educated  mothers  would  shed 
light on the mechanism behind the differential impacts of child endowments on later life outcomes.  

Motived  by  this  discussion,  we  have  examined  whether  birth  weight  has  heterogeneous  impacts  by 
mother’s  education.  We  estimate  our  preferred  twin  fixed  effects  specification  for  children  whose  mothers 
have 12 years of schooling or less (Table 5). Qualitatively, the results replicate the patterns found before. We 
find that the coefficients tend to be higher for this subsample relative the baseline estimates. Although these 
differences  are  statistically  significant  only  in  a  few  cases,  the  overall  patterns  appear  generally  consistent 
across  columns  in  Table  5.  It  seems  to  be  the  case  that  less  educated  parents  adopt  larger  reinforcing 
responses. These results complement the evidence in Table 4. Furthermore, they suggest that the differentials 
impacts of child endowments on cognitive abilities documented in Almond et al. (2009), for example, may be 
explained because poor families do concentrate their resources on the better-endowed children.   

 
 
 
 

                                                           
11  As  Almond  and  Mazumder  (2013)  note,  low  and  high  education  parents  may  have  the  same  causal  responses  to  child 
endowments,  but  the  observed  correlation  between  endowments  and  investments  is  higher  for  less  educated  parents  due  to 
unobserved sources of stress such as financial difficulties that affect both endowments and parental responses. 

9 

 

4.4.Additional robustness checks 
4.4.1.  Measurement error 

One important caveat to our analysis is that birth weight is based on maternal reports. Some mothers might 
misreport birth weight information and this could introduce a relevant measurement error.  Recall errors are 
likely more important for mothers who do not give birth in hospitals and for distant births whose mothers are 
less likely to remember detailed information about birth histories. In the presence of a random measurement 
error, our estimates of the effects of birth weight would be attenuated. Naturally, mothers who give births in 
hospitals are different in ways that could affect postnatal investments so that the measurement error would be 
systematically  correlated  with  birth  weight.  The  use  of  twin-fixed  effects  will  capture  any  such  mother-
specific differences. Still, one could be concerned if mothers selectively think of their better child as the one 
having higher birth weight. This is a reasonable hypothesis but note that any positive correlation between the 
measurement error and birth weight will tend to bias our estimates toward zero.12 If so, our results showing 
significant impacts become even more telling.  

We conducts some robustness checks. In Panel B of Table 6, we restrict the sample to children who 
were born  in  health facilities.  The results of this  exercise report coefficients  very similar to  the baseline  in 
Panel  A.  For  example,  the  coefficient  for  at  least  one  immunization  is  almost  identical  to  the  baseline 
estimate (i.e, 10.9 versus 11.8). In Panel C, we restrict our sample to more recent births whose mothers might 
be more likely to  remember information  about  birth histories. We then estimate our specification for  twins 
under 24 months of age. This reduces substantially the baseline sample, approximately by 50 percent. In this 
smaller  sample,  we  find  generally  larger  point  estimates  and  even  statistically  significant  effects,  which  is 
consistent with the notion that recent births have better information on birth weight records. As a final check, 
we limit the sample to waves of the DHS with relatively lower missing-data rates. This is important because 
some waves have high rates of missing data on birth weight. In Appendix Table A2, we repeat the baseline 
analysis, but  exclude waves of the DHS with  more than 50-90 percent  of missing data on birth weight.  As 
shown, our baseline estimates are very robust in these different subsamples. For example, the effect of birth 
weight on number of immunizations is 96.641 (s.e.= 37.701) without restricting the sample, and 99.592 (s.e.= 
42.889) when the sample is restricted to waves with missing-data rates lower than 50 percent. 

4.4.2.  Selective mortality  

While  the  use  of  data  on  twins  rather  than  siblings  it  is  empirically  compelling,  a  major  concern  is  that  of 
selective mortality. As such, our analysis does not include infants who died and previous studies show that 
lower  birth  weight  is  associated  with  increased  rates  of  infant  mortality  (ALMOND;  CHAY;  LEE,  2005; 
BLACK; DEVEREUX; SALVANES, 2007; OREOPOULOS et al., 2008). To address this issue, we exploit 
the  feature  of  the  DHS  data  that  mothers  are  asked  to  report  on  investments  and  birth  weight  even  for 
children  who  had  died  before  the  interview.  Therefore,  we  can  examine  the  impact  of  mortality  on  our 
estimates  by  simply  including  these  deceased  twins  in  our  estimation  sample.  When  we  included  these 
children  in  the  analysis,  we  find  even  stronger  impacts  of  birth  weight  (Appendix  Table  A3).  In  general, 
point estimates are three times as large as our baseline estimates and are significant at the one percent level.  

As  a  further  check,  we  calculate  bounds  by  imputing  the  missing  information  for  infants  who  did  not 
survive  before  the  investments  was  possible.  Although  it  is  impossible  to  know  what  the  effects  of  birth 
weight  would  have  been  on  parental  inputs  of  the  dead  children,  we  adopt  a  simple  approach  to  compute 

                                                           
12 Suppose that we want to estimate                . However,    is measured with error so that we only observe x, which is the 
true  variable  plus  some  noise  (i.e,            )  .  If  the  measurement  error,  ,  is  positively  correlated  with  the  true  value  of  the 
variable  of  interest,    ,  then  the  probability  limit  of        as         is                   
assumption, the estimate of   will be smaller than the true coefficient.   

.  As        is  positive  by 

       
   
     
   

       

 

10 

bounds:  lower  bounds  assume  that  all  dead  children  would  have  received  investments  and  upper  bounds 
assume exactly the opposite. We find the upper bounds quite similar to those estimates that simply include all 
deceased children in the sample (Column (2)). Although these bounds are not very tight, they exclude zero. If 
one  assumes  that  the  most  reliable  scenario  is  that  deceased  children  were  treated  worse  than  surviving 
children were, then the upper bounds would imply that our baseline estimates could underestimate the impact 
of birth weight by approximately 70 percent.      

4.4.3.  Alternative specifications 

In this section, we assess the robustness of our results to different versions of our basic specifications. First, 
we estimates our baseline specification but using birth weight in grams rather than the log of birth weight as 
the key independent  variable. Second, we classify  birth weight  into categories and  use dummy variables to 
estimate  possible  nonlinear  effects  of  birth  endowments.  While  using  the  natural  log  of  birth  weight  does 
allow for nonlinear effects,  the use of dummy variables helps  uncover more detailed relationships between 
child  endowments  and  parental  investments.  We  group  children  by  whether  their  birth  weight  was  1,499 
grams or less, 1500 to 2000 grams, 2001 to 2500 grams, 2501 to 3000 grams, 3001 to 3500 grams, and 3500 
grams or more.  

We  regress  our  outcome  measures  on  these  alternate  variants  of  log  of  birth  weight.  The  results  are 
reported  in  Table  7.  Panel  A  reports  results  for  birth  weight  in  grams,  and  Panel  B  reports  results  using 
dummy  indicators  for  birth  weight  categories.  All  estimated  coefficients  on  birth  weight  are  positive  and 
significant.  For  example,  the  coefficient  of  0.008  indicates  that  a  one  standard  deviation  increase  in  birth 
weight  (694  grams)  would  increase  the  likelihood  of  being  completely  immunized  by  approximately  0.55 
percentage  points.  The  results  on  birth  weight  categories  also  support  our  findings  that  child  endowments 
have a positive effect on parental investments. These results further suggest significant nonlinearities in the 
relationships.  In  particular,  infants  born  with  a  birth  weight  below  1,500  grams  are  about  2.1  percentage 
points less likely to be completely immunized, but for infants born between 2000 and 2500 grams there is no 
discernable effect. In general, our conclusions are qualitatively similar across these alternative specifications. 

5.  Conclusions  

Many previous studies have provided a variety of evidence that poor endowments at birth can have adverse 
consequences on human capital accumulation. The extent to which these effects can be totally  attributed to 
biological  mechanisms  remains  controversial.  It  has  been  stated  that,  in  part,  such  effects  reflect  parental 
responses to variations in child endowments. Prior literature has provided conflicting evidence about the sign 
and magnitude of these behavioral  responses.  These estimates, however, may be affected by small samples 
and  omitted  variables,  limiting  the  power  of  policy  implications.  We  have  examined  the  effect  of  birth 
endowments,  proxied by birth weight, on health investments  using a  within-twin  strategy  for a large set  of 
developing  countries.  In  comparing  twins,  we  account  for  omitted  variables  determining  prenatal  and 
postnatal  investments.  In  contrast  to  previous  studies,  we  find  that  health  investments  do  respond  to 
variations  in  child  endowments.  Indeed,  lower  birth  weight  babies  are  less  likely  to  receive  health 
investments.  

It  is  useful  to  point  out  that  our  analysis  does  not  address  several  questions.  We  have  examined 
vaccinations  and  other  types  of  health  investments  are  certainly  important.    Clearly,  mothers  who  seek 
vaccinations  are  likely  to  make  other  types  of  health  care  as  well.  If  one  knew  the  causal  impacts  of  birth 
endowments  on  others  health  investments,  we  would  be  able  to  explain  a  greater  portion  of  the  higher 
mortality  rates  among  lower  birth  weight  children.  This  should  be  addressed  in  future  studies.  Another 
important  issue  is  that  our  study  do  not  explicitly  deal  with  the  issue  of  multidimensional  capabilities  of 
initial  endowments.  Recently,  it  has  been  argued  that  parental  responses  may  differ  across  dimensions  of 
human  capital  and  birth  weight  has  been  related  to  different  dimensions  including  health  and  cognitive 

11 

 

development. Our estimates do not allow us to disentangle what source of variation in birth weight has more 
or less influence on parental investment. This is important in view that parental response to a cognitive shock 
could be different from a health shock, as hypothesized by Yi et al. (2015). We emphasize that our findings 
should be interpreted as a combined influence of these different dimensions. The magnitude of this reduced 
form estimate is still important, as birth weight is an objective measure that can be used as a direct target of 
policy. Social programs that seek to reduce the incidence of low birth weight may have positive externalities 
on  health  investments  in  infancy  and  cost-benefit  analyses  of  these  interventions  should  account  for  them. 
Finally,  future  research  should  also  investigate  the  impacts  of  birth  endowments  on  other  human  capital 
investments,  including  cognitive  and  non-cognitive  investments.  Reliable  estimates  of  these  parameters  are 
crucial  to  understand  the  role  of  household  behavior  in  determining  the  long-run  effects  of  prenatal 
conditions.   
 

References  

ABERNETHY, L. J.; PALANIAPPAN, M.; COOKE, R. W. I. Quantitative magnetic resonance imaging of 
the brain in survivors of very low birth weight. Archives of Disease in Childhood, v. 87, n. 4, p. 279–283, 
2002.  

ADHVARYU, A.; NYSHADHAM, A. Endowments at Birth and Parents’ Investments in Children. The 
Economic Journal, 2014.  

AIZER, A.; CUNHA, F. The Production of Human Capital: Endowments, Investments and Fertility: 
NBER Working Paper. Boston, United State: [s.n.].  

ALMOND, D. et al. Estimating Marginal Returns to Medical Care: Evidence from At-risk Newborns. The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, v. 125, n. 2, p. 591–634, 2010.  

ALMOND, D.; CHAY, K. Y.; LEE, D. S. The Costs of Low Birth Weight. The Quarterly Journal of 
Economics, v. 120, n. 3, p. 1031–1083, 2005.  

ALMOND, D.; EDLUND, L.; PALME, M. Chernobyl’s Subclinical Legacy: Prenatal Exposure to 
Radioactive Fallout and School Outcomes in Sweden. The Quarterly Journal of Economics , v. 124 , n. 4 , 
p. 1729–1772, 1 nov. 2009.  

ALMOND, D.; MAZUMDER, B. Fetal Origins and Parental Responses. Annual Review of Economics, v. 
5, n. 1, p. 37–56, 2013.  

BECKER, G. S.; TOMES, N. Child Endowments and the Quantity and Quality of Children. Journal of 
Political Economy, v. 84, n. 4, p. 143–162, 1976.  

BEHRMAN, J. R.; POLLAK, R. A.; TAUBMAN, P. Parental Preferences and Provision for Progeny. 
Journal of Political Economy, v. 90, n. 1, p. 52–73, 1982.  

BEHRMAN, J. R.; ROSENZWEIG, M. R.; TAUBMAN, P. Endowments and the Allocation of Schooling in 
the Family and in the Marriage Market: The Twins Experiment. Journal of Political Economy, v. 102, n. 6, 
p. 1131–1174, 1994.  

BHARADWAJ, P.; EBERHARD, J.; NEILSON, C. Health at Birth, Parental Investments and Academic 
Outcomes: Working paper UC San Diego. [s.l: s.n.].  

BHARADWAJ, P.; LØKEN, K. V.; NEILSON, C. Early Life Health Interventions and Academic 
Achievement. American Economic Review, v. 103, n. 5, p. 1862–1891, 2013.  

 

12 

BLACK, S. E.; DEVEREUX, P. J.; SALVANES, K. G. From the Cradle to the Labor Market? The Effect of 
Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, v. 122, n. 1, p. 409–439, 2007.  

BOTTING, N. et al. Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorders and Other Psychiatric Outcomes in Very Low 
Birthweight Children at 12 Years. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, v. 38, n. 8, p. 931–941, 
1997.  

BRAZELTON, T. B. Neonatal behavior assessment scale. 2nd. ed. Philadelphia: Spastics International 
Medical Publications, 1984.  

BREATHNACH, F. M.; MALONE, F. D. Fetal Growth Disorders in Twin Gestations. Seminars in 
Perinatology, v. 36, n. 3, p. 175–181, 2012.  

BROOKS, A. et al. IMpact of low birth weight on early childhood asthma in the united states. Archives of 
Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine, v. 155, n. 3, p. 401–406, 2001.  

CONTI, G.; HECKMAN, J. J. Understanding the Early Origins of the Education–Health Gradient: A 
Framework That Can Also Be Applied to Analyze Gene–Environment Interactions. Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, v. 5, n. 5, p. 585–605, 2010.  

CUNHA, F.; HECKMAN, J. The Technology of Skill Formation. American Economic Review, v. 97, n. 2, 
p. 31–47, 2007.  

CURRIE, J.; ALMOND, D. Chapter 15 - Human capital development before age five. In: CARD, D.; 
ASHENFELTER, O. (Eds.). . Handbook of Labor Economics. [s.l.] Elsevier, 2011. v. Volume 4,p. 1315–
1486.  

DATAR, A.; KILBURN, M. R.; LOUGHRAN, D. Endowments and parental investments in infancy and 
early childhood. Demography, v. 47, n. 1, p. 145–162, 2010.  

DEL BONO, E.; ERMISCH, J.; FRANCESCONI, M. Intrafamily Resource Allocations: A Dynamic 
Structural Model of Birth Weight. Journal of Labor Economics, v. 30, n. 3, p. 657–706, 2012.  

FIGLIO, D. et al. The Effects of Poor Neonatal Health on Children’s Cognitive Development. American 
Economic Review, v. 104, n. 12, p. 3921–3955, 2014.  

HSIN, A. Is Biology Destiny? Birth Weight and Differential Parental Treatment. Demography, v. 49, n. 4, p. 
1385–1405, 2012.  

KAELBER, C. T.; PUGH, T. F. Influence of Intrauterine Relations on the Intelligence of Twins. New 
England Journal of Medicine, v. 280, n. 19, p. 1030–1034, 1969.  

LUCAS, A.; MORLEY, R.; COLE, T. J. Randomised trial of early diet in preterm babies and later 
intelligence quotient. BMJ, v. 317, n. 7171, p. 1481–1487, 1998.  

MARLOW, N.; ROBERTS, B. L.; COOKE, R. W. Motor skills in extremely low birthweight children at the 
age of 6 years. Archives of Disease in Childhood, v. 64, n. 6, p. 839–847, 1989.  

MARLOW, N.; ROBERTS, L.; COOKE, R. Outcome at 8 years for children with birth weights of 1250 g or 
less. Archives of Disease in Childhood, v. 68, n. 3, p. 286–290, 1993.  

MATTE, T. D. et al. Influence of variation in birth weight within normal range and within sibships on IQ at 
age 7 years: cohort study. BMJ, v. 323, n. 7308, p. 310–314, 2001.  

MELTZOFF, A. N.; MOORE, M. K. Newborn Infants Imitate Adult Facial Gestures. Child Development, 

 

13 

v. 54, n. 3, p. 702–709, 1983.  

MELTZOFF, A. N.; MOORE, M. K. Explaining facial imitation: a theoretical model. Early Development 
and Parenting, v. 6, n. 3-4, p. 179–192, 1997.  

NELSON, K. B.; GRETHER, J. K. Cerebral palsy in low-birthweight infants: Etiology and strategies for 
prevention. Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities Research Reviews, v. 3, n. 2, p. 112–
117, 1997.  

NORES, M.; BARNETT, W. S. Benefits of early childhood interventions across the world: (Under) 
Investing in the very young. Economics of Education Review, v. 29, n. 2, p. 271–282, 2010.  

OREOPOULOS, P. et al. Short-, Medium-, and Long-Term Consequences of Poor Infant Health: An 
Analysis Using Siblings and Twins . Journal of Human Resources , v. 43 , n. 1 , p. 88–138, 1 jan. 2008.  

PANETH, N. S. The Problem of Low Birth Weight. The Future of Children, v. 5, n. 1, p. 19–34, 1995.  

PARMAN, J. Childhood Health and Sibling Outcomes: the Shared Burden and Benefit of the 1918 
Influenza Pandemic: NBER Working Paper. Boston: [s.n.].  

PHILLIPS, D. Twin studies in medical research: can they tell us whether diseases are genetically 
determined? The Lancet, v. 341, n. 8851, p. 1008–1009, 1993.  

POWLS, A. et al. Motor impairment in children 12 to 13 years old with a birthweight of less than 1250 g. 
Archives of Disease in Childhood - Fetal and Neonatal Edition, v. 73, n. 2, p. F62–F66, 1995.  

RICHARDS, M. et al. Birth weight and cognitive function in the British 1946 birth cohort: longitudinal 
population based study. BMJ, v. 322, n. 7280, p. 199–203, 2001.  

ROSENZWEIG, M. R.; ZHANG, J. Do Population Control Policies Induce More Human Capital 
Investment? Twins, Birth Weight and China’s “One-Child” Policy. The Review of Economic Studies, v. 76, 
n. 3, p. 1149–1174, 2009.  

ROYER, H. Separated at Girth: US Twin Estimates of the Effects of Birth Weight. American Economic 
Journal: Applied Economics, v. 1, n. 1, p. 49–85, 2009.  

VENKATARAMANI, A. S. Early life exposure to malaria and cognition in adulthood: Evidence from 
Mexico. Journal of Health Economics, v. 31, n. 5, p. 767–780, 2012.  

YI, J. et al. Early Health Shocks, Intrahousehold Resource Allocation, and Child Outcomes: NBER 
Working Paper 20757. Boston: [s.n.].  

YI, J. et al. Early Health Shocks, Intra-household Resource Allocation and Child Outcomes. The Economic 
Journal, v. 125, n. 588, p. F347–F371, 2015.  

ZHANG, J.; BRENNER, R. A.; KLEBANOFF, M. A. Differences in Birth Weight and Blood Pressure at 
Age 7 Years among Twins. American Journal of Epidemiology, v. 153, n. 8, p. 779–782, 2001.  

 

 

 

 

 

14 

FIGURES AND TABLES 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

15 

0.0002.0004.0006.0008Density050010001500200025003000350040004500500055006000Birth weightTwinsSingletonsNotes. Figure 1 plots kernel density distributions of infant birth weight for twins (solid line) and singletons (dashed line) in our sample.Figure 1. Difference in birth weight distributions between singletons and twins0102030400100020003000 Difference in Birth Weight between Twins (Grams) Notes. Each bar represents the percentage of twins whose birth weight difference falls within the specifiedrange. The mean birth weight difference among twins in our sample is 330 grams.Figure 2. Distribution of Differences in Birth Weight of Twins 

 

Child's characteristics: 
Infant birth weight (grams) 
Fraction low birth weight (<2,500 grams) 
Birth order 
Fraction male 

 
Mother's characteristics 
Age 
Fraction married 
Years of schooling 
Fraction of mothers liven in urban areas 

 
Health investments 
Fraction with BCG vaccine 
Number of polio doses (max =3) 
Number of DPT doses (max =3) 
Fraction with measles vaccine 
Number of immunizations (max=8) 
Fraction with at least one immunization 
Fraction completely immunized  

Table 1. Summary statistics 

Twins sample 

Mean 

SD 

 

2,523.19 

 

694.91 

0.45 
4.04 
0.49 

 
 

30.43 
0.73 
6.45 
0.49 

 
 

0.92 
2.45 
2.44 
0.70 
6.50 
0.96 
0.54 

0.50 
2.36 
0.50 

 
 

6.21 
0.44 
4.91 
0.50 

 
 

0.27 
0.98 
1.04 
0.46 
2.33 
0.20 
0.50 

Notes. There are 17,779 twins and 308,522 singletons.     
 

Singleton sample 

Mean 

SD 

 

3,218.35 

 

651.65 

0.09 
3.14 
0.51 

 
 

28.33 
0.70 
6.89 
0.51 

 
 

0.90 
2.42 
2.45 
0.71 
6.47 
0.96 
0.52 

0.28 
2.10 
0.50 

 
 

5.88 
0.46 
4.92 
0.50 

 
 

0.30 
0.99 
1.02 
0.46 
2.32 
0.20 
0.50 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Table 2. The effect of birth weight on parental investments 

Singleton sample 

Twin sample 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LN(Birth weight) 

 
 
 
LN(Birth weight) 

 
 
 
LN(Birth weight) 

 

OLS 
(1) 

 
 

2.746 

[17.957] 

 

2.732 
[1.932] 

 

-6.118 
[4.143] 

Family F. E. 

(2) 

OLS 
(3) 

 
 
Panel A: Number of immunizations 

 
 

104.891 

[22.239]*** 

-110.804 
[58.203]* 

 
Panel B: At least one immunization 

 

 

5.867 
[2.642]** 

 

7.224 
[6.056] 

 

Panel C: Completely immunized 
-30.178 

 

9.183 

[5.520]* 

[15.044]** 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 

Family F. E. 

(4) 

 
 

96.641 

[37.701]** 

 

10.992 

[5.270]** 

 

19.276 

[7.725]** 

Notes. Robust standard errors in brackets (***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1) are clustered at the mother level. All coefficients and 
standard errors are multiplied by 1,000 to make them easier to read. OLS regressions control for year and month-of-birth dummies, 
indicators for mother’s years of education, dummies for mother’s age, country dummies, mother’s marital status (married), urban 
residence,  year  and  month-of-survey  dummies,  child’s  sex,  dummies  for  child’s  age  (in  months)  and  gender-specific  birth  order 
dummies. Sibling-fixed effects regressions control for child’s sex, dummies for child’s age (in months), and gender-specific birth 
order dummies. Twin-fixed effects regressions control for child’s sex and gender-specific birth order dummies. There are 17,779 
twins and 308,522 singletons.     

 

 

 

 

 

 

16 

 

 

 
 
 
 

LN(Birth weight) 

 
 
N 
 
 
 
LN(Birth weight) 

Table 3. Effect of birth weight on specific vaccinations  

Vaccinations 

BCG 

(1) 

No. of  

polio doses 

(2) 

No. of  

DPT doses 

(3) 

Measles 

(4) 

 
 

 
 
 

11.283 
[5.796]* 
17,775 

8.234 

[3.407]** 
308,463 

 

Panel A: Twin sample with family fixed effects 

[14.910]*** 

[16.806]** 

Panel B: Singleton sample with family fixed effects 

33.760 

17,764 

 
 

 
 
 

47.647 

[10.332]*** 

41.884 

17,763 

 
 

 
 
 

40.132 

[10.148]*** 

 
 

 
 
 

11.687 
[6.925]* 
17,717 

9.904 

[4.578]** 
307,301 

 

 
 
N 
Notes. Robust standard errors in brackets (***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1) are clustered at the mother level. All coefficients and 
standard errors are  multiplied by 1,000 to make them easier to read.  Sibling-fixed effects regressions control  for child’s  sex and 
age, and gender-specific birth order dummies. Twin-fixed effects regressions control for child’s sex and gender-specific birth order 
dummies.   

308,136 

308,150 

 

 

Table 4. Twin-fixed effects estimates of the effect birth weight on parental investments (by economic development) 

 

 
 
 
 

LN(Birth weight) 

 
 
N 
 
 
LN(Birth weight) 

 
 
N 
 
 
LN(Birth weight) 

 
 
N 
 
 
LN(Birth weight) 

 
 
N 
 
 
LN(Birth weight) 

 
 
N 
 
 
LN(Birth weight) 

 
 
N 
 
 
LN(Birth weight) 

No. of 

immunizations 

(1) 

 

96.641 

[37.701]** 

At least one 
Immunization 

(2) 

Panel A: Baseline estimates 

 

10.992 

[5.270]** 

Completely 
immunized 

(3) 

 

19.276 

[7.725]** 

Panel B: Bottom tertile of the per capita GDP distribution 

17,779 

94.137 

[41.022]** 

11,623 

11,819 

132.226 

[43.518]*** 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

Panel C: Bottom tertile of the infant survival distribution 

138.427 

[45.172]*** 

13.862 

[6.628]** 

26.491 

[8.517]*** 

Panel D: Bottom tertile of the life expectancy distribution 

11,608 
Panel E: Bottom tertile of the life the health expenditure distribution 
147.826 

18.857 

11,608 

26.907 

[52.603]*** 

[7.992]** 

[10.887]** 

8,182 

8,182 
Panel F: Bottom tertile of the percentage improved sanitation distribution 
33.432 

142.131 

8,182 

[45.355]*** 

[44.595]*** 

11,532 

11,532 
Panel G: Bottom tertile of the economic development index distribution 
32.854 

125.756 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

17,779 

24.713 

[9.682]** 

11,623 

 
 

11,819 

 
 

33.775 

[8.418]*** 

[8.663]*** 

[8.642]*** 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

17,779 

6.857 
[5.038] 
11,623 

11,819 

11.971 
[6.364]* 
11,608 

12.232 
[6.519]* 
11,532 

11.284 
[6.541]* 
11,153 

 

 
 
N 
Notes. Robust standard errors in brackets (***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1) are clustered at the mother level. All coefficients and 
standard errors are multiplied by 1,000 to make them easier to read. All regressions use twin-fixed effects and control for child’s 
sex and gender-specific birth order dummies. Countries in the low end of the infant survival distribution refer to countries in the 
top  tertile  of  the  infant  mortality  distribution.  The  economic  development  index  refers  to  the  first  principal  component  from  a 

11,153 

11,153 

 

 

 

17 

principal  components  analysis  on  per  capita  GDP,  infant  mortality  rate,  improved  sanitation,  life  expectancy  at  birth,  and  health 
expenditure as percentage of the GDP. This aggregate measure captures 70 percent of the total variance of the variables.  

Table 5. Twin-fixed effects estimates of the effect birth weight on parental investments (by mother’s education) 

 
 

 
 
 

LN(Birth weight) 

 
 
N 
 
 
LN(Birth weight) 

No. of  

immunizations 

(1) 

 

96.641 

[37.701]** 

17,779 

 

 

105.891 

At least one  
Immunization 

(2) 

Panel A: Baseline estimates 

 

10.992 

[5.270]** 

17,779 

 

Panel B: Results for low-education parents 

 

12.483 

Completely  
immunized 

(3) 

 

19.276 

[7.725]** 

17,779 

 

 

24.133 

[43.507]** 

[6.157]** 

[8.121]*** 

 
 
N 
Notes. Robust standard errors in brackets (***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1) are clustered at the mother level. All coefficients and 
standard errors are multiplied by 1,000 to make them easier to read.  All regressions use twin-fixed effects and control for child’s 
sex and gender-specific birth order dummies. Results from Panel B are based on a sample restricted for twins whose mothers have 
12 years of schooling or less.  

14,627 

14,627 

14,627 

 

 

 

Table 6. Twin-fixed effects estimates of the effect birth weight on parental investments (the potential role of measurement error) 

  

 
  
 
 

LN(Birth weight) 

 
 
N 
 
 
LN(Birth weight) 

 
 
N 
 
 
LN(Birth weight) 

 
 
N 

  

No. of  

immunizations 

(1) 

 

96.641 

[37.701]** 

17,779 

 
 

81.923 

[38.742]** 

16,340 

 
 

130.773 

[51.477]** 

8,533 

 
  

At least one  
immunization 

(2) 

Panel A: Baseline estimates 

 

10.992 

[5.270]** 

Panel B: Births in health facilities 

 
 

 
 

17,779 

11.829 

[5.359]** 

16,340 

17.395 

[8.064]** 

8,533 

 
  

Panel C: Children under 24 months of age 

Completely  
immunized 

(3) 

 

19.276 

[7.725]** 

17,779 

 
 

13.000 
[7.820]* 
16,340 

 
 

20.003 

[10.926]* 

8,533 

 
  

Notes.  Robust  standard  errors  in  brackets  (***p  <  0.01,  **p  <  0.05,  *p  <  0.1)  are  clustered  at  the  mother  level.  All  coefficients  and 
standard errors are multiplied by 1,000 to make them easier to read. All regressions use twin-fixed effects and control for child’s 
sex and gender-specific birth order dummies.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

18 

Table 7. Twin-fixed effects estimates of the effect birth weight on parental investments (Alternative specifications) 

 

 
 
 
 

Birth weight (in grams) 

 
 
 
Birth weight <1500 

 
 
Birth weight 1500-2000 

 
 
Birth weight 2000-2500 

 
 
Birth weight 2500-3000 

 
 
Birth weight 3000-3500 

 
 

 

  

  

 

 
 
 
LN(Birth weight) 

 
 
Mean of dependent variable 
N 

 
 
LN(Birth weight) 

No. of  

immunizations 

At least one  
immunization 

Completely  
immunized 

(1) 

0.037 

 
 

[0.016]** 

(3) 

0.004 

 
 

[0.002]* 

(5) 

0.008 

 
 

[0.003]** 

(2) 

 
 
 
 
 
 

-134.464 
[64.415]** 

-96.323 

 

[41.622]** 

 

 

-39.646 
[33.520] 
-33.192 
[34.500] 
-5.221 
[32.025] 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(4) 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

-14.673 
[8.343]* 
-7.826 
[5.115] 
-2.855 
[3.975] 
-1.725 
[3.927] 
-0.35 
[3.631] 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(6) 

 
 
 
 
 
 

-25.917 

[12.435]** 

 

 

-21.547 
[8.979]** 
-11.814 
[7.513] 
-8.957 
[7.195] 
-4.401 
[6.904] 

 

 

 

Notes.  Robust  standard  errors  in  brackets  (***p  <  0.01,  **p  <  0.05,  *p  <  0.1)  are  clustered  at  the  mother  level.  All  coefficients  and 
standard errors are multiplied by 1,000 to make them easier to read.  All regressions use twin-fixed effects and control for child’s 
sex and gender-specific birth order dummies. There are 17,779 twins. 

APPENDIX 

Table A1. Results by individual dose (DPT and polio) 

Polio 1 

(1) 

 
 
  14.687    
 [5.981]**  
 
   17,763    

0.90 

Vaccinations 

Polio 2 

(2) 

Polio 3 

(3) 

DPT 1 

(4) 

DPT 2 

(5) 

Panel A: Twin sample with family fixed effects 

 
 
  12.703    
 [6.380]**  
 
0.83 
   17,745    

 
 
  12.761    
 [5.932]**  
 
0.71 
   17,745    

 
 
   8.635    
 [6.010]    
 
0.88 
   17,763    

 
 
  14.533    
 [6.929]**  
 
0.82 
   17,744    

Panel B: Singleton sample with family fixed effects 

DPT 3 

(6) 

 
 
  11.907    
 [6.526]*   
 
0.73 
   17,740    

 
   7.396    
 [3.405]**  
 
  308,136    

0.90 

 
  16.334    
 [4.224]*** 
 
  307,756    

0.82 

 
  15.504    
 [5.197]*** 
 
  307,755    

0.69 

 
   9.958    
 [3.597]*** 
 
  308,144    

0.88 

 
 
Mean of dependent variable 
N 
Notes. Robust standard errors in brackets (***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1) are clustered at the mother level. All coefficients and 
standard errors are multiplied by 1,000 to make them easier to read. Sibling-fixed effects regressions control for child’s sex and 
age, and gender-specific birth order dummies. Twin-fixed effects regressions control for child’s sex and gender-specific birth order 
dummies.  

 
  15.635    
 [4.175]*** 
 
  307,817    

0.82 

 
  20.991    
 [4.809]*** 
 
  307,745    

0.73 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

19 

Table A2. Twin-fixed effects estimates of the effect of birth weight on parental investments (Excluding surveys with higher 

rates of missing data on birth weight) 

 

 
 
 

LN(Birth weight) 

 
N 

 
LN(Birth weight) 

 
N 

 
LN(Birth weight) 

 
N 

 
LN(Birth weight) 

 
N 

 
LN(Birth weight) 

 
N 

 
LN(Birth weight) 

No. of  

immunizations 

(1) 

96.641 

[37.701]** 

17,779 

At least one  
immunization 

(2) 

Panel A: Baseline results 

10.992 

[5.270]** 

17,779 

Completely  
immunized 

(3) 

19.276 

[7.725]** 

17,779 

Panel B: Excluding surveys with missing rates higher than 90 percent 

96.780 

[37.736]** 

17,765 

11.014 

[5.275]** 

17,765 

19.298 

[7.731]** 

17,765 

Panel C: Excluding surveys with missing rates higher than 80 percent 

97.604 

[38.166]** 

17611 

11.125 

[5.334]** 

17611 

19.389 

[7.819]** 

17611 

Panel D: Excluding surveys with missing rates higher than 70 percent 

105.420 

[39.824]*** 

16,732 

11.763 

[5.588]** 

16,732 

19.838 

[8.151]** 

16,732 

Panel E: Excluding surveys with missing rates higher than 60 percent 

97.809 

[40.811]** 

15,939 

11.145 
[5.775]* 
15,939 

18.424 

[8.446]** 

15,939 

Panel F: Excluding surveys with missing rates higher than 50 percent 

99.592 

[42.889]** 

 
N 
Notes. Robust standard errors in brackets (***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1) are clustered at the mother level. All coefficients and 
standard errors are multiplied by 1,000 to make them easier to read.  All regressions use twin-fixed effects and control for child’s 
sex and gender-specific birth order dummies.  

15,241 

11.718 
[6.072]* 
15,241 

15.956 
[8.715]* 
15,241 

Table A3. Twin-fixed effects estimates of the effect birth weight on parental investments (Selective mortality) 

 

 
 
 
 
 

LN(Birth Weight) 

 
 
N 
 
 
LN(Birth Weight) 

 
 
N 
 
 
LN(Birth Weight) 

 

Baseline 
estimates 

 

(1) 

96.641 

[37.701]** 

17,779 

 
 

10.992 

[5.270]** 

17,779 

 
 

19.276 

 

Including 
deceased 
infants 

(2) 

 
Bounds to account for mortality 
Upper 
Bound 

Lower 
bound 

 

(3) 

(4) 

Panel A Number of immunizations 

266.532 

[68.701]*** 

18,315 

 
 
Panel B: At least one immunization 

 
 

34.634 

[9.202]*** 

11.616 

[5.181]** 

18,315 

 
 

36.659 

Panel C: Completely immunized 

56.659 
[43.984] 
18,315 

18,315 

 
 

5.141 
[9.505] 
18,315 

 

273.676 

[75.169]*** 

18,315 

 
 

38.743 

[10.640]*** 

18,315 

 
 

32.268 

[10.366]*** 

[7.725]** 

[10.292]*** 

 
 
N 
Notes. Robust standard errors in brackets (***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1) are clustered at the mother level. All coefficients and 
standard errors are multiplied by 1,000 to make them easier to read.  All regressions use twin-fixed effects and control for child’s 
sex and gender-specific birth order dummies.  

18,315 

18,315 

17,779 

 

 

 

 

20 

