Analysis of the strategic use of forward 
contracting in electricity markets 

Miguel Vazquez 
Instituto de Economia, Universidade Federal de Rio de Janeiro. 
Av. Pasteur, 250 – Urca, RJ, 22290-240. 
Miguel.vazquez.martinez@gmail.com 

Michelle Hallack 
Facultad de Economia, Universidade Federal Fluminense. 
R. Tiradentes, 17 – Niterói, RJ, 24210-510. 
Corresponding author: michelle.hallack@gmail.com 

 

ABSTRACT 

When  oligopolistic  producers  anticipate  the  effects  of  forward  sales  on  spot  prices,  they  may  react  in  the 
forward market to compensate for the spot price reduction. In this situation, forward prices are not the (risk-
affected) expectation of future spot prices, which is contrary to no-arbitrage pricing theory. However, we will 
show  that  it  does  not  represent  arbitrage  opportunities,  and  that  players’  profits  are  equivalent  to  the  ones 
obtained  in  the  no-forward-trade  case.  The  paper  also  considers  that,  when  past  spot  prices  are  signals  of 
future spot prices, the equilibrium often results in the spot prices of the no-trade case.  

JEL classification: C72, C73, G13, L13, L14, L50, Q40 
Key words: Forward markets, oligopoly, private information 
1. 

Introduction 

Absence of arbitrage can be thought of as the fundamental tool to describe financial markets. The 
no-arbitrage  price  of  any  financial  contract  represents  players’  valuation  of  the  uncertain  future 
income stream that will result from the contract. As a part of the calculation of these valuations, a 
risk-neutral probability might be defined that modifies the real probability to incorporate the effects 
of  players’  preferences  (risk  aversion,  etc.),  see  for  instance  Duffie  (2001).  But  the  previous 
reasoning  is  based  on  considering  future  income  streams  as  exogenously  defined  variables.  When 
spot  markets  do not behave under the assumption  of  perfect  competition, future  income streams 
might depend on players’ strategic interaction, and thus risk-neutral probabilities might be affected 
by  such  interaction.  For  instance,  the  risk-neutral  price  of  a  forward  contract  is  the  expected  spot 
price  at  the  expiration  of  the  contract,  with  respect  to  the  risk-neutral  measure.  This  condition 
represents a situation where players cannot obtain riskless profits (arbitrage) just by benefiting from 
forward and spot price differences, as markets are supposed to rule out these opportunities. But the 
above  argument  rests  on  the  assumption  that,  once  players  have  entered  into  the  contract, 
incentives in the spot market remain the same. To put it another way, the above reasoning implies 
that  the  effects  of  strategic  behavior  are  restricted  to  the  spot  market  or,  equivalently,  that  all 
possible  strategies  concern  only  production  decisions,  whereas  financial  markets  do  not  introduce 
any gaming opportunity. When assuming so, the usual same-price condition is still valid, so that the 
modeling of strategic behavior can be restricted to the analysis of spot behavior, regardless financial 
market decisions.  

 

1 

The  relationship  between  forward  and  spot  market  has  been  widely  discussed  in  the  electricity 
industry with different aims. One of the most discussed issues is whether or not the use of forward 
market decreases players’ opportunities to exercise market power. We cope with this problem and 
we  show that,  the strategic interaction that characterizes  most  power  markets  casts  doubt on the 
possibility  to  separate  spot  and  financial  decisions,  and  hence  on  the  direct  application  of  no-
arbitrage pricing to power markets.  

After this introduction, we review the literature in section 2. Section 3 will describe the game for the 
interaction  between  the  forward  and  spot  markets  by  means  of  a  two-period  model.  It  is  shown 
that,  when  producers  set  the  forward  price,  there  is  a  strategic  premium  associated  with  the 
anticipation  of  spot  market  responses  to  forward  contracting,  which  makes  forward  prices  depart 
from  expected  spot  prices.  Section  4  shows  that  the  condition  “forward  price  is  equal  to  (risk 
affected) expected spot price” might not hold when players behave strategically in the spot market. 
The logic for this is that, although price differences might result in non-convex market sets, this does 
not  imply  the  existence  of  arbitrage  opportunities,  as  it  happens  under  perfect  competition1, 
because market players cannot take advantage of such non-convexities. Section 5 then continues by 
showing  that,  when  players  anticipate  that  forward  sales  reduce  spot  price,  they  can  react  in  the 
forward market to compensate for the spot price decrease, so that players profits are, considering 
both  forward  and  spot  markets,  equivalent  to  the  ones  obtained  in  the  case  where  no  forward 
trading  is  allowed.  In  addition,  section 6  develops  a  refinement  of  the  game  based  on  the 
consideration  of  private  information.  The  logic  for  this  model  is  that,  when  considering  private 
information, past spot  price  reveals information  regarding  competitors’ parameters, and thus they 
are  signals  of  the  probability  of  future  spot  prices.  Consequently,  a  decrease  in  the  spot  price  will 
make the forward price lower. Therefore, there is an additional incentive when playing in the spot 
market  associated  with  the  sensitivity  of  forward  prices  to  past  spot  decisions.  Section  7  collects 
some final remarks and analyzes the policy implications of the results obtained in the paper.   

Interaction between forward and spot markets 

2. 
Most of the early works on the interaction between forward and spot markets tackled the problem 
using a two-period game where players decided in both markets simultaneously --Anderson (1991) is 
a survey of these works. But Allaz (1992) and Allaz and Vila (1993) can be considered as the starting 
point of a long-lasting discussion on whether the existence of forward contracts limits the ability of 
players  to  exercise  market  power.  Allaz  and  Vila  (1993)  explicitly  modeled  the  forward-spot 
interaction as a sequence of markets, and concluded that the possibility to trade forward contracts, 
even  in  markets  without  uncertainty,  forces  market  players  to  behave  more  competitively. 
Moreover,  an  infinite  number  of  consecutive  forward  markets  before  the  spot  market  clearing 
would result in perfectly competitive spot prices. The problem can be related  to the more general 
analysis  of  Bulow,  et  al.  (1985)  and  Fudenberg  and  Tirole  (1984).  Both  works  discussed  on  the 
problem  of  whether  two  consecutive  markets  result  in  more  competitive  outcomes  than  two 
simultaneous  markets.  According  to  these  models,  and  assuming  that  forward  sales  lower  rival’s 
profits,  the  pro-competitive  effects  of  sequential  trading  depend  on  whether  spot  market 
competition is modeled as a price or quantity game. From this standpoint, if firms are assumed to 
compete in quantities in the spot market, the results obtained in Allaz and Vila (1993)remain valid. 
Mahenc  and  Salanié  (2004),  on  the  contrary,  considered  a  model  where  firms  compete  in  prices. 
They  obtain  that,  in  this  case,  firms  buy  electricity  in  the  forward  market  and  the  outcome  is  less 
efficient  than  in  absence  of  forward  trading.  Along  these  lines,  Holmberg  (2008)  investigates  the 
consequences  of  considering  supply  function  competition 2 in  a  two-period  problem,  and  he 

                                                             
1 See for instance Magill and Quinzii (2002) 

2 Originally,  Klemperer  and  Meyer  (1989)  developed  the  concept  of  supply  function  equilibrium  as  a 
compromise  between  price  and  quantity  competition,  suggesting  that  in  an  uncertain  environment  firms 

 

2 

concludes,  in  agreement  with  Bulow,  et  al.  (1985)  and  Fudenberg  and  Tirole  (1984),  that  the 
strategic effects depend on the way in which players compete in the spot market. Newbery (1998) 
also developed a supply function model to describe forward and spot markets interaction. His work, 
nonetheless,  aimed at analyzing the role  of forward  contracts  as entry barriers. He concludes  that 
the  only  incentive  of  producers  to  enter  into  forward  contracts  was  to  make  the  market  less 
contestable.  Green (1999) shows that considering supply functions competition in the spot market 
and  Cournot  conjectures  in  the  forward  market,  result  in  no  forward  contracting  for  risk-neutral 
producers.  Kamat  and  Oren  (2004)  and  Yao,  et  al.  (2007)  develop  models  with  the  same  strategic 
setup  as  the  Allaz-Vila’s  model  and  obtain  the  same  results  concerning  strategic  effects,  but  they 
consider a very detailed representation of the power system characteristics. 

All previous proposals build on the representation of a market with two periods. In addition, there 
are  several  refinements  of  the  two-period  model  that  are  aimed  at  analyzing  the  effects  of 
considering many periods. Ferreira (2003) considers a model where producers have the opportunity 
to trade forward in infinitely many periods before the spot market takes place. This model, although 
formally  similar  to  the  one  analyzed  in  Allaz  and  Vila  (1993),  considers  an  infinite  horizon  directly 
instead  of  as  the  limit  of  the  two-period  case.  In  this  setting,  Ferreira  (2003)  obtains  that  many 
outcomes  can  be  sustained  in  equilibrium.  Moreover,  when  firms  are  not  allowed  to  buy  in  the 
forward  markets,  the  Cournot  outcome  is  a  renegotiation-proof3 equilibrium.  The  infinite  horizon 
model suggests considering the effects of repetition in the forward-spot interaction. This is the main 
idea behind Le Coq (2004) and Liski and Montero (2006). On the one hand, Le Coq (2004) considers 
that  forward  markets  open  once  at  the  initial  period,  and  then  producers  compete  in  prices  in  a 
repeated spot market. On the other, Liski and Montero (2006) analyzes the infinite repetition of the 
two-period  game  defined  by  the  sequence  of  a  forward  and  a  spot  market.  Although  these  works 
differ in the setup of the game, their basic message is quite similar i. e. the repetition of the game 
facilitates  to  coordinate  strategies.  The  logic  for  these  models  is  that  forward  sales  reduce  the 
incentive  of  firms  to  deviate  from  collusion,  as  contracts  limit  the  players’  profits  during  the 
deviation period. A refinement of the previous argument is suggested in Green and Le Coq (2009), 
where  the  effects  associated  with  the  length  of  the  forward  contract  is  analyzed.  When  firms  are 
allowed  to  enter  into  long-term  forward  contracts,  there  is  an  additional  effect  on  the  collusive 
behavior.  In  their  analysis,  long-term  contracts  are  a  protection  during  the  punishment  period,  so 
that collusion is harder to sustain. Under this model, thus, it is difficult to anticipate the result of the 
trade-off between the pro- and the anti-collusive incentives. 

On the other hand, private information has not played an important role in the analysis of forward-
spot  interactions.  Hughes  and  Kao  (1997)studies  the  role  of  observability  in  the  analysis  of  the 
forward-spot  interaction.  In  particular,  they  argue  that  if  market  players  do  not  observe  rivals’ 
forward positions, the equilibrium of the game is the Cournot outcome (when considering Cournot 
competition in the spot market). Ferreira (2003) and Ferreira (2006), challenge the model by arguing 
that, even when forward positions are not observable, the results obtained by Allaz-Vila’s model still 
hold.  Zhang  and  Zwart  (2006)  study  a  model  where  a  monopolist  is  forced  to  sell  part  of  her 
production forward, and where her costs are private information. They show that, in this case, the 
monopolist has the incentive to  raise the price,  to build the reputation of having  high  costs,  along 
the lines of Kreps and Wilson (1982) and Milgrom and Roberts (1982). 

  

                                                                                                                                                                                              
would not want to commit with either of these strategies, but instead firms would specify supply functions, 
i. e. functions specifying the bid price corresponding to each possible output. 

3Loosely,  a  renegotiation-proof  equilibrium,  which  is  defined  in  Bernheim  and  Ray  (1989)  and  Farrell  and 
Maskin (1989) for repeated games and extended in Ferreira (2003) for extensive form games, is the one that 
results in the highest profits with respect to the rest of sub-game perfect equilibria. 

 

3 

 

 

 

3.  Two-period game setup and equilibrium conditions 

3.1  Firms’ behavior 

This section will discuss the analysis of the financial problem in a two-period setting, considering that 
quantity  decisions  in  the  spot  market  affect  spot  prices,  and  hence  forward  prices.  The  time-
uncertainty setting is defined by two periods and S possible alternatives at date 1 (spot market). The 

possible states at date 1 will be denoted byݏൌ1,…,ܵ.Date 0 (forward market) will be considered to 
be  state  0,  so  that  we  will  have  S  +  1  states, ݏ′ൌ0,1,…,ܵ.  This  formulation  aims  to  represent  a 

situation where players decide on their contracts at date 0 subject to the uncertainty of date 1. 

In order to motivate the need for considering spot market reactions to forward positions, let us first 
analyze the classical financial model where such reactions are not taken into account. The revenue 
stream  at  date  zero  will  be  defined  by  the  income  associated  with  forward  sales,  denoted  by 

ܴ଴௜ ൌ݌ிݍ௜, where ݌ிis the forward price and ݍ௜are firm݅’s forward sales4. At date 1, the spot market 
takes place, where the revenues in each future stateݏൌ1,…,ܵare denoted byܵ݌݋ݐ௦௜ and the price 
by ߨ௦ . In addition, player ݅ has a preference ordering on the revenues set ܴ௜ ൌܴ଴௜,…,ܴௌ௜ , and we 

will assume that the ordering can be expressed by a utility function: 

This  utility  function,  thus,  defines  the  producers’  preferences  for  each  state  of  nature,  and  it  is 
assumed transitive, convex and complete. The profit-maximization problem of market players can be 
represented by the program: 

ܷ௜∶	࣬ௌାଵ⟶࣬ 

݉ܽݔோೞ೔,௤೔ ܷ௜൫ܴ௦ᇱ௜൯
ܴ଴௜ൌ	݌ிݍ௜
ݏ.ݐ.
ܴ௦௜ൌ	ܵ݌݋ݐ௦௜െߨ௦ݍ௜
డோೞᇲ೔ ൌߣ௦௜,			ݏ′ൌ0,1,…,ܵ 
డ௎೔൫ோೞᇲ೔ ൯

:ߣ଴௜
:ߣ௦௜  

(1) 

(2) 

The  optimality  of  problem  (1)  with  respect  to  revenues ܴ௦௜ gives  the  definition  of  the  Lagrange 

multipliers: 

As Lagrange multipliers are marginal utilities at date 0 of an additional unit of spot profits, they can 

instance Magill and Quinzii (2002). Besides, to keep the notation simple, we will assume hereinafter 

The  optimality  conditions  of  problem  (1)  with  respect  to  forward  sales  give  the  definition  of  the 

be thought of as discount factors for each state of nature. No-arbitrage conditions impose that each 

ߣ௦௜ is  a  positive  value,  which  is  equivalent  to  the  condition  that  problem  (1)  has  a  solution,  see  for 
that ߣ଴௜ ൌ1(this simply says that, at date 0, market players’ utility function is the identity function).  
డ௤೔ ൌ0, the forward price is given by5 
forward price. When it is assumed that  డௌ௣௢௧ೞ೔
݌ிൌ∑
ௌ௦ୀଵ

                                                             
4 Note  that  producers  are  allowed  to buy  and  sell forward; there  are  no  limitations  on  the  forward  positions 

ߨ௦  

ߣ௦௜

 

(3) 

 

that producers may take. 

5 Note  that  the  relationship  between  optimality  condition  (3)  and  risk-neutral  probabilities  needs  just  a 
normalization  of  the  Lagrange  multipliers,  so  that  each  of  them  represents  artificially  constructed 
probabilities, see for instance Duffie (2001). 

 

4 

 

 

 

 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

The objective of this section is to identify how this result changes when an oligopolistic equilibrium is 

considered.  In  order  to  take  into  account  the  effects  of  market  power  in  the  spot  market,  we  will 

consider a more detailed description of spot market revenues. Thus, we will define  

ܵ݌݋ݐ௦௜ൌ൫ߨ௦ െܿ௦௜൯ܳ௦௜ 
ܴ௦௜ൌ	൫ߨ௦ െܿ௦௜൯ܳ௦௜െߨ௦ݍ௜ 

where ܳ௦௜ is the total production of firm ݅in state ݏ, ܿ௦௜is the corresponding variable cost. Hence, the 

detailed expression for revenues at each state of date 1 is given by: 

For notational simplicity, we will include the constraint ܴ଴௜ ൌ݌ிݍ௜in the primal problem by assuming 

the  corresponding  multiplier  equal  to  one,  so  that  the  firms’  profit-maximization  problem  can  be 
described by the following model:  

݉ܽݔோೞ೔,௤೔ ݌ிݍ௜൅ܷ௜൫ܴ௦௜൯
ݏ.ݐ.

ܴ௦௜ൌ	൫ߨ௦ െܿ௦௜൯ܳ௦௜െߨ௦ݍ௜

:ߣ௦௜  

Following the above reasoning, the Lagrange multipliers represent the players’ marginal utility. The 

డ௤೔ ്0.  In 
main  difference  with  respect  to  the  perfect  competition  problem  is  that,  in  general డௌ௣௢௧ೞ೔
particular, spot market reactions are defined by the derivatives డொೞ೔డ௤೔ andడగೞడ௤೔ . In Vazquez (2011), these 

derivatives  are  obtained  under  both  Cournot  and  conjectural  variation  competition,  and  the 
consequences of different assumptions on the forward-spot interaction. For the sake of exposition, 
this paper will assume that players compete à la Cournot, although no result developed hereinafter 
makes use of such assumption.  

The firm’s optimality of problem (6) with respect to forward sales is given by 

݌ிൌ∑
ௌ௦ୀଵ

ߣ௦௜

ߨ௦ െ∑

ௌ௦ୀଵ

ߣ௦௜

൜డொೞ೔డ௤೔ ൫ߨ௦ െܿ௦௜൯൅డగೞడ௤೔ ൫ܳ௦௜െݍ௜൯ൠ 

In contrast to the perfect-competition case, which states that forward prices are the present value of 
future payoffs –in this  case, future spot prices–,  optimality condition (7) states that present values 
are modified by the present values of spot market reactions. They are made up of two terms: 

equilibrium  production.  Contracting  an  additional  megawatt  changes  the 
production of the firm, which is affected by the difference between the spot price 
and the production cost 

•  డொೞ೔డ௤೔ ൫ߨ௦ െܿ௦௜൯ represents  the  profits  variation  associated  with  the  change  of 
•  డగೞడ௤೔ ൫ܳ௦௜െݍ௜൯ is  the  change  of  profits  associated  with  the  change  of  spot  price. 
That is, the change of spot prices affects the infra-marginal quantity ൫ܳ௦௜െݍ௜൯ 

Equation (7) says that optimal forward prices, in general, take account of the spot market response, 
so they are determined not only by the present value of future prices, but in addition by the present 
value of market responses. Thus, the premium with respect to the (risk-affected) expected spot price 
depends both on the profits increase due to the increased production, and on the decrease of prices 
due  to  the  loss  of  incentives  to  exercise  market  power.  Hence,  market  players  have  two  opposite 
incentives to deviate from spot price present value: on the one hand, forward contracting increase 
the firms’ total production, and thus spot sales, so they can reduce forward prices to compensate for 

 

5 

these  extra  profits;  on  the  other,  forward  contracting  reduces  spot  prices,  so  market  players  have 
the incentive to raise forward prices. 

The spot market will be represented by a Cournot model. We will model a linear demand curve at 

each state of nature ܦ௦ , with a slope given at each state of nature by ߙ௦ : 

Under such conditions, it is possible to obtain, as in any other Cournot model, the spot optimality for 
the firms: 

ܦ௦ ൌܦ௦଴െ ଵఈೞ ߨ௦  
ߨ௦ ൌܿ௦௜൅ߙ௦൫ܳ௦௜െݍ௜൯ 

 

(8) 

 

 

where it can be observed that forward positions do affect spot output decisions. The consequences 
of  assuming  different  behavior  in  spot  markets  are  analyzed,  among  others,  by  Holmberg  (2008), 
who used a supply function equilibrium, and by Vazquez (2011), who used a conjectural variations 
equilibrium. 

The forward market is defined by an inelastic demand ܦி .The main idea behind that representation 

is that power consumers are often significantly risk averse, so that they prefer to hedge certain parts 
of their portfolios in advance. This is the typical situation of a power retailer who needs to hedge the 
price risk. Thus, all price elasticity is represented in the spot market, whereas the forward position is 
given as a fixed parameter.  

3.2  Equilibrium conditions 

 

The set of optimality conditions defined by the equations corresponding to the optimality conditions 
of all players defined in (7) and (8), added to the two definitions of the quantity demanded both in 
the  forward  and  the  spot  market,  allows  solving  the  game.  The  solution  of  this  game  provides 
forward and spot  prices, in addition to forward  and spot  quantities. Qualitatively,  the idea behind 
this  equilibrium  is  players’  bids  in  the  forward  market  are  defined  by  the  marginal  cost  of  the 
contract, as defined by (7), which is made up both of the price expectations and of the expectations 
on  spot  market  responses.  Thus,  in  this  initial  model,  market  players  are  assumed  to  bid 
competitively in the forward market, even when the spot market is oligopolistic. Section 5will relax 
this assumption, but the main objective of the following section is to show that just by considering 
oligopolistic spot markets, no-arbitrage conditions do not imply that the forward price is equal to the 
expected spot price. 

4.  Absence of arbitrage and market power 
From the financial theory under perfectly  competitive spot markets, if forward prices are different 
from  the  expected  spot  price,  there  will  be  arbitrage  opportunities.  We  will  investigate  in  this 
section whether that conclusion can be extended to the case of oligopolistic spot markets. To do so, 
we will consider the geometric interpretation of absence of arbitrage.   

⁄

Under  the  assumption  of  perfect  competition,  no-arbitrage  conditions  can  be  obtained  by 
representing  all  possible  trades  available 
in  the  market  by  means  of  the  market  set 

〈ࣧ〉௉஼ൌሼ݀∈࣬ௌାଵ ݀ൌࣧݍ
ሽ ,  where ݀  is  the  income  transfer  associated  with  the  forward 
contract, ࣧ is the payoff matrix6, and ݍis the quantity contracted. To simplify the exposition, let me 
consider  that  there  is  just  one  future  state,  so  that ݏൌሼ0,1ሽ.  Hence, ݀will  be  a  vector  with  two 
dimensions. That is, it will be made up of the income transfer associated with date 0, ݀଴ൌ݌ிݍ, and 

                                                             
6 In this case, it would be a vector containing the forward price and the spot prices at each state of nature with 

the negative sign. 

 

6 

the  transfer  associated  with  the  unique  state  at  date  1, ݀ଵൌെߨݍ.  This  market  set  is  a  linear 

subspace, and it is represented in Figure 1by the dotted line. 

d1

π−

π− q

Fp

Fp q

d0

Figure 1. Market set with and without market power opportunities. 

 

It is possible to state absence of arbitrage as a geometric property of the market set, namely that the 

market  set  does  not  intersect  the  non-negative  orthant ࣬ௌାଵ.  That  is,  if  the  set  representing  all 
〈ࣧ〉௉஼⋂࣬ௌାଵൌሼ0ሽ.  Hence,  no-arbitrage  implies  that  the  market  set  must  be  separable  from  the 

possible  trades  –the  market  set–  intersects  the  non-negative  orthant,  trades  in  intersection  are 
arbitrage opportunities, in the sense that they are opportunities to obtain riskless profits (e. g. the 
opportunity to obtain revenues at date 1 without a cost at date 0). Markets are assumed to rule out 
these opportunities for free profits. Formally, the definition of absence of arbitrage can be written as 

positive  orthant.  From  the  Separating  Hyperplane  Theorem,  see  for  instance  Luenberger  (1984), 
nonconvex sets cannot be separated in general. That is, when the trades available to market players 
are represented  by  a nonconvex  market set, a  possible  strategy  is to build a  portfolio made  up  of 
linear  combinations  of  the  contracts  lying  in  the  market  set,  which  in  general  would  intersect  the 
non-negative  orthant  (and  thus  would  yield  arbitrage  opportunities).  Therefore,  under  perfect 
competition, no-arbitrage implies that the trades available in the market must be represented by a 
convex set.  

It is possible to use the same reasoning to analyze forward prices when the assumption of  perfect 
competition in the spot market is relaxed. For the sake of explanation, let me consider that the total 
effect of spot price responses is a positive value: 

In this case, equation (7) implies that ݌ி൏ߣ௜ ߨ, and thus the income transfer at date 1 would be  

ߣ௜ ൜డொ೔డ௤೔ ൫ߨെܿ௜൯൅ డగడ௤೔ ൫ܳ௜ െݍ௜൯ൠ൐0 
݀ଵൌെߨݍ൅൜డொೞ೔డ௤೔ ൫ߨ௦ െܿ௦௜൯൅డగೞడ௤೔ ൫ܳ௦௜െݍ௜൯ൠݍ௜  

 

 

(9) 

(10) 

as represented by the solid line inFigure 1.However, the market set represented by the model is not 
a convex one, which in the perfect-competition case implied arbitrage opportunities, because it was 
possible  to  build  a  portfolio  made  up  of  linear  combinations  that  intersected  the  non-negative 
orthant. 

 

7 

id1

i
Bqπ

B

F i
p q
A A

F i
p q−
B B

i
Aqπ−

A

id0

 

Figure 2. Convexity of the market set in oligopolistic spot markets. 

Figure 2 represents the kind of portfolio required to benefit from the non-convexity of the  market 

correspond  to  the  typical  strategy  used  to  motivate  absence  of  arbitrage,  i. e.  buying  and  selling 
simultaneously the same commodity). However, both points require that the player behaves in the 
spot  market  according  to  each  single  contracting  decision,  i. e.  that  she  decided  her  spot  market 

set.  Such  portfolio  would  be  the  combination  of  positions ܣ and ܤ(note  that  these  positions 
productionܳ௜  as if she had bought quantity ݍ஻௜ in the forward market, and at the same time, as if she 
had  sold  quantity ݍ஺௜ in  the  forward  market.  But,  as  the  spot  market  takes  place  once  all  forward 

decisions are made, the producer will play taking into account her net position, which is contrary to 
the  assumptions  regarding  her  contract  position  made  to  determine  the  forward  prices  (the  ones 
represented  by  the  market  set).  Therefore,  assuming  that  players  are  sequentially  rational  means 
that is not possible to build a portfolio from the combination of two (or more) points of the market 
set. Or, conversely, that the market set changes when several positions are taken at the same time.  

We can conclude that, when forward decisions have an influence on spot prices, nonconvex market 
sets arise that do not represent arbitrage opportunities, so having forward prices different from the 
expected spot prices can be a plausible market equilibrium. 

This  kind  of  analysis  can  be  related  to  similar  approaches  in  the  context  of  General  Equilibrium 
Theory.  Building  on  the  model  described  in  Shapley  and  Shubik  (1977),  Koutsougeras  (2003b)  and 
Koutsougeras (2003a) have proposed that market prices might not be equalized when firms behave 
strategically. These works study the problem of price behavior when there is more than one market 
for  each  commodity  (which  they  called  trading  posts).  In  the  case  of  electricity  markets,  this 
corresponds to multiple forward markets to trade electricity. The conclusion of these works is that, 
when  firms’  strategies  change  future  spot  prices,  absence  of  arbitrage  does  not  necessarily  imply 
that  the  forward  price  is  the  expected  spot  price.  In  addition,  price  differences  do  not  represent 
arbitrage opportunities, because when players try to take advantage of them, prices react dissipating 
such arbitrage opportunities. Note that this is essentially the same conclusion obtained above. The 
problem  above  can  be  identified  with  a  market  with  two  different  trading  posts  (the  forward  and 
spot  markets).  Although  both  prices  might  be  different,  if  players  try  to  take  advantage  of  the 
arbitrage  opportunities  the  prices  react  to  compensate  for  the  change  of  strategy.  In  contrast, 
Gobillard  (2006)  argued  that  the  result  in  Koutsougeras  (2003b)  is  motivated  by  players  trading  in 
both  the  supply-  and  demand-side  of  each  market,  which  he  considered  implausible  in  real 
commodity  markets.  In  the  problem  of  this  section,  it  is  natural  to  consider  players  supplying 
electricity in the forward market and purchasing electricity in the spot market.  

To support the price equality condition, it is often claimed that considering a significant number of 
arbitrageurs results in forward prices equal to the expectation of spot prices.  The rationale behind 

 

8 

this  is  that  arbitrageurs  can  be  modeled  as  players  having  almost  no  incentive  to  manipulate  spot 
prices, so that their optimality conditions imply that forward are equal to spot prices. In addition, it 
is claimed that, even if the spot prices increase because of the strategies of oligopolists, the forward 
price  is  set  by  arbitrageurs’  optimality.  It  is  worth  to  analyze  the  conditions  on  the  forward  price 
formation  required  to  satisfy  such  result.  From  the  spot  market  point  of  view,  arbitrageurs  are 
assumed  to  trade  a  small  quantity  to  have  no  effect  on  the  oligopolistic  prices.  From  the  forward 
market point of view, arbitrageurs are assumed to trade a large enough quantity to set the forward 
price. Both assumptions are compatible only in the case that power producers trade a small enough 
quantity in the forward market. In such a case, all the strategic effects related to forward contracting 
discussed in this paper are irrelevant. In a more general case, with relevant forward trade by power 
producers,  arbitrageurs  will  not  be  capable  of  eliminating  all  differences  between  forward  and 
expected  spot  prices.  Note  that  a  possible  active  risk-neutral,  non-strategic  demand,  choosing  the 
cheapest  market  to  buy  electricity  would  play  the  same  role  as  the  arbitrageurs,  and  hence  the 
above reasoning could be used also in that case. 

 

5.  Optimal forward price response to forward positions 
The  model  described  in  section  3  has  assumed  that  power  producers  have  no  incentive  to  raise 
forward  prices.  Relaxing  this  assumption  requires  a  slight  generalization  of  the  price  equation 
defined above. To do so, we will use the same profit-maximization problem (6), but considering the 
ability  of  producers  to  manipulate  the  forward  price.  In  this  case,  the  first-order  optimality 
conditions are 

݌ி൅డ௣ಷడ௤೔ ݍ௜ ൌ∑
ௌ௦ୀଵ

ߣ௦௜

ߨ௦ െ∑
ௌ௦ୀଵ

ߣ௦௜

൜డொೞ೔డ௤೔ ൫ߨ௦ െܿ௦௜൯൅డగೞడ௤೔ ൫ܳ௦௜െݍ௜൯ൠ 

rest of the game, including the forward market clearing, has not changed. Equation (11) requires the 

where  the  new  term  representing  forward  market  powerడ௣ಷడ௤೔ ݍ௜  has  been  included.  Note  that  the 
definition of the forward price sensitivity డ௣ಷడ௤೔ . The aim of this section is to show that the incentive to 

raise forward prices is associated with compensating for the spot market response to forward sales. 
Loosely,  this  effect  follows  from  the  fact  that  the  optimal  forward  price  is  equal  to  the  contract 
payoff, which is the spot price expectation plus the expectation of spot market responses to forward 
contracting. When those responses result in lower profits, there is an incentive to compensate for 
the loss of profits.    

(11) 

 

Specifically,  we  will  consider  that  supply-side  players  in  the  forward  market  face  an  inelastic 
demand,  compete  in  quantities  and  assume  that  rivals  do  not  react  to  their  sales  decisions.  The 
central  point  of  this  section  is  to  show  that,  even  in  this  case  where  there  are  no  responses  to 
forward market  decisions,  players face a reaction  curve defined by their own  behavior in  the spot 
market. Relaxing this assumption will have only effects typically found in oligopoly models, and they 
will add to the ones described below.  

Consider a player solving the problem (6) in  order to decide on her bids in the forward market.  In 
addition,  consider  first  that  the  player,  when  doing  so,  assumes  that  forward  prices  have  no 
sensitivity  to  forward  sales  decisions.  In  this  case,  she  obtains  the  price  equation  (7).  This  price 
equation can be re-interpreted as expressing that forward price is equal to the marginal cost of the 
contract7. That is, the right-hand side of equation (11) represents the price that the producer would 

pay to undo her position. Let us denote this cost by ܿி,௜, so that 

                                                             
7Note that marginal cost refers to the contract payoff, i. e. it is not only the production cost but also includes 

the strategic behavior in the spot market. 

 

9 

ߨ௦ െ∑

ௌ௦ୀଵ

ߣ௦௜

൜డொೞ೔డ௤೔ ൫ߨ௦ െܿ௦௜൯൅డగೞడ௤೔ ൫ܳ௦௜െݍ௜൯ൠ 

 

ܿி,௜ൌ∑
ߣ௦௜
ௌ௦ୀଵ
and equation (7) is ݌ிൌܿி,௜. 
ߣ௦௜

 

ܿி,௜ൌ∑
ௌ௦ୀଵ
൬ߙ௦ െ డொೞ೔డ௤೔ ߙ௦ െడగೞడ௤೔൰. 
ߣ௦௜

F orward cont ract

is െ∑
ௌ௦ୀଵ

Using the spot optimality conditions (8), the previous equation can be expressed as 

൛ܿ௦௜൅ߙ௦൫ܳ௦௜െݍ௜൯ൟെ∑
ௌ௦ୀଵ

ߣ௦௜

൜డொೞ೔డ௤೔ ߙ௦ ൅డగೞడ௤೔ൠ൫ܳ௦௜െݍ௜൯ 

The  marginal  cost  contains  both  the  spot  price  and  the  spot  price  reactions  to  forward  decisions. 
Hence, it is possible to represent the cost of the contract as in Figure 3, where the slope of the curve 

(12) 

(13) 

cost

F ic ,∆

iq∆

Quant it y
cont ract ed

 

Figure 3. Marginal cost of forward contract as a function of forward sales. 

If the player observes Figure 3, she knows that an extra megawatt sold in the forward market will 
lower the marginal cost of the contract. That is, as forward sales lower the incentive to raise the spot 
price, the cost of undoing her position will be lower. Therefore, they do reduce the contract cost and 
hence  the  forward  price.  In  turn,  as  the  forward  price  is  reduced,  the  revenues  associated  with 
forward sales will be also reduced. Hence, the player modifies her conjecture to take account of the 
slope of the marginal cost curve, by observing equation (13), so that  

Using this conjecture, the optimality conditions of problem (6) are 

൬ߙ௦ െ డொೞ೔డ௤೔ ߙ௦ െడగೞడ௤೔൰ 

ߣ௦௜

డ௣ಷడ௤೔ ൌെ∑
ௌ௦ୀଵ
൫ܿ௦௜൅ߙ௦ܳ௦௜൯െ∑
݌ிൌ∑
ߣ௦௜
ௌ௦ୀଵ
ௌ௦ୀଵ

ߣ௦௜

൬డொೞ೔డ௤೔ ߙ௦ ൅డగೞడ௤೔൰ܳ௦௜  

 

 

In that case, the conjecture is consistent with the final optimality condition.  

By  considering  (14),  the  agent  translates  to  the  forward  market  the  loss  of  market  power 

which differs from (7) in the fact that the relevant quantity is the total output ܳ௦௜  instead of ܳ௦௜െݍ௜ . 
opportunities derived from forward contracting. To put it another way, if the quantity ݍ௜  were sold 
ݍ௜ in the forward market, the player sets a price that compensates for the loss of profits, so that her 

profits  selling  forward  are  equal  to  the  ones  that  she  obtained  when  she  did  not  enter  into  any 
forward  contract.  Loosely,  when  market  players  sell  forward  and  do  not  consider  forward  price 
sensitivity, they are implicitly loosing market power opportunities. Selling forward implies that this 
amount  of  energy  will  not  be  affected  by  the  manipulation  of  spot  prices,  so  that,  under  the 

in the spot market, the equilibrium would imply greater prices and lower productions. When selling 

(14) 

(15) 

 

 

10 

assumption of no-forward-price-sensitivity, producers move production from a market (spot) where 
they are oligopolists to a market (forward) where prices are not manipulated. Expression (15) shows 
that  forward  prices  are  the  expected  spot  price  considering  that  all  production  is  sold  in  the  spot 
market, but discounting the spot market response: the extra profits from the increased production 
and the  cost of price decrease. In addition, it can be alternatively thought of as the no-trade price 
modified by the change of the spot market equilibrium. Therefore, although spot prices are actually 
reduced,  forward  prices  compensates  for  the  corresponding  loss  of  profits.  Informally,  this  is  a 
revenue-equivalence-like result: agents’ profits will be the same regardless the market where they 
sell their output. Hence, although the efficiency –in terms of system  costs–  can be  improved from 
the  viewpoint  of  an  isolated  market,  the  whole  set  of  markets,  in  absence  of  uncertainty,  will  be 
equivalent to the case without forward trading.  

6.  The role of private information 
The  previous  section  has  analyzed  the  forward-spot  interaction  assuming  perfect  information.  In 
particular,  it  showed  that  when  players  are  allowed  to  set  their  optimal  forward  price,  market 
players internalize the spot market response to forward sales, resulting in an outcome equivalent to 
the  no-trade  case.  Nonetheless,  each  equilibrium  results  in  the  same  profits  as  the  corresponding 
no-trade  solution,  but  forward  prices  depend  on  the  particular  forward  position.  This  section  is 
aimed at introducing an additional refinement of the game. In particular, the objective is to show the 
effects of considering private information. 

The spot market outcome can be thought of as the aggregated signal about rivals’ costs and strategic 
parameters. Describing the uncertainty in a multi-period market by an event-tree8, the primary idea 
behind the model of this section is that the probability associated with each node of the event-tree 
is a personal belief rather than input data, and such beliefs change when players observe spot prices. 
From  this  viewpoint, a similar problem  can be found in auction theory models. Auctions  are often 
thought  of  as  games  with  private  information:  bidders  observe  some  private  signal,  which  is  then 
used to infer the value of  the auctioned object. This is usually modeled in the context of Bayesian 
games,  using  an  objective  probability  distribution  giving  the  signal  probability  conditional  to  the 
object  value.  The  same  idea  can  be  used  to  model  the  problem  of  this  section.  That  is,  the 
probabilities that each producer assigns to the states of nature are conditioned to the last spot price 
observed in the market: 

߰ൌ߰௜ሺ݊ ߨሺ݊ିሻ

⁄

ሻ 

 

where ߰௜is the probability distribution  of player ݅, ݊ is  the node of the event-tree and ߨሺ݊ିሻis the 
spot price at the antecessor of ݊. These probabilities are objective probabilities, and hence the utility 

defined  over  the  states  are  objective.  In  general,  the  probability  distribution  will  be  different  for 
each market player. In addition, we assume that players update their beliefs according to the Bayes’ 
Law.  

(16) 

6.1  Spot market game under private information 

The representation is based on considering that, at each node of the event-tree, a spot market takes 
place and, after the spot market clearing, market players have the opportunity to trade in a forward 
market. Such forward market is assumed to have neither liquidity constraints nor transaction costs. 
Thus,  the  portfolio  evolution  can  be  represented  by  means  of  its  capital  value.  In  addition,  the 
forward  price  is  zero  at  terminal  nodes.  In  this  situation,  the  problem  can  be  represented  by  the 
multi-period version of the problem (6): 

                                                             
8 The event-tree notation is described in detail in the Appendix.  

 

11 

 

݉ܽݔ ቀߨሺ݊଴ሻെܿ௜ሺ݊଴ሻቁܳ௜ሺ݊଴ሻ൅݌ிሺ݊଴ሻݍ௜ሺ݊଴ሻ൅ܷ௜ቀܴ௜ሺ݊ሻቁ

ܴ௜ሺ݊ሻൌቀߨሺ݊ሻെܿ௜ሺ݊ሻቁܳ௜ሺ݊ሻ൅݌ிሺ݊ሻݍ௜ሺ݊ሻെቀߨሺ݊ሻ൅݌ிሺ݊ሻቁݍ௜ሺ݊ିሻ
ܴ௜ሺ݊ሻൌቀߨሺ݊ሻെܿ௜ሺ݊ሻቁܳ௜ሺ݊ሻെߨሺ݊ሻݍ௜ሺ݊ିሻ
߲ܳ௜ሺ݊ሻቀܳ௜ሺ݊ሻെݍ௜ሺ݊ିሻቁെ߲݌ிሺ݊ሻ
is, it  would be necessary to take into account thatడ௎೔ቀோ೔ ሺ௡శሻቁ

:ߣ௜ሺ݊ሻ,݊∉்ܰ
:ߣ௜ሺ݊ሻ,݊∈்ܰ
Let  us  analyze  spot  market  decisions  at  the  intermediate  nodes݊∉்ܰ.  The  first-order  optimality 
conditions with respect to production decisions ܳ௜ሺ݊ሻare the following: 
߲ܳ௜ሺ݊ሻቀݍ௜ሺ݊ሻെݍ௜ሺ݊ିሻቁെ 1ߣ௜ሺ݊ሻ߲ܷ௜ቀܴ௜ሺ݊ାሻቁ
ߨሺ݊ሻൌܿ௜ሺ݊ሻെ ߲ߨሺ݊ሻ
߲ܳ௜ሺ݊ሻ
డொ೔ሺ௡ሻ ്0.The effects of that term are not 

First, it is important to highlight that the statement of probabilities dependent on past spot prices 
introduces  a  signaling  game  between  consecutive  spot  markets.  In  the  model  developed  in  this 
section, these effects might be expressed by means of the utility derivative in the next period. That 

directly  related  to  the  analysis  of  the  spot-forward  strategic  interaction,  as  it  would  exist  even  if 
there were no possibility to trade forward. That is, if this effect were considered, it would represent 
an additional strategic effect in the spot market, i. e. the incentive to raise the spot price to increase 
future spot profits, which would appear even without the opportunity to trade forward. As the main 
objective  of  this  thesis  is  to  analyze  the  forward-spot  interaction,  we  will  disregard  the  effect. 
Therefore, the optimality can be simplified to yield 

 

ߨሺ݊ሻൌܿ௜ሺ݊ሻെ డగሺ௡ሻ

డொ೔ሺ௡ሻቀܳ௜ሺ݊ሻെݍ௜ሺ݊ିሻቁെడ௣ಷሺ௡ሻ

డொ೔ሺ௡ሻቀݍ௜ሺ݊ሻെݍ௜ሺ݊ିሻቁ 

(17) 

The  last  term  of  the  previous  equation  represents  the  effects  of  spot  market  decisions  on  the 
subsequent forward market. It is the analogue to the term representing the spot market power: the 
ability  to  manipulate  the  forward  price  by  withholding  spot  production  times  the  quantity  sold 
forward in that node of the event-tree.  

We will assume that the incentive to manipulate the forward price at a  certain node of the event-

consider that no renegotiation is possible: then, the capital value is intended to represent that there 

tree  is  defined  just  by  the  quantity  sold  in  that  node, ݍ௜ሺ݊ሻ.  To  see  the  logic  for  this  assumption, 
is  no  change  in  the  portfolio  over  time,  so  both  quantities ݍ௜ሺ݊ሻൌݍ௜ሺ݊ିሻ are  approximately  the 

same and the last term would be small. This is equivalent to a two-period model, and this case was 
analyzed in the previous section. The other extreme case is when all contracts in the forward market 
expire in the next period (modeled as all successors). In this case, the capital value is zero. We will 
concentrate herein in the latter situation in order to analyze the effects related to the renegotiation 
of  the contracts.  When liquidity  constraints are considered, which is the  typical situation  in power 
markets (where the forward contracts available in the market are often written on the average spot 
price of several periods), the effects studied below would involve only the part of the portfolio that 
can be renegotiated. In general, the results will be something intermediate between the two-period 
case and the results of this section. Therefore, when the quantity representing the capital value of 
the portfolio is not included, the spot market optimality can be written as 

ߨሺ݊ሻൌܿ௜ሺ݊ሻെ డగሺ௡ሻ

డொ೔ሺ௡ሻቀܳ௜ሺ݊ሻെݍ௜ሺ݊ିሻቁെడ௣ಷሺ௡ሻ

డொ೔ሺ௡ሻݍ௜ሺ݊ሻ 

(18) 

 

As in the two-period case, We will represent the spot market competition by a Cournot model, so 
that equation (18) can be recast as 

 

12 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ߨሺ݊ሻൌܿ௜ሺ݊ሻ൅αሺ݊ሻቆܳ௜ሺ݊ሻെݍ௜ሺ݊ିሻ൅డ௣ಷሺ௡ሻ

డగሺ௡ሻݍ௜ሺ݊ሻቇ 

The  right-hand  side  of  equation  (19)  can  be  interpreted  as  the  marginal  cost  at  node ݊ plus  the 
effect  of  exercising  market  power  in  the  spot  market.  That  is, αሺ݊ሻis  the  ability  of  player ݅ to 
manipulate the spot price at node ݊, and the rest of the terms are the incentives to manipulate it. 

These terms have  changes with respect  to the two-period  case. The first two terms are the  same, 
namely  the  production  sold  at  the  spot  price.  The  last  term  is  a  new  effect  related  to  the 
consideration  of  private  information.  It  represents  the  fact  that  players’  beliefs  about  the 
probabilities of future states of nature change when they observe the spot price.  

(19) 

 

(20) 

 

Hence, it is necessary to define the forward price derivative with respect to output decision. To do 
so, let us consider the optimality condition with respect to forward quantities: 

 

݌ிሺ݊ሻൌ ଵఒ೔ሺ௡ሻ∑

௡ᇱ∈ேశሺ௡ሻ

డ௤೔ ሺ௡ᇲషሻቀߨሺ݊ᇱሻെܿ௜ሺ݊ᇱሻቁ൅
ߣ௜ሺ݊′ሻ൞ߨሺ݊ᇱሻ൅ డொ೔ሺ௡ሻ
ൢ
డ௤೔ ሺ௡ᇱషሻቀܳ௜ሺ݊ሻെݍ௜ሺ݊′ିሻቁ
డగሺ௡ᇱሻ

6.2  Players maximizing expected utilities 

beliefs  about  future  probabilities,  which  in  turn  change  the  utility  associated  with  each  state  of 

డగሺ௡ሻ ്0. To 
The main effect that this section analyzes is that, in presence of private information, డ௣ಷሺ௡ሻ
put  it  another  way,  after  producers  observe  the  spot  market  results  at  node ݊,  they  update  their 
nature. Therefore, at all successors డఒ೔ሺ௡శሻ
one hand, their actual forward position ݍ௜ሺ݊ିሻlowers the quantity that benefits from a higher spot 

డగሺ௡ሻ ്0 and the forward price will be affected.  

price.  On  the  other,  a  high  spot  price  makes  more  likely  a  high  price  in  the  future.  Next,  We  will 
analyze in detail the latter incentive. We will analyze the case where the utility function of all market 
players  is  the  expected  utility,  and  they  define  their  probabilities  to  be  conditioned  to  the 
observation of past spot price. In addition, players are risk-neutral. The possible consequences of the 
generalization of this model will be explored in section  

Thus, compared to the case without forward trading, players have two opposite incentives. On the 

In this case, the producers’ marginal utility function is  

Hence, the forward price derivative can be expressed as 

ሻ 

ߣ௜ሺ݊ሻൌడ௎೔ቀோ೔ሺ௡ሻቁ
⁄
డோ೔ ሺ௡ሻ ൌ߰௜ሺ݊ ߨሺ݊ିሻ
డ௤೔ ሺ௡ሻቀߨሺ݊ାሻെܿ௜ሺ݊ାሻቁ൅
డగሺ௡ሻ ൞ߨሺ݊ାሻ൅డொ೔ሺ௡శሻ
డ௤೔ ሺ௡ሻቀܳ௜ሺ݊ାሻെݍ௜ሺ݊ሻቁ
డగሺ௡శሻ
డ௤೔ ሺ௡ሻቀߨሺ݊ାሻെܿ௜ሺ݊ାሻቁ൅
డగሺ௡ሻ ൞ߨሺ݊ାሻ൅డொ೔ሺ௡శሻ
డ௤೔ ሺ௡ሻቀܳ௜ሺ݊ାሻെݍ௜ሺ݊ሻቁ
డగሺ௡శሻ

ൢ

డగሺ௡ሻ ൌ ଵఒ೔ሺ௡ሻ∑ డఒ೔ሺ௡శሻ
డ௣ಷሺ௡ሻ

௡శ

డగሺ௡ሻ ൌ ଵట೔∑ డట೔ሺ௡శሻ
డ௣ಷሺ௡ሻ

௡శ

(21) 

(22) 

ൢ

 

 

(23) 

 

In addition, using equation (21), the forward price sensitivity is 

The previous expression is made up of three terms: 

 

13 

 

 

•  The first one is the change in the risk-affected expectation of future spot prices 
•  The second one is the perceived sensitivity of forward prices to production decisions 
•  The third one is the perceived sensitivity of forward prices to spot price reactions 

The  last  two  terms  represent  the  change  in  the  valuation  of  spot  market  reactions  to  forward 
contracting,  which  follows  from  changes  in  output  decisions  in  the  present  spot  market.  When 
power producers are deciding on the production of the present spot market, they take into account 
that higher spot prices today will likely imply higher spot prices tomorrow. But this would also imply, 
in  general,  different  needs  for  internalization  in  the  next  forward  market.  Nonetheless,  it  is  more 
difficult for power producers to take into account the change in spot reactions than the change in 
the expected spot price. Furthermore, it is important to highlight that this would have no effect in 
players’ revenue, as any change in the future spot market situation can be internalized in the next 
forward market. 

We will assume hereinafter that players take account of the change in the expected spot price, but 
they disregard the change in its derivatives at future nodes of the event-tree. Formally, 

∑ డట೔ሺ௡శሻ
௡శ

డగሺ௡ሻ ൜డொ೔ሺ௡శሻ

డ௤೔ ሺ௡ሻቀߨሺ݊ାሻെܿ௜ሺ݊ାሻቁ൅డగሺ௡శሻ

డ௤೔ ሺ௡ሻቀܳ௜ሺ݊ାሻെݍ௜ሺ݊ሻቁൠ

ൌ0 

Consequently,  it  is  possible  to  assume  that  power  producers  do  not  update  their  perceptions  of 
future reactions, because they are able to internalize in the next forward price any possible loss of 
market  power  related  to  forward  sales.  To  put  it  another  way,  it  is  possible  to  consider  bounded 
rationality, and to assume  that  players take account  of the  change in the expected spot price, but 
they disregard  the change in  its  derivatives. In addition, it will  be shown  that,  under some further 
assumptions, spot prices do not depend on forward contracting decisions, and thus there is no spot 
market  sensitivity  to  forward  sales.  Hence,  assuming  no  update  of  spot  reactions  would  be 
sequentially  rational.  The  above  expression  can  be  understood  as  a  situation  where  the  market 
players  assume  that  the  net  effect  of  their  spot  signals  is  a  change  in  the  (risk-affected)  expected 
spot price. Therefore, the forward price sensitivity is  

డగሺ௡ሻ ൌ ଵట೔∑ డట೔ሺ௡శሻ
డ௣ಷሺ௡ሻ

డగሺ௡ሻ ߨሺ݊ାሻ

௡శ

 

(24) 

 

Denoting the term defined by equation (24) by ߜሺ݊ሻ, equation (19) can be rewritten as 

ߨሺ݊ሻൌܿ௜ሺ݊ሻ൅αሺ݊ሻቀܳ௜ሺ݊ሻെݍ௜ሺ݊ିሻ൅ߜሺ݊ሻݍ௜ሺ݊ሻቁ 

 

(25) 

Thus, the effect of the next markets is to reduce the relevant forward position and, hence, increase 
the incentives to raise the spot price. In fact, let us  consider that 

•  The expected update of future probabilities after the observation of present spot 
prices,  time  the  spot  price  at  each  node  of  the  event-tree,  is  equal  to  one, 

ߜሺ݊ሻൌ1 
•  The forward position remains stable from one period to the next, ݍ௜ሺ݊ିሻൌݍ௜ሺ݊ሻ 

In this situation, when producers are risk neutral when deciding on spot market, the equilibrium is 
the same as the one obtained in the no-trade case. 

On the one hand, ߜሺ݊ሻൌ1 represents that an increase of 1€ in the spot price today will change the 

price expectation for tomorrow in 1€. This implies that the market conditions that caused a high spot 
price will remain the same in the next period and raise the next spot price. For instance, a change in 
the strategy of any certain player that caused a 1€ increase in the price of today, will cause the same 
increase in the price of tomorrow, assuming that the rest of the conditions remain stable. Therefore, 

 

14 

 

ߨሺ݊ሻൌܿ௜ሺ݊ሻ൅αሺ݊ሻቀܳ௜ሺ݊ሻെݍ௜ሺ݊ିሻ൅ݍ௜ሺ݊ሻቁ 

(26) 

On the other hand, from (25), it is possible to observe that the relevant quantity in terms of market 
power  is  the  portfolio  change  with  respect  to  the  previous  period.  In  periods  of  stable  forward 
strategies,  it  yields  the  Cournot  solution.  When  the  forward  portfolio  is  being  reduced,  the  spot 
market is more competitive than Cournot, but in periods of an increase of the forward position the 
spot prices are higher than Cournot. In practice, forward positions do not change dramatically over 
time, except for certain few specific periods (often linked to a regulatory change in the liberalization 
process). For the general analysis, these specific periods may be disregarded. Most trading periods, 
on the other hand, would show stable portfolios.   

Assuming both stable portfolios and equation (25), the spot optimality yields 

 

(27) 

 

ߨሺ݊ሻൌܿ௜ሺ݊ሻ൅αሺ݊ሻܳ௜ሺ݊ሻ 

which is the same optimality result that is obtained when there is no forward trading. As, in addition, 
spot  prices  do  not  depend  on  forward  positions,  forward  prices  are  given  by  the  traditional  no-
arbitrage condition. 

6.3  General utility functions 

 

 

Previous results have been obtained by assuming that players maximize their expected utility, and 
that they are risk-neutral. Note that this does not imply that market players are risk-neutral, but that 
they consider risk neutrality when deciding in the spot market. Let us discuss on the consequences 
of considering more general utility functions. In order to determine the forward price sensitivity to 

spot  prices,  it  is  necessary  to  define డఒ೔ሺ௡శሻ
డగሺ௡ሻ ,  which  is  quite  a  difficult  task  in  the  general  case, 
especially because the Lagrange multipliers ߣ௜ሺ݊ሻ, representing the marginal cost of profits at nodes 
݊with respect to the initial nodes, are not just the probability of the node. They take account of the 
ሻܴ௜ሺ݊ାሻ

risk attitude of producers. It is worth to use as an example the case of quadratic utility, so that 

ሻܴ௜ሺ݊ାሻଶ

௡శ

 

 

െଵଶߚ∑ ߰௜ሺ݊ା ߨሺ݊ሻ
ܷ௜ቀܴ௜ሺ݊ାሻቁൌ∑ ߰௜ሺ݊ା ߨሺ݊ሻ
⁄
⁄
௡శ
ߣ௜ሺ݊ାሻൌడ௎೔ቀோ೔ ሺ௡శሻቁ
డோ೔ ሺ௡శሻ ൌ߰௜ሺ݊ାሻൣ1െߚܴ௜ሺ݊ାሻ൧ 
డగሺ௡ሻ ߨሺ݊ାሻ
డగሺ௡ሻ ൌ ଵఒ೔ሺ௡ሻ∑ డట೔ሺ௡శሻ
డ௣ಷሺ௡ሻ

െ ఉఒ೔ሺ௡ሻ∑ డట೔ሺ௡శሻ
డగሺ௡ሻ

௡శ

௡శ

ߨሺ݊ାሻܴ௜ሺ݊ାሻ 

 

so that 

 

In this case, it is possible to define 

The first term in the right-hand side represents the present value of the sensitivity of the expected 
profits to actual spot prices. In the case of risk-neutral producers, this term was approximately equal 
to one. In this case, however, the present value contains the attitude towards risk of market players, 
so that the valuation of this sensitivity will depend on their preferences. To put it another way, when 
valuating  the  expected  profits  sensitivity,  producers  use  a  discount  factor  that  represents  their 

preferences.  In  this  case,  the  discount  factor  is 1െߚܴ௜ሺ݊ାሻ.  Therefore,  this  term  is  in  general 

different  from  one,  and  thus  there  is  a  net  effect  of  forward  sales  on  spot  strategies.  The  second 
term  represents  the  present  value  of  the  sensitivity  of  the  profits  covariance  with  respect  to  spot 
prices. As shown in Bessembinder and Lemon (2002), such covariance can be related, by means of a 
Taylor  expansion,  to  spot  price  variance  and  skewness.  That  is,  risk-averse  producers  will  take 
account of the fact that manipulating the moments of future spot prices changes their valuation of 

 

15 

(28) 

 

(29) 

 

(30) 

future profits. Moreover, general utility functions might imply the consideration of other moments 
(kurtosis...).  

7. 

Final remarks and policy implications 

One of the primary objectives of all previous developments is to analyze the incentives for forward 
trading in oligopolistic markets. In particular, they aim at answering the question of whether forward 
trading is motivated only by hedging purposes or even risk-neutral players have strategic incentives 
to  trade  forward.  Most  of  the  works  analyzing  the  forward-spot  interaction  assume  that  the  no-
arbitrage condition under perfect competition directly generalizes to the oligopolistic case. Thus, the 
model imposes that forward and spot prices are the same. This serves as the condition to clear the 
forward  market  regardless  the  particular  model  for  the  forward  demand.  However,  this  simplified 
version  of  no-arbitrage  implicitly  defines  forward  incentives,  and  thus  determines  the  strategic 
behavior in forward markets. In this paper, we have relaxed this assumption to show that it is not 
enough that forward trading results in lower spot prices to obtain outcomes that are more efficient. 
It  is  also  necessary  that  players  do  not  raise  the  forward  price  to  compensate  for  the  lower  spot 
prices, and that there is no incentive to give signals to future forward  negotiation through present 
spot prices.  

The paper has  shown that the assumption that the incentive to  manipulate the forward  price at a 
certain node of the event-tree is defined just by the quantity sold in that node, requires liquidity of 
the power market. To obtain the result that firms’ profits are the same as in the no-trade case we 
assumed  that  the  portfolio  remains  stable.  When  these  assumptions  do  not  hold,  there  is  a 
dependence of forward prices and spot strategies, and then the effect described in the two-period 
model  is  activated.  What  we  have  done  is  two  separate  two  effects:  when  there  is  renegotiation, 
then  the  private  info  model  is  activated.  If  there  is  no  renegotiation,  just  the  two-period  model. 
Typically, the real situation would be a combination of the two. In both cases, the pro-competitive 
effect is not present.  

We will use these ideas to investigate the consequences on policy making. Actually, the introduction 
of  forward  markets  has  been  proposed  as  a  means  to  mitigate  market  power,  and  usually  these 
proposals  are  based  on  the  theoretical  model  proposed  in  Allaz  and  Vila  (1993).  This  paper  has 
shown  that  such  pro-competitive  effect  rests  on  very  particular  assumptions.  Thus,  regulated 
forward contracting can be analyzed from the viewpoint of the following criteria:  

•  Whether the regulatory measure avoids the internalization in the forward price of 

the loss of spot market power opportunities 

•  Whether the measure destroy the signaling incentive of private information 

There  is  and  have  been  a  wide  range  of  regulatory  measures  that  imply  some  kind  of  regulated 
forward  contracting. From the viewpoint of the  analysis developed in the paper, there are,  on the 
one hand, measures imposing the obligation of writing forward contracts, but at a price determined 
by some kind of market-based mechanism -e. g. an auction-, and on the other, measures imposing 
the  obligation  of  forward  contracting  at  a  regulated  price.  The  difference  between  them  can  be 
studied  under  their  effects  on  the  internalization  incentive.  In  the  former  kind  of  measure,  the 
situation can be thought of as a two-period market, so that players can internalize the loss of market 
power by raising the forward price, so that the exercise of market power is equally high (in terms of 
system costs) as in the case with contracting obligation. In the latter kind of measure, the ability to 
internalize  the  loss  of  market  power  disappears.  Therefore,  with  a  regulated  price  for  forward 
contracts, the opportunities of exercising market power are reduced.  

Another relevant feature of these measures is the contract duration, because it affects the signaling 
incentive.  Actually,  short  duration  contracts  imply  that  there  is  an  incentive  to  raise  spot  prices 

 

16 

caused by the signaling game. On the other hand, large durations eliminate the incentive, as players 
cannot manipulate the forward price by driving up the spot price. In the case of forward contracting 
at a regulated price, if such price is constant, players have no ability to respond to the loss of market 
power associated with the contract, and thus the duration of the contract seems to be irrelevant.  

Nonetheless,  these  prices  are  often  actualized  every  time  the  contract  expires.  This  price 
actualization can be thought of as a renegotiation  of the contract, which might be manipulated by 
players  by  manipulating  the  corresponding  spot  prices.  Therefore,  in  this  case,  short  duration 
contracts will not destroy the signaling incentive, and the market will not be more competitive. Good 
examples  of  long-term  contracts  allocated  through  an  auction  are  reliability  forward  contracts,  or 
Virtual  Power  Plant  contracts.  In  principle,  they  will  not  be  able  to  eliminate  the  internalization 
effect, so that the profits of power producers will be the same as in the case without the contracting 
obligation. However, in presence of uncertainty, the internalization process will be more difficult for 
large durations. In particular, if players are risk averse, they will internalize the value of the loss of 
market  power.  If  they  are  risk  averse  and  the  uncertainty  is  large,  the  value  of  this  loss  will  be 
negligible. Vesting contracts are typical examples of a forward contract with regulated price. In this 
case,  as  both  the  price  and  the  quantity  are  fixed,  the  two  incentives  disappear  regardless  the 
duration of the contract. If, as in the previous case, the renegotiation process can be manipulated, 
then short durations will imply absence of the pro-competitive effect.  

References 

Allaz,  B.  (1992).  Oligopoly,  uncertainty  and  strategic  forward  transactions.  International  Journal  of 

Industrial Organization, 10: pp. 297-308. 

Allaz,  B.  and  Vila,  J.-L.  (1993).  Cournot  competition,  forward  markets  and  efficiency.  Journal  of 

Economic Theory, 59: pp. 1-16. 

Anderson, R. W. (1991). Futures trading for imperfect cash markets: a survey. In: Commodity, futures 

and financial markets. L. Philips (ed.), Kluwer Academic Publishers. 

Bernheim,  B.  and  Ray,  D.  (1989).  Collective  dynamic  consistency  in  repeated  games.  Games  and 

Economic Behavior, 1 (4): pp. 295-326. 

Bessembinder,  H.  and  Lemon,  M.  L.  (2002).  Equilibrium  pricing  and  optimal  hedging  in  electricity 

forward markets. Journal of Finance, 57 (3): pp. 1347-82. 

Bulow,  J.  I.,  Geanokoplos,  J.  D.  and  Klemperer,  P.  D.  (1985).  Multimarket  oligopoly:  strategic 

substitutes and complements. Journal of Political Economy, 93 (3): pp. 488-511. 

Duffie, D. (2001). Dynamic asset pricing theory (3rd edition). Princeton, Princeton University Press. 

Farrell, J. and Maskin, E. (1989). Renegotiation in repeated games. Games and Economic Behavior, 1 

(4): pp. 327-60. 

Ferreira,  J.  L.  (2003).  Strategic  interaction  between  futures  and  spot  markets.  Journal  of  Economic 

Theory, 108 (1): pp. 141-51. 

Ferreira, J. L. (2006). The role of observability in futures markets. Topics in Theoretical Economics, 6 

(1). 

Fudenberg, D. and Tirole, J. (1984). The fat cat effect, the puppy dog ploy and the lean and hungry 

look. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 74: pp. 361-8. 

Gobillard,  B.  (2006).  Wash-sales  and  the  law  of  one  price  in  multiple  trading  posts  per  commodity 

market games. University of Paris 10. Manuscript. 

Green,  R.  (1999).  The  electricity  contract  market  in  England  and  Wales.  Journal  of  Industrial 

Economics, 47: pp. 107-24. 

 

17 

Green,  R.  and  Le  Coq,  C.  (2009).  The  length  of  contracts  and  collusion.  International  Journal  of 

Industrial Organization, 28 (1): pp. 21-9. 

Holmberg, P. (2008). Game-theoretical,  strategic  forward contracting  in  the electricity  market. IFN. 

Working Paper 756. 

Hughes,  J.  S.  and  Kao,  J.  L.  (1997).  Strategic  forward  contracting  and  observability.  International 

Journal of Industrial Organization, 16 (121-133). 

Kamat,  R.  and  Oren,  S.  (2004).  Two-settlement  systems  for  electricity  markets  under  network 

uncertainty and market power. Journal of Regulatory Economics, 25 (1): pp. 5-37. 

Klemperer,  P.  D.  and  Meyer,  M.  (1989).  Supply  function  equilibria  in  oligopoly  under  uncertainty. 

Econometrica, 57 (6): pp. 1243-77. 

Koutsougeras,  L.  C.  (2003a).  Convergence  to  no  arbitrage  equilibria  in  market  games.  Journal  of 

Mathematical Economics, 39: pp. 401-20. 

Koutsougeras,  L.  C.  (2003b).  Non-Walrasian  equilibrium  and  the  law  of  one  price.  Journal  of 

Economic Theory: pp. 169-75. 

Kreps,  D.  M.  and  Wilson,  R.  B.  (1982).  Reputation  and  imperfect  information.  Journal  of  Economic 

Theory, 27. 

Le  Coq,  C.  (2004).  Long-term  supply  contracts  and  collusion  in  the  electricity  market.  Stockholm 

School of Economics. Working Paper Series in Economics an Finance 552. 

Liski, M. and Montero, J. P. (2006). Forward trading and collusion in oligopoly. Journal of Economic 

Theory, 131: pp. 212-30. 

Luenberger, D. (1984). Introduction to linear and nonlinear programming (2nd edition). Reading, MA, 

Addison-Wesley. 

Magill, M. and Quinzii, M. (2002). Theory of incomplete markets. MIT Press. 

Mahenc,  P.  and  Salanié,  F.  (2004).  Softening  competition  through  forward  trading.  Journal  of 

Economic Theory, 116: pp. 282-93. 

Milgrom,  P.  R.  and  Roberts,  D.  J.  (1982).  Predation,  reputation  and  entry  deterrence.  Journal  of 

Economic Theory, 27. 

Newbery, D. (1998). Competition, contracts and entry in the electricity spot market. RAND Journal of 

Economics, 29: pp. 726-49. 

Shapley, L. and Shubik, M. (1977). Trade using one commodity as a means of payment. The Journal 

of Political Economy, 85 (5): pp. 937-68. 

Vazquez, M. (2011). Analysis of forward prices in electricity markets by means of their fundamental 

drivers. PhD Thesis. PhD Thesis, Universidad Pontificia Comillas, Madrid. 

Yao,  J.,  Oren,  S.  and  Adler,  I.  (2007).  Cournot  equilibria  in  two-settlement  electricity  markets  with 

system contingencies. International Journal of Critical Infrastructures, 3 (1-2): pp. 142-60. 

Zhang, Y. and Zwart, G. (2006). Market power mitigation contracts and contracts duration. University 

of Toulouse. mimeo. 

 

 

 

18 

Appendix: Detailed event-tree notation 

As in the two-period model, the uncertainty associated with each period is described by means of a 

finite  set of  states 

=S

{
1, ...,

}S

, but  in  this  case,  the two-period  model  needs to be extended  in 

two ways: 

•  To consider more time periods, namely 

=T

{
1, ...,

}T

 

•  To define the concept of partial information 

The  latter  objective  can  be  achieved  by  considering  partitions  of  the  set  of  states.  Thus,  the 
unfolding of information is described by means of a sequence of partitions {

where 

, ...,

1,
F F

0

}T
F

=F

0

{
1, ...,

}S

, 

=F

T

{
{ }
1 , ...,

}
{ }
S

. An additional condition on the way the information unfolds is 

that it increases over time. Thus, 

t  is  the  subset  of  the  partition 
encontrada. represents an example of this idea.  

tF  is finer than 

. Therefore, the information available at time 
tF  in  which  the  state  s  lies.  Erro!  Fonte  de  referência  não 

t 1−F

St at es of

nat ure

0F

1F

2F

3F

Figure 4.A sequence of partitions for 4 periods and 4 states. 

Dat es

 

We  will  use  an  event-tree  approach  to  represent  this  information  process,  which  is  based  on 
considering  each  subset  of  the  sequence {
Fonte de referência não encontrada. shows the event-tree associated with the previous example.  

 as  a  single  node  of  an  event-tree.  Erro! 

}T
F

F F

, ...,

0

1

,

Figure 5.Event-tree corresponding to the sequence of partitions in Erro! Fonte de referência não encontrada.. 

Next,  we  will  define  some  concepts  and  notation  that  will  be  used  below.  These  definitions  are 
represented in Erro! Fonte de referência não encontrada.. 

 

•  Event-tree:  let 

=F

=F

0

{
1, ...,

}S

,  and 

{

,

0

F F

, ...,
1

}T
F
tF  finer  than 

t 1−F

 be  a  sequence  of  partitions  of  S ,  with 

.  For  each t ∈ T  and  for  each σ ∈ F , 

the pair 

n

)
t,σ=

(

 is a node. The set  N  consisting of all nodes is called an event-

tree 

 

19 

(

t,

)
σ

 

=

N U
∈
T
t
σ
∈
F

•  Predecessor: the unique node 

S is called the initial node. The set of non-

)

(

=

0,

n
+N .  For  each 
'σ σ⊃ .  Thus,  the  node 

)
t,σ

=

n

(

+

∈ N  there  is  a  unique 

− =

n

(

t

−

1,

'σ

)

 is  called 

initial  nodes  is  denoted  by 

subset 

'σ

−∈ F
t 1

 such  that 

the predecessor of  n  

•  Successor: a node 

n

)
T ,σ=

(

 with 

Tσ ∈ F  is called a terminal node, and the set 

of all terminal nodes is  

T

N

=

nodes  is  denoted  by 

−N .  For  each 

n

are defined by the set 

(
T ,

U
σ
∈
F
T
)
(
t,σ

=

)
σ

;  the  set  of  all  non-terminal 

−

∈ N ,  the  immediate  successors 

+ =

n

{
n

'

∈

N

n

'

=

(

t

+

1,

σ

)
' ,

}
σ σ

⊂

'

 

•  Subtree:  for  any  node  n ∈ N ,  the  set  of  all  nodes  that  succeed  n is  called  the 

subtree

)nN

(

 starting at  n  

N

(

n

)

=

{
n

'

∈

N

n

'

≥

n

}

 

•  The set of all strict successors of  n  is denoted by  

+

N

(

n

)

=

{
n

'

∈

N

(

n n

)

'

>

n

}

 

•  And the set of all non-terminal successors is  

−

N

(

n

)

=

{
n

'

∈

N

(

n n

)

∈

−N

−n

n

+n

−

}
N  

+N

n '
− n '
(

)

N

N

(

)n '

N

+ n '

(

)

 

Figure 6. Event-tree definitions. 

20 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

