Drought Shocks and School Performance in Brazilian Rural Schools1 
  

Danyelle Branco2                                       José Gustavo Féres3 

Abstract 

This  paper  aims  at  assessing  the  impact  of  drought  shocks  on  the  performance  of 
students  enrolled  in  Brazilian  Northeastern  rural  schools.  In  particular,  we  assess  how 
droughts  may  affect  students  achievement  as  measured  by  Prova  Brasil,  a  national 
standardized exam. Our results show that drought shocks are associated to lower scores 
on both mathematics and Portuguese exams. By investigating the potential transmission 
mechanisms underlying the relationship between weather shocks and school performance, 
we  observe  that  exposure  to  a  negative  rainfall  shock  increase  the  hospitalization  rate 
among  children.  In  addition  to  that,  severe  droughts  are  also  associated  to  higher 
probability of child work. Both health and job-market related effects may be associated 
to  lower  school  attendance  and  therefore  contribute  to  poor  student  achievement. 
Finally, our results provide suggestive evidence that drought tends to be more harmful 
to  children  that  study  in  schools  with  no  cistern  or  other  water  storage  devices. 
Therefore, investing in basic infrastructure like cisterns is a low-cost policy strategy that 
may  mitigate  the  negative  the  effects  of  droughts  and  improve  school  performance  in 
Northeastern Brazil. 
 
Keywords: extreme weather events; droughts; school performance. 

 

Resumo 

Este  trabalho  tem  como  objetivo  investigar  o  impacto  de  choques  de  seca  na 
performance  escolar  dos  estudantes  matriculados  nas  escolas  rurais  do  Nordeste 
Brasileiro. Em particular, avalia-se como as secas podem afetar as notas dos estudantes 
na  Prova  Brasil,  um  exame  padrão  nacional.  Os  resultados  mostram  que  choques  de 
seca  estão  associados  à  notas  mais  baixas  nos  exames  de  matemática  e  português.  Ao 
investigar os potenciais mecanismos de transmissão subjacentes à relação entre choques 
climáticos  e  desempenho  escolar,  observamos  que  a  exposição  a  um  choque 
pluviométrico  negativo  aumenta  a  taxa  de  hospitalização  entre  crianças.  Além  disso, 
secas severas também estão associadas à maior probabilidade de trabalho infantil. Tanto 
a saúde quanto os efeitos relacionados ao mercado de trabalho podem estar associados à 
menor frequência escolar e, portanto, contribuem para o baixo desempenho dos alunos. 
Finalmente, nossos resultados fornecem evidências sugestivas de que a seca tende a ser 
mais  prejudicial  para  as  crianças  que  estudam  em  escolas  sem  cisternas  ou  outros 
dispositivos  de  armazenamento  de  água.  Portanto,  investir  em  infraestrutura  básica 
como  cisternas  é  uma  estratégia  política  de  baixo  custo  que  pode  mitigar  os  efeitos 
negativos das secas e melhorar o desempenho escolar no Nordeste brasileiro. 
 
Palavras-chave: eventos climáticos extremos; secas; desempenho escolar. 
JEL codes: Q56; Q54; O15. 
Área ANPEC: Economia Social e Demografia Econômica  

                                                 
1 The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support provided by the Latin American and 
Caribbean Environmental Economics Program (LACEEP Senior Grant). The authors would also like to 
thank Duarte Costa for the efficient research assistance in the construction of the climate database, as well 
as Bladimir Carillo, Claudio Araujo and Miguel Foguel for the helpful suggestions. 
2 Universidade Federal de Viçosa. E-mail: danyellebranco@gmail.com.  
3 Instituto de Pesquisa Econômica Aplicada (IPEA). 

1 Introduction  
 
 
A consolidated body of research suggests that the risk of extreme events will rise 
with the increasing global average temperature (Coates et al., 2014; IPCC, 2013; Kreft 
et al., 2014; Marengo, 2009). Further, higher temperature variability could amplify the 
magnitude of  climate shocks. Changes in  the  frequency  and level  of these events  may 
cause  severe  damages  in  regions  that  are  vulnerable  to  harsh  climate  scenarios 
(Hallegatte  et  al.,  2007).  In  particular,  weather  shocks  can  have  serious  welfare 
consequences  in  both  the  short  and  the  long  runs  if  it  affects  education  production, 
children’s schooling, and accumulation of human capital. 
 
This  study  examines  how  weather  shocks,  more  specifically  drought  shocks, 
affect  educational  outcomes of children attending schools in  rural  Northeastern  Brazil. 
In  particular,  we  assess  how  droughts  may  affect  students  achievement  measured  by 
Prova  Brasil  scores  in  math  and  language,  a  national  standardized  exam.  We  believe 
that  focus  on  Northeastern  Brazil  provide  a  compelling  setting  to  investigate  the 
potential  impacts  of  extreme  weather  events.  This  is  the  driest  Brazilian  region  and  it 
has long been subject to harsh climatic conditions, with recurrent events of drought and 
rising temperatures (Ab’Sáber, 1999; Marengo, 2009). Brazilian Northeast is one of the 
most  populated  semi-arid  area  of  the  world,  where  more  than  23.5  million  inhabitants 
(12%  of  the  Brazilian  population)  are  living  (Ab’Sáber,  1999;  Correia  et  al.,  2011; 
Insa/MCTI,  2014).  Moreover,  there  is  plenty  of  anecdotal  evidence  showing  that 
schools  in  rural  semiarid  areas  are  forced  to  temporally  cease  activities  due  to  lack  of 
water  storage  infrastructure.  It  is  estimated  that  approximately  40.5%  of  all  public 
schools have no water storage devices such as water tanks and cisterns (Cipola, 1998). 
Such  disruptions  may  hamper  school  attendance  and  therefore  contribute  to  poor 
students  achievement.  Furthermore,  this  region  has  limited  social  safety  nets, 
consequently  households  face  credit  constraints  and  they  do  not  have  access  to  the 
portfolio of adaptation strategies available in more developed regions. 
 
We  hypothesize  that  drought  shocks  have  negative  impact  on  students 
achievement. There are different mechanisms through which climate change may affect 
child  schooling.  One  can  have  a  direct  effect,  known  as  "thermal  stress",  which  can 
cause  cognitive  impairment,  discomfort  and  fatigue  (Zivin  et  al.,  2018;  Zivin  and 
Shrader,  2016).  Another  potential  mechanism  is  school  supply.  Drought  shocks  may 
lead  schools  to  close  or  cease  activities  due  to  lack  of  water  for  consumption  and 
hygiene,  decreasing  the  educational  provision  and  making  impossible  for  the  children 
attend  school.  As  an  attempt  to  prevent  this,  the  governors  should  investing  in  basic 
infrastructure  like  cisterns.  Such  improvement  could  maintain  schools  open,  enriches 
learning and nurturing the environment of disadvantaged children.  
 
Second, we assess whether the scarcity of water could drive children to become 
sick.  Previous  studies  have  documented  the  relationship  between  weather  shocks  and 
health  outcomes.  Heat  waves  and  cold  waves,  for  instance,  could  directly  affect 
cardiovascular stress, respiratory diseases, and cerebrovascular diseases (Deschênes and 
Moretti,  2009).  Also,  indirect  impacts  could  be  associated  to  scarcity  and  lack  of 
adequate water supply, leading to  disruption on  agricultural  production, reducing food 
availability and increasing malnutrition (Rocha and Soares, 2015). The lack of drinkable 
water increases the risk of infectious diseases, such as diarrheal diseases. One estimated 
94%  of  the  diarrheal  disease  burden  in  developing  countries  are  associated  with  risk 
factors  such  as  unsafe  drinking  water,  lack  of  sanitation  and  poor  hygiene  (WHO, 
2008).  Furthermore,  extreme  events  could  contribute  to  the  persistence  of  infectious 
endemic diseases, such as dengue and leptospirosis, enhancing the region's vulnerability 

(Souza  et  al.,  2013).  If  drought  shocks  lead  to  higher  incidence  of  particular  diseases, 
this  could  reduce  school  attendance,  hindering  students  learning  and  delaying  their 
progress in school. 
 
As the last mechanism, we investigate whether the drought shocks are associated 
with  increased  child  labor.  According  to  the  luxury  axiom  (Basu  and  Van,  1999),  the 
reduction in the household income should increase child labor. A negative rainfall shock 
could  affect  agricultural  production  leading  to  a  drop  in  family  income.  As  a 
consequence, parents may need to increase their use of child labor, typically by having 
children  substitute  adult  labor  in  household  chores  or  farm  work,  for  instance.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  drought  shock  could  reduce  the  opportunity  cost  of  studying.  In  this 
case, parents may reallocate the child's time endowment to human capital accumulation 
rather than to labor market activities. Whether the income or substitution effect prevails 
is an empirical question.   
 
Identification requires that weather shocks, conditional on municipality and year 
fixed-effects, are not correlated with other latent determinants of students achievement. 
We  argue  that  this  is  plausible  insofar  as  parents  are  unlikely  to  anticipate  precisely  a 
rainfall shock at a given moment in time and place. One potentially important concern is 
that if for some reason the drought shocks lead only the low-performing students to take 
the exam, the estimated effect of drought on achievement at the end of the year may not 
capture  the  causal  impact  of  negative  shocks  on  learning.  We  address  this  issue  and 
there is very little evidence that this is the case. We make use of high frequency gridded 
information  on  precipitation  and  temperature  to  construct  a  municipality-by-year 
weather  dataset  which  then  is  combined  with  Prova  Brasil  microdata  and  Educational 
Census by using place and exam month. 
 
We focus our analysis on young students (fifth and ninth graders) from schools 
located in rural areas. We provide evidence for both grades that students  from schools 
that are exposed to drought shocks perform worse on standardized math and Portuguese 
exams.  A  one  standard  deviation  increases  in  the  number  of  drought  months  per 
academic  year  leads  to  a  reduction  of  0.39  and  0.27  percentage  points  in  math  and 
Portuguese scores, respectively, for fifth graders. For the ninth grade students, the effect 
of  drought  on  math  and  language  achievement  are  -0.29  and  -0.24  percentage  points, 
respectively. Our results also suggest that the shock effect seem to be more detrimental 
for  girls  and  those  students  with  lower  educated  mothers.  We  also  find  suggestive 
evidence that drought tends to be more harmful to children that study in schools with no 
cistern  or  other  water  storage  device.  Therefore,  investing  in  basic  infrastructure  is  a 
low-cost  policy  strategy  in  rural  areas  that  may  considerably  improve  school 
performance. The results do not seem to be driven by student selection and are robust to 
placebo tests. In particular, we find no association between drought that occurs after the 
exam and performance at the exam. 
 
By investigating the potential  transmission mechanisms linking weather shocks 
to  school  performance,  we  find  that  the  impact  of  negative  rainfall  shocks  on  child 
health    is  an  important  mechanism  driving  our  results.  Exposure  to  a  drought  shock 
increase the hospitalization rate among children. For instance, the estimate suggests that 
one more negative shock per  year increases by  2,6 per cent  the hospitalization rate by 
infectious  and  parasitic  diseases  per  1,000  inhabitants,  relative  to  mean  of  0.46.  In 
addition  to  that, one more drought  shock per  year is  associated to  a 4.24% increase in 
the  likelihood  of  a  child  being  employed.  Both  health  and  job-market  related  effects 
may be  associated to  lower school  attendance  and therefore  contribute to poor student 
achievements.   

Recent papers have addressed the relationship between general shocks (such as 
 
accidental crop loss, reduction in crop prices, economic crises) and children’s schooling. 
Kruger  et  al.,  (2012)  find  that  exogenous  shocks  to  local  economic  activity  are 
associated with increased child labor and reduced schooling, in Brazil. They also stress 
out that these shocks have even more strength in children living in rural areas. Duryea et 
al.,  (2007)  also  analyze  the  impact  of  household  economic  shocks  on  schooling  and 
employment  transitions  of  young  people  living  in  Brazilian  metropolitan  areas.  They 
show  that  an  unemployment  shock  significantly  increases  the  probability  that  a  child 
enters the labor force, drops out of school, and fails to advance in school. Guarcello et 
al., (2003) observe a similar response for households in Guatemala, and also point out 
that child labor has a high degree of persistence because children who are sent to work 
are  subsequently  less  likely  to  return  to  school.  de  Janvry  et  al.,  (2006)  show  that 
economic shocks have large effects in taking children out of school and induce they to 
increase their work participation in Mexico. They also find that the conditional transfers 
help  protect  enrollment,  but  do  not  refrain  parents  from  increasing  child  work  in 
response to shocks.     
 
Our results contribute to  an emerging literature that  documents the relationship 
between specific weather-related events and educational outcomes. Boutin, (2014) finds 
no relationship between climate change and school attendance in Malawi. However, she 
observe that climate vulnerability negatively affects child labor incidence and intensity, 
while  has  no  significant  impact  on  household  chores.  Shah  and  Steinberg,  (2017) 
investigate positive rainfall shocks in India and show that going from regular rainfall to 
a  positive  rainfall  shock  increases  wages  by  2%,  decreases  school  attendance  by  2 
percentage  points,  and  decrease  the  probability  that  a  child  is  enrolled  in  school  by  1 
percentage point. We contribute to this literature by documenting that changes in health 
conditions  could  be  an  important  mechanism  through  which  rainfall  shocks  affect 
human capital. 
 
The  rest  of  the  study  is  organized  as  follows.  The  next  Section  presents  the 
conceptual  issues.  Section  3.3  describes  database  construction  and  the  econometric 
specification. Section 3.4 presents the results on the relationship between droughts and 
school  performance,  the  robustness  checks,  as  well  as  the  discussion  on  the  potential 
transmission  mechanism  underlying  this  relationship.  Finally,  Section  3.5  summarizes 
the main conclusions and presents some policy recommendations. 
 
2 Conceptual issues 
 
The  modeling  of  the  cognitive  achievement  production  function  is  often  based 
 
on  the  idea  that  knowledge  acquisition  is  a  cumulative  process  by  which  current  and 
past  family  and  school  inputs  are  combined  with  child’s  innate  characteristics  to 
produce  a  cognitive  outcome  (Todd  and  Wolpin,  2007,  2003).  Cognitive  achievement 
production functions typically consider achievement for child  i residing in household j 
at age a, Sija to be a function of an initial child’s endowed mental capacity     , as well 
as  the  history  of  family  and  school  inputs,  respectively,  F1,  ...,  Fa,  T1,  ...,  Ta,  and 
exogenous  environmental  factors  Z.  Other  cognitive  achievement  determinant  of 
importance  includes  student  health  H.  Following  Todd  and  Wolpin  (2007,  2003)  a 
model of education production function can be expressed as: 
 
                                                                                                                            (1) 
 

Drought shocks may have direct effects on learning through heat stress that may 
 
affects physiology in ways that can be detrimental to cognitive performance or reduced 
expected productivity (Park, 2018; Wargocki and Wyon, 2007; Zivin et al., 2018; Zivin 
and Shrader, 2016). We also hypothesize that the shocks may have disruptive effects on 
school  routine.  As  supported  by  several  reports  in  the  media,  extreme  weather  events 
can affect  the school  routine by causing temporary  school  closings and interruption of 
classes,  due  to  lack  of  water  for  consumption  and  hygiene.  As  a  result,  student 
achievement could suffer as classes are discontinued (Grogger, 1997). 
 
Poor  health  in  childhood  may  also  be  an  important  mechanism  through  which 
water scarcity affects education; thus, "if poor health among school aged children has an 
effect on the acquisition of skills, it is more likely to come through impairing children's 
ability to learn while they are in school"  (Currie, 2009). The literature suggests that in 
developing  countries  children  who  are  in  poor  health  tend  to  have  lower  educational 
attainments  (Bleakley,  2007;  Miguel  and  Kremer,  2004).  Bleakley  (2007)  provides 
evidence  that  the  eradication  of  hookworm  in  the  American  South  had  a  significant 
effect  on  school  enrollment,  school  attendance,  and  that  in  addition,  literacy  increased 
markedly.  
 
In  this  paper,  we  do  not  attempt  to  estimate  tightly  the  education  production 
function specified in (12) once that initial endowments are not observed and we also do 
not  observe  past  family  and  school  inputs  and  test  scores.  Instead,  to  arrive  at  an 
empirically implementable specification, we propose a reduced-form strategy that relies 
on  the  evidence  that  variation  in  rainfall  levels  within  municipalities  over  time  is 
orthogonal to any other past and contemporaneous latent determinants of learning. Our 
empirical strategy is detailed in next section. 
 
3 Methods 
3.1 Educational data 

 
 
To assess the impact of drought shocks on student achievement, this paper uses 
two  different  databases,  Prova  Brasil  microdata  and  Educational  Census,  both 
developed  and  coordinated  by  Instituto  Anísio  Teixeira  (Inep).  These  datasets  provide 
information at the level of the school, the teacher, and the student. The Prova Brasil is a 
national  standardized  exam  applied  each  two  years  to  all  fifth  and  ninth  graders 
students. The student scores on exam are our main outcome variables. All students from 
public schools with at least twenty students enrolled in each grade are required to take 
this test. The Prova Brasil exam is applied at the same day in all schools in November, 
and  it  is  composed  of  two  parts,  language  (Portuguese)  and  math.  The  fifth  grade 
students  have  to  answer  twenty-two  questions,  while  the  ninth  grade  ones  need  to 
answer twenty-six questions. The score is  calculated separated for language  and math, 
and  only  for  those  students  who  answered  more  than  3  questions  in  each  portion.  In 
addition, students also respond to a socioeconomic survey, and teachers and principals 
provide information on their experience and school routine.  
 
The exam has been applied since 1995, but it was only in 2007 that rural schools 
were included. We restrict our analysis to the period between 2011 and 2015, when it is 
possible  to  compare  the  scores,  and  to  schools  situated  in  rural  areas,  because  rural 
population is more likely to suffer insults due to drought shocks than urban ones. Before 
2010,  elementary  School  in  Brazil  had  two  possible  systems,  but  after  this  year,  all 
Brazilian  schools  have  implemented  the  Law  nº  11,274/2006.  This  law  institutes  the 
nine  years  primary  School,  with  the  compulsory  inclusion  of  six-year-old  instead  of 

seven-year-old children, and it also reorganized school curriculum.4 In panel A of table 
1, we report summary statistics for fifth graders who take the Prova Brasil exam, while 
panel B provides statistics for ninth grade students. For fifth grade, our analysis sample 
consists  of  350,838  students  from  6,098  elementary  schools.  The  numbers  for  ninth 
grade are slightly smaller, comprising 253,946 students from 3,977 primary schools.      
 
Although  Prova  Brasil  database  provides  some  information  at  school  level,  it 
does not contain details on schools or teachers. We thus use the Educational Census to 
complete the information  about  school  infrastructure and teachers’ characteristics. The 
dataset  is  annual  and  every  school  receives  an  unique  identification  code.  Since  2009, 
this number has been the  same to  identify the school  on both  Educational  Census  and 
Prova Brasil, which  allows us to  merge them and to  link teachers to  schools  that took 
the exam over time. Panel C of table 1 reports the summary statistics for the teachers in 
our sample.  
  
3.2 Weather data 
 
 
We  use  the  latest  global  atmospheric  reanalysis  produced  by  the  European 
Centre  for  Medium-Range  Weather  Forecasts  (ECMWF),  the  ERA-Interim  data,  to 
build  a  series  for  temperature  and  precipitation.  ERA-Interim  provides  worldwide 
estimates  for  weather  conditions  at  the  0.1  ×  0.1  degree  latitude/longitude  grid  and 
covers the period from 1 January 1979 onwards. To construct a municipality-by-month 
of weather panel we use a geo-spatial software to aggregate the data to the municipality 
level  and  calculate  an  average  of  the  points  located  inside  the  municipality  limits. 
Considering the small grid of the dataset, almost all municipalities (1,485 of an total of 
1,794) have had points inside their limits.  For those that have had not,  we employ the 
same approach as  (Rocha and Soares, 2015). We compute the centroid for each of the 
309 remaining municipalities and then locate the four closest nodes to build a monthly 
series  as  the  weighted  average  of  estimates  related  to  these  four  nodes.  We  use  the 
inverse of the distance to each node as weight. We make use of this data to construct our 
measure of drought shock. 
 
 
               
 
where       indicates  the  monthly  rainfall  in  municipality  j  and  calendar  month  m.       is 
    is  the  historical 
the  average  historical  monthly  rainfall  in  municipality  j,  and    
monthly standard deviation of rainfall for municipality j, both calculated over the 1979-
2016 period. Thus, an episode of drought occurs always that rainfall in a given month 
was  more  than  one  standard  deviation  below  the  historical  average  for  municipality  j. 
Then  our  measure  of  drought  shock  is  computed  as  the  fraction  of  drought  months 
occurring in the current year up to the month when Prova Brasil exam takes place. For 
example, if the exam was made in November 2005, then the drought shock is computed 
as the share of drought months between January and November 2005.  
 
 
 
 

                                                                                                                (2) 

An episode of drought is defined when the following condition holds 

                                                 
4 We also thought to estimate separately for the period 2007-2009, but it is not possible considering that 
the number of schools that took the exam in 2007 was too low. 

3.3 Other data 
 
 
To  explore  potential  mechanisms,  we  use  data  from  the  Brazilian  Household 
Survey  (PNAD).  The  PNAD  is  nationally  and  regionally  representative,  and  contains 
detailed  information  on  socio-economic  and  demographic  characteristics.  We  use  data 
from  2001  to  2014,  for  which  consistent  sampling  methodologies  and  questionnaires 
were maintained. The input we examine is child labor, the PNAD asks whether children 
from  age 10 work or not, thus  we restrict our  analysis to  children  ages 10-16, to  keep 
the sample similar to the students who take the Prova Brasil exam. On one hand, facing 
a negative rainfall shock could  decrease the opportunity cost  of studying.  In this case, 
parents may reallocate the child's time endowment to human capital accumulation rather 
than to labor market activities. On the other hand, due to a drop in income, parents may 
need  to  increase  their  use  of  child  labor,  typically  by  having  children  substitute  adult 
labor in  household  activities or farm work, preventing children  from  attending school; 
or yet, children could work off parents establishments to improve family income. Thus, 
to  test  in  which  direction  this  mechanism  would  be  acting,  we  exploit  whether  water 
scarcity affect the likelihood of a child being or not employed. 
 
We  also  construct  a  dataset  on  infant  health  by  using  microdata  from  the 
Brazilian National System of Hospital Information (Datasus/SIH). The database records 
every  hospitalization  by  hospital  units  participating  in  the  Brazilian  Health  Unique 
System  (SUS)5  and  provides  information  on,  among  other  things,  the  municipality  of 
residence, years of age and sex. Thus, we are able to build a municipality-by-month on 
hospitalization panel over the 2008-2016 period. The region of interest is Northeastern 
Brazil and we restrict our sample to children aged 9 to 15, because our main sample on 
educational  data.  The  municipality  of  reference  in  the  panel  is  the  municipality  where 
the child lives, so that we are able to capture the shock that she was subject to. 
 
3.4 Variation in drought shocks and outcomes 
 
Because  the  statistical  approach  of  this  study  relies  on  within-municipality 
 
variation, we  confirm  that  there is  in  fact  substantial  within-municipality variability in 
the  data  for  identification.  To  evaluate  the  within-municipality  variability  in  the  data 
more formally, we regress  drought measure on a full set of municipality and year fixed 
effects.  The  residual  variation  in  this  regression  is  a  direct  measure  of  within-
municipality variability. Thus, the further R-squared is from 1 the greater is the within-
municipality  variation.  We  find  that  about  77  percent  of  the  total  variation  in  our 
drought  shock  exposure  cannot  be  explained  by  this  set  of  fixed  effects,  a  substantial 
within-municipality variation. 
 
We  also  evaluate  the  within-municipality  variability  in  the  main  outcomes  of 
interest, language and math scores for fifth and ninth grade students. For fifth graders, 
we find that a substantial  portion of the total  variation  in  math and language scores is 
due to within-municipality differences, about 87 and 88 percent, respectively. For ninth 
grade  students,  municipality  and  year  fixed  effects  cannot  explain  93  percent  of  the 
variation in math score, and the value does not change when we look to language score 
variation. In summary, this analysis shows that there is meaningful variation the data for 
identification. 
 

                                                 
5 This involves all public hospitals and some private hospitals which are associated to SUS.   

In  order  to  identify  the  impacts  of  drought  shocks  on  student  achievement,  we 

3. 5 Empirical Strategy  
 
 
estimate the following regression 
 
                                                                                           (3) 
  
where       is the learning outcome of student i, enrolled at school h in municipality m 
and  surveyed  in  year  t.  Learning  is  measured  by  Prova  Brasil  scores  in  math  and 
language.  The  variable  of  interest  is     ,  that  is  the  number  of  drought  months  in  m 
from January to November (the month in which the exam is taken) of the current year, t. 
The    is the key parameter of interest, it captures the effect of current-year droughts on 
math and language test scores. We also control for child socioeconomic characteristics, 
by  including    ,  just  as  students'  gender,  age  fixed  effects,  mother's  education,  race,  a 
dummy for whether the student has ever dropped out in previous years and a dummy for 
whether  the  student  has  ever  repeated  a  grade.  School's  characteristics  are  also 
accounted  by  including  the  vector      (whether  the  school  has  water  storage  facilities, 
computer lab, free lunch and offers free transport for students). These controls were add 
in order to absorb confounding effects driven by within-school heterogeneity. The term 
    is the average temperature in the municipality  m, on year of survey t. It allows us 
controlling for other climatic variations possibly correlated with droughts also occurring 
at the municipality level.  
The  term      is  a  vector  of  municipality  fixed  effects,  which  absorb  any 
 
unobservable time invariant factors at the municipality level, including initial conditions 
and persistent municipality characteristics such as geography. The model also includes 
year of survey fixed effects (   , that capture aggregate shocks impacting all Northeast 
region, including demand shocks, labor market conditions and educational policies and 
programs. This specification allows us to compare children from the same municipality 
who take the Prova Brasil exam in  different  years. Standard errors are clustered at  the 
municipality level to account for serial correlation. 
 
The  identifying  assumption  underlying  this  statistical  approach  is  that, 
conditional on municipality and year fixed effects, there are not omitted determinants of 
children's  education  correlated  with  the  incidence  of  weather  shocks.  This  seems 
plausible, given that the occurrence of extreme weather event at a given moment in time 
and place is unpredictable. Thus, our approach exploits arguably random fluctuations in 
rainfall from municipality-specific deviations in long-term rainfall after controlling for 
all seasonal factors and common shocks to all municipalities. If this assumption holds, 
we are able to identify the causal impact of drought shocks on student achievement. 
 
time  within 
municipalities  appears  to  be  idiosyncratic,  an  identification  issue  could  arise  when 
following  this  specification.  A  potential  problem  in  our  analysis  concerns  student 
selection at the Prova Brasil exam. For instance, if for some reason the drought shocks 
lead only the low-performing students to take the exam, the estimated effect of drought 
on achievement at the end of the year may capture the worsening of the pool of students 
rather than the causal impact of shocks on learning. We address this issue in section 3.4 
and there is very little evidence that this is the case. 
 
 

in  rainfall  shocks  over 

Although  much  of 

the  variation 

4 Results 
4.1 Impact on student achievement  
 
 
In  table  2  we  report  the  results  from  equation  (3)  estimating  the  impact  of 
contemporaneous drought shocks on students achievement. Panel A displays the results 
for  fifth  graders.  In  columns  1  and  3  we  estimate  our  simplest  specification,  which 
include  only  year  and  municipality  fixed  effects.  Columns  2  and  4  present  our  full 
specification,  which  we  add  controls  for  student  and  school  characteristics  in  order  to 
absorb  confounding  effects  driven  by  observed  heterogeneity  in  students’  background 
and school infrastructure.  
 
In  panel  A  of  table  2,  column  1  reports  a  significant  negative  relationship 
between drought and math achievement. The coefficient rises slightly as we move from 
column  1  to  2.  It  appears  that  the  heterogeneity  in  students  and  school  characteristics 
plays a restricted role in generating the noticed correlation between drought shocks and 
math  scores.  In  columns  3  and  4  we  estimate  the  impact  of  drought  shocks  on  fifth 
graders  Portuguese  score.  We  also  find  a  significant  negative  correlation  between 
drought and language achievement. Besides, when we control for observed students and 
school characteristics the coefficient is pretty much the same (column 4).  
Panel  B  of  table  2  repeats  the  same  sequence  of  specifications  for  ninth  grade 
 
students.  When  we  move  from  column  1  to  column  2,  there  is  no  striking  differences 
between the coefficients, and it remains negative and statistically significant at the 5% 
level.  This  result  indicates  that  the  effect  of  water  scarcity  on  math  achievement  is 
important  for  the  older  children  as  well.  For  language  scores,  the  point  estimates 
basically  does  not  change,  as  we  move  from  columns  3  to  4,  remaining  negative  and 
statistically significant. 
Column 2 and column 4 of table  2 are our preferred specifications, and are the 
 
ones we use in the remainder of the paper, for both fifth and ninth grade students. The 
magnitudes  are  similar  in  size.  A  one  standard  deviation  increases  in  the  number  of 
drought  months  per  academic  year  leads  to  a  reduction  of  0.39  and  0.27  percentage 
points in math and Portuguese scores, respectively, for fifth graders. For the ninth grade 
students,  the  effect  of  drought  on  math  and  language  achievement  are  -0.29  and  -0.24 
percentage points, respectively. Overall, we find a negative and statistically significant 
impact of drought shocks on both math and language achievement. 
 
4.2 Heterogeneities  
 
In  appendix  table  A1,  we  look  at  the  heterogeneity  of  drought  impact  by 
 
students’  socioeconomic  characteristics.  In  each  column  we  regress  students 
achievements  on  the  drought  shock,  as  well  as  its  interaction  with  different  student 
characteristics.  Panel  A  shows  the  results  for  fifth  grader  students,  while  panel  B 
presents  the  coefficients  for  ninth  graders.  Columns  1  and  5  replicates  our  benchmark 
specification,  respectively,  for  math  and  Portuguese,  without  interaction  terms.  In  the 
rest  of  the  columns,  we  add  interaction  terms  between  the  drought  indicator  and  a 
dummy  for  white,  for  boys  and  low-educated  mother  (student’s  mother  is  illiterate  or 
has not completed elementary school), respectively.  
 
Panel  A  of  table  A1  provides  evidence  for  fifth  graders.  Overall,  we  find  that 
differential  effects  are  in  general  statistically  significant,  for  both  math  and  language 
test scores, with exception of race. The results show that the effects of water scarcity on 
school achievement seem to be larger for girls. Furthermore, the shocks tend to be more 
detrimental to those students with lower educated mothers. In this period children may 

benefit  from  instruction  at  home.  Moreover,  better  educated  parents  may  react 
differently to the drought shock than less educated ones. The observed concentration of 
damage  among  children  with  lower  educated  mother  is  consistent  with  a  larger 
compensatory  response  by  high-education  parents  compared  to  low-education  parents. 
In other words, higher educated mothers might know better ways to mitigate the effects 
of  the  shock.  Panel  B  documents  there  is  little  evidence  for  a  differential  response  to 
drought  shock  according  to  students’  socioeconomic  characteristics  for  ninth  graders, 
with the only exception being gender.  
 
Table A2 of the appendix examines heterogeneity in the effect of drought shocks 
by school's infrastructure. Each column presents the result from our main specification, 
added  by  an  interaction  term  between  the  drought  indicator  and  a  different  school 
characteristic.  Panel  A  shows  the  results  for  fifth  graders,  while  panel  B  repeats  the 
exercise  for  ninth  grade  students.  Columns  1  and  4  show  the  results  for  our  preferred 
specifications, without interaction terms. In columns 2 and 5, we add an interaction term 
between the shock and a dummy for schools with cistern. Column 3 and column 6 add 
an interaction term for a variable that indicates if the school provides transportation for 
children  to  attend  the  classes.  The  results  provide  suggestive  evidence  that  drought 
tends to  be more harmful  to  children that study in schools with  no cistern.  In  years of 
negative rainfall shocks, rural schools may cease activities due to lack of adequate water 
for  consumption  and  hygiene,  decreasing  the  educational  provision  and  making  more 
difficult for the children attend to school. As an attempt to prevent this, cisterns should 
be installed to store water. Such improvement could helps on the functioning, enriches 
learning and nurturing environments of disadvantaged children.  
 
4.3 Effects of shocks before and after the Prova Brasil year 
 
 
In appendix table  A3, columns 1 and 4  replicates our benchmark specification, 
respectively,  for  math  and  Portuguese  performance.  In  column  2  and  5  we  assess  the 
extent  to  which  droughts  have  either  persistent  or  transitory  effects  on  learning,  by 
exploring the relationship between math and language achievement and our benchmark 
indicator of drought shock for the previous two school years. In the remainder columns 
we  provide  a  natural  placebo  test.  We  regress  students  performance  in  math  and 
language on our drought measure computed in the following academic year. As before, 
panel A shows the results for fifth graders and panel B for ninth grade students. 
 
According  to  the  results  of  table  A3,  there  is  no  evidence  of  a  significant 
association  between  math  and  Portuguese  test  scores  and  past  drought  shocks.  Other 
studies in the literature have found that intervention programs, violence and temperature 
effects  on test scores "fade out" over time, especially in  earlier  grades  (Andrabi  et  al., 
2011;  Cascio  and  Staiger,  2012;  Deming,  2009;  Monteiro  and  Rocha,  2017;  Shah  and 
Steinberg, 2017). The interpretation that the effect of drought shocks on learning is only 
transitory  should  be  taken  with  attention.  Although  test  score  impacts  often  fade  over 
time,  their  effects  on  knowledge  is  more  persistent  (Cascio  and  Staiger,  2012). 
Furthermore,  drought  may  affect  student  attainment  through  its  effects  on  learning, 
which may affect completed  years of schooling in the long run. Also, as expected, the 
placebo  test  shows  that  there  is  no  relationship  between  water  scarcity  during  the 
following year and test scores in the current year.  
 
 
 

4.4 Student selection 
 
 
The primary concern for our main results in table 2 is self-selection of students 
at the Prova Brasil exam. If Prova Brasil data is sampling a different set of children in 
schools when experiencing droughts relative to a set when the shock does not occur, this 
may bias our estimates. Specifically, if higher-ability children are less likely to take the 
exam  when  rainfall  is  low,  the  estimated  effect  of  droughts  on  students  achievement 
may  capture  the  worsening  of  the  pool  of  students  rather  than  the  causal  impact  of 
weather shock on learning.  
 
In order to address this issue, table 3 examines for student selection at the Prova 
Brasil  exam.  Panel  A  shows  the  results  for  fifth  graders,  while  panel  B  provides 
evidence for ninth grade students. First, we regress some socioeconomic characteristics 
of the students who take the exam on the drought shock during the school year. In the 
first column we regress on drought a dummy variable indicating gender equal to male. 
The results show that a shock during the school year is not significantly associated with 
a higher probability of observing a male in the sample of students taking the exam, for 
both fifth and ninth grade. In the columns 2 to 4, we repeat the same specification for 
race  (white),  mother's  education  (student’s  mother  is  illiterate  or  has  not  completed 
elementary  school)  and  student  age,  respectively.  The  coefficients  on  below  are 
typically  small  and  statistically  insignificant,  with  the  only  statistically  significant 
coefficient plausibly arising due to sampling error. The remaining column examines the 
relationship  between  drought  shocks  and  participation  rate  of  students  who  take  the 
exam. The point estimate for the fifth graders is negative but statistically insignificant, 
and  for  ninth  grade  students  is  positive  but  insignificant  either.  Thus,  we  observe  no 
significant  association  between  water  scarcity  and  the  number  of  students  taking  the 
Prova Brasil exam.  
 
4.5 Mechanisms  
 
In  this  section,  we  try  to  uncover  the  specific  mechanisms  linking  negative 
 
rainfall shocks to students achievement. This relationship can be driven by a variety of 
channels.  In  the  context  of  Northeast  Brazilian,  we  may  think  in  three  main  potential 
channels  acting  in  our  setting.  First  potential  connection  is  through  school  supply. 
Negative  rainfall  shocks  may  lead  schools  to  close  or  cease  activities  due  to  lack  of 
water. Second, we assess whether the scarcity of water could cause children to become 
sick  and  attend  school  less.  Finally,  we  examine  whether,  due  to  a  drop  in  family 
income, the drought shocks are associated with increased child labor and reduced school 
attendance. 
 
4.5.1 School supply 
 
 
We  analyze  if  drought  shocks  may  lead  to  disruption  of  regular  classroom 
routines and procedures due to lack of water for consumption and hygiene, decreasing 
educational provision and affecting children learning. As a result, student achievement 
may suffer as classes are discontinued.  
 
To investigate the effects of the drought shocks on the school supply, we use a 
survey answered by principals in Prova Brasil editions. This survey investigates several 
aspects  of  the  school’s  routine.  Table  4  presents  the  results  from  estimating  drought 
events for school routine. In column 1, we regress a dummy variable indicating whether 
the  principal  reported  any  interruption  of  school  activities  for  any  reason.  We  find  no 

 

relationship  between  the  shocks  and  this  variable.  In  the  following  columns,  we 
estimate  other  binary  dependent  variables:  student  and  teacher  absenteeism,  both 
reported by principals. The ideal it would be have information about daily student and 
teacher  attendance,  but  this  is  not  available.  Point  estimates  are  small  and  not 
statistically significant at the conventional levels of significance. Importantly, note that 
these  results  are  not  driven  by  large  standard  errors.  This  suggests  that  teachers 
absenteeism do not increase noticeably in drought years.   
 
4.5.2 Infant health 
 
 
If drought shocks lead to higher incidence of particular diseases, this could cause 
children  to  attend  school  less  during  drought  years,  and  thus  doing  worse  on  Prova 
Brasil  exam.  A  series  of  studies  have  documented  the  relationship  between  weather 
shocks  and  health  outcomes.  Precipitation  is  crucial  for  agricultural  productivity,  thus 
water scarcity may be associated with lower agricultural production, higher food prices 
and,  therefore,  lower  nutrient  intake,  which  could  rise  de  incidence  of  nutritional 
diseases. Also, it may be related with lack of adequate drinkable water, which increases 
the  risk  of  infectious  diseases  (Bandyopadhyay  et  al.,  2012;  Burgess  and  Deschenes, 
2011; Carlton et al., 2013; Carrillo, forthcoming; Rocha and Soares, 2015; WHO, 2016, 
2008). 
 
To  investigate  the  effects  of  drought  shocks  on  infant  morbidity,  we  use  a 
municipality-by-month  on  hospitalization  panel  from  January  2008  to  October  2016, 
with children between 9 and 15 years old. We estimate the following equation: 
 
                                                                                             (4) 
 
where      is the infant hospitalization rate per 1,000 inhabitants in municipality j, on 
month m and year t.      is our drought indicator, a dummy equal one if rainfall over 
month m in year t was more than one standard deviation below the historical average for 
municipality  j.      is  the average temperature in  the municipality in  the same month. 
We also control for municipality (  ), year (  ), month (  ) and month-by-year (   ) 
fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level. 
The  results  are  reported  in  table  5.  Column  1  estimates  the  impact  of  drought 
 
shock  on  children  aged  9  to  15.  We  find  that  exposure  to  negative  rainfall  shocks 
increase the hospitalization rate among children in 0.83 percent. In columns 2 and 3, we 
report these coefficients separately estimated for children aged 9–11 and aged 12–15 in 
order to observe if the effect is concentrated in an specific group. As in the first column, 
the results are positive and statistically significant, but the effect appears to be slightly 
larger for the younger children (1 percent) than to older ones (0.72 percent). This result 
supports  the  view  that  infant  health  in  the  Northeast  region  are  affected  by  rainfall 
fluctuations. 
 
In  order  to  examine  a  little  deeper  on  the  impact  of  drought  shocks  on  infant 
health, we look at causes of hospitalization. We group our sample into four categories: 
infectious  and  parasitic  diseases,  malnutrition,  respiratory  infections,  and  all  other 
diagnoses.  In  contexts  of  water  scarcity,  these  are  consider  the  main  drivers  of  infant 
morbidity and mortality. Diarrhea is caused mainly by pathogens that are ingested from 
contaminated water (for consumption and hygiene) and food. Through reduced capacity 
to  absorb  nutrients,  diarrhea  can  also  lead  to  increased  malnutrition.  Rainfall  scarcity 
also  facilitates  the  irritation  of  the  airways.  A  drier  environment  leaves  children  more 
susceptible  to  nasal  bleeding  and  coughing  due  to  the  concentration  of  dust  in  the  air. 

For those who  already suffer from respiratory diseases, drought shocks increase the risk 
of having a crises (Fewtrell et al., 2007; Rocha and Soares, 2015; WHO, 2016, 2008). 
 
In  panel  A  of  table  6  we  report  the  results  from  equation  (4)  estimating  the 
impact  of  negative  rainfall  shocks  on  hospitalization  by  cause  of  children  aged  9–11. 
The  first  column  presents  the  effect  on  hospitalization  rate  by  infectious  and  parasitic 
diseases. The point estimate of the coefficient of interest is 0.0116, which is statistically 
different from zero at the 5 percent level of significance. This estimate suggests that one 
more shock per year increases by 2,6 per cent the hospitalization rate by infectious and 
parasitic  diseases  per  1,000  inhabitants,  relative  to  mean  of  0.46.  The  coefficient  for 
malnutrition  (column  2)  is  also  statistically  significant.  One  more  drought  shock  per 
year  is  associated  with  an  increase  of  5  per  cent  in  hospitalization  by  malnutrition  for 
children aged 9-11. Column 3 shows that respiratory diseases are positively related with 
water scarcity, increasing by 3.23 per cent with to one additional drought shock, relative 
to  mean of 0.61.  In Panel  B, we present  these coefficients  estimated for children aged 
12-15.  Most  of  the  magnitudes  are  similar  in  size,  although  the  effect  of  rainfall 
negative  shocks  on  malnutrition  is  not  statistically  different  from  zero  for  the  older 
children.  Overall,  the  results  show  that  health  may  be  one  of  the  mechanisms  through 
which drought shocks affect students achievements. 
 
4.5.3 Child labor 
 
 
The  impact  of  drought  shocks  on  agricultural  production  is  straightforward. 
Almost all of the total area sown in Northeastern Brazil is rainfed. Only 2 percent of net 
area  is  irrigated.    Therefore,  we  would  expect  rainfall  to  be  an  important  driver  of 
agricultural  productivity  and  household  income.  According  to  the  literature,  family 
wealth  is  associated  with  child  labor,  as  poorest  the  family  as  higher  the  chance  of  a 
child works (Baland and Robinson, 2000; Basu and Van, 1999; Kruger et al., 2012). For 
example, facing a negative rainfall shock could lead parents increase their use of child 
labor, typically by having children substitute adult labor in household activities or farm 
work,  preventing  children  to  attending  classes  or  diminishing  time  devoted  to  school 
activities  (Bar  and  Basu,  2009;  Beegle  et  al.,  2006);  or  yet,  children  could  work  off 
parents establishments to improve family income. This would reduce school attendance 
and  consequently  contribute  to  poor  students  achievement.  On  the  other  hand, 
decreasing  agricultural  revenues  may  diminish  the  opportunity  cost  of  school 
attendance.  In  this  sense,  negative  shocks  could  be  associated  to  school  performance 
improvements.  The  answer  to  the  question  whether  the  effects  of  weather  shocks  are 
positive or negative to school achievement is a priori ambiguous. 
 
employed, we specify the following regression equation: 
 
                                                                                               (5) 
 
where       is equal to one if child i works and zero otherwise, in municipality m and 
surveyed in year t. The variable of interest is    , that is the number of drought months 
in m from January to September (the month in which the survey is made) of the current 
year,  t.  The      is  the  key  parameter  of  interest,  it  captures  the  effect  of  current-year 
droughts on . We also control for child socioeconomic characteristics, by including   , 
just as students' gender, age fixed effects, race and the number of family members. The 
term     is the average temperature in the municipality m, on year of survey t. It allows 
us  controlling  for  other  climatic  variations  possibly  correlated  with  droughts  also 

To analyze the effects of drought shocks on the likelihood of a child being or not 

occurring at the municipality level. The model also includes year of survey fixed effects 
(    and municipality fixed effects   . Standard errors are clustered at the municipality 
level to account for serial correlation. 
 
The  coefficient  from  Table  7  refers  to  the  effect  of  the  drought  shocks  on  the 
likelihood of child working. The point estimate is positive and statistically significant at 
the 5 percent level of significance. One more drought shock per year is associated with a 
4.24%  increase  in  the  likelihood  of  a  child  being  employed.  Therefore,  we  find 
suggestive  evidence  that  infant  labor  is  a  mechanisms  through  which  drought  shocks 
may reduce student achievement. Overall, the finding in this section is consistent with 
the  evidence  that  the  poorest  agricultural  families  tend  to  increase  the  supply  of  child 
labor in order to substitute adult labor or improve family wealth  (Bar and Basu, 2009; 
Beegle et al., 2006; Bhalotra and Heady, 2003; Boutin, 2014; Hyder et al., 2015).  
 
5 Concluding Remarks 
 

In this paper, we tried to shadow some light on rural school issues. The Brazilian 
public  debate  is  dominated  by  urban-related  educational  themes,  mainly  focused  on 
enhancing teaching quality. Little attention is devoted to rural schools, which suffer from 
basic infrastructure problems, high dropout rates and poor student achievement.  

This  study  provides  evidence  that  drought  shocks  have  negative  impact  on  the 
performance  of  students  from  rural  schools  located  in  the  Northeastern  Brazil.  We 
assessed  how  droughts  may  affect  student  achievement  as  measured  by  Prova  Brasil 
scores,  a  national  standardized  exam.  Our  results  show  that  drought  shocks  are 
associated  to  lower  scores  on  both  mathematics  and  Portuguese  exams,  for  fifth  and 
ninth  graders.  However,  schools  equipped  with  cisterns  seem  to  be  able  mitigate  the 
negative  effects  of  droughts.  Cisterns  may  prevent  water  scarcity  problems  that  could 
eventually force schools to temporarily cease their activities. Therefore, investments in 
this  low-cost  water  storage  device  may  bring  considerable  benefits  to  rural  children, 
improving school attendance and education supply. 
 
We also find that the effect of drought is transitory, although this result should 
be taken with caution. Although test score impacts often fade over time, their effects on 
knowledge  is  more  persistent.  Furthermore,  drought  may  affect  student  attainment 
through  its  effects  on  learning,  which  may  affect  completed  years  of  schooling  in  the 
long run. 
 
We  are  able  to  provide  evidence  for  two  mechanisms  through  which  adverse 
rainfall shocks affect students achievement. Water scarcity increases the hospitalization 
rate  among  children,  specially  by  specific  causes  as  malnutrition,  respiratory  diseases, 
infectious  and  parasitic  diseases.  In  addition  to  that,  droughts  are  also  associated  to 
higher  probability  of  child  labor.  Both  health  and  job-market  related  effects  may  be 
associated  to  lower  school  attendance  and  therefore  contribute  to  poor  student 
achievement. 

to 

In  order 

intervening  on 

transmission  mechanism, 
governmental  policy  could  focus  on  improving  water  and  sanitation  infrastructure. 
Many  rural  areas  lack  access  to  safe  drinking  water  especially  during  drought  years. 
Improving access  to  safe drinking water may reduce waterborne  diseases  like diarrhea 
and improve school attendance; 

the  health-related 

Finally, conditional cash transfers could be an effective way to improve school 
attendance in rural areas. By conditioning eligibility to the income supporting program 
to  school  attendance,  the  government  may  reduce  the  incentives  for  rural  households 
replacing the workforce by child labor during drought seasons. In this sense, the Bolsa 

Família Program seems to be playing an important role by listing school attendance as 
an eligibility criteria. 
 

References 

Ab’Sáber, A.N., 1999. Sertões e sertanejos: uma geografia humana sofrida. Estud. 

Avançados 13, 5–59. 

Andrabi, T., Das, J., Ijaz Khwaja, A., Zajonc, T., 2011. Do Value-Added Estimates Add 

Value? Accounting for Learning Dynamics. Am. Econ. J. Appl. Econ. 3, 29–54. 
doi:10.1257/app.3.3.29 

Baland, J.-M., Robinson, J.A., 2000. Is Child Labor Inefficient ? J. Polit. Econ. 108, 

663–679. 

Bandyopadhyay, S., Kanji, S., Wang, L., 2012. The Impact of Rainfall and Temperature 
Variation on Diarrheal Prevalence in Sub-Saharan Africa. Appl. Geogr. 33, 63–72. 

Bar, T., Basu, K., 2009. Land : in the Long Run and Short Run. J. Eur. Econ. Assoc. 7, 

487–497. 

Basu, K., Van, P.H., 1999. The Economics of Child Labor: Reply. Am. Econ. Rev. 89, 

1386–1388. doi:10.1257/aer.89.5.1386 

Beegle, K., Dehejia, R.H., Gatti, R., 2006. Child labor and agricultural shocks. J. Dev. 

Econ. 81, 80–96. doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2005.05.003 

Bhalotra, S., Heady, C., 2003. Child Farm Labor: The Wealth Paradox. World Bank 

Econ. Rev. 17, 197–227. doi:10.1093/wber/lhg017 

Bleakley, H., 2007. Disease and Development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradication 

in the American South. Q. J. Econ. 122, 73–117. 

Boutin, D., 2014. Climate vulnerability, communities’ resilience and child labour. Rev. 

Econ. Polit. 124, 625. doi:10.3917/redp.244.0625 

Burgess, R., Deschenes, O., 2011. Weather and death in India. Cambridge, United  …. 
Carlton, E.J., Eisenberg, J.N.S., Goldstick, J., Cevallos, W., Trostle, J., Levy, K., 2013. 

Heavy Rainfall Events and Diarrhea Incidence: The Role of Social and 
Environmental Factors. Am. J. Epidemiol. 179, 344–352. 

Carrillo, B., n.d. Early Rainfall Shocks and Later-Life Outcomes: Evidence from 

Colombia. World Bank Econ. Rev. 

Cascio, E.U., Staiger, D.O., 2012. Knowledge, Tests, and Fadeout in Educational 

Interventions. NBER Working Paper No. 18038 0. doi:10.3386/w18038 

Cipola, A., 1998. Estiagem fecha escolas no sertão do Nordeste. Folha São Paulo. 
Coates, L., Haynes, K., O’Brien, J., McAneney, J., De Oliveira, F.D., 2014. Exploring 

167 years of vulnerability: An examination of extreme heat events in Australia 
1844-2010. Environ. Sci. Policy 42, 33–44. doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2014.05.003 

Correia, R.C., Kill, L.H.P., Moura, M.S.B. de, Cunha, T.J.F., 2011. A região semiárida 

brasileira., in: Produção de Caprinos E Ovinos No Semiárido. pp. 21–48. 

Currie, J., 2009. Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: Socioeconomic Status, Poor Health in 

Childhood, and Human Capital Development. J. Econ. Lit. 47, 87–122. 
doi:10.1257/jel.47.1.87 

de Janvry, A., Finan, F., Sadoulet, E., Vakis, R., 2006. Can conditional cash transfer 

programs serve as safety nets in keeping children at school and from working when 
exposed to shocks? J. Dev. Econ. 79, 349–373. doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2006.01.013 

Deming, D., 2009. Early Childhood Intervention and Life-Cycle Skill Development: 

Evidence from Head Start. Am. Econ. J. Appl. Econ. 1, 111–134. 
doi:10.1257/app.1.3.111 

Deschênes, O., Moretti, E., 2009. Extreme Weather Events, Mortality, and Migration. 

Rev. Econ. Stat. 91, 693–713. 

Duryea, S., Lam, D., Levison, D., 2007. Effects of economic shocks on children’s 

employment and schooling in Brazil. J. Dev. Econ. 84, 188–214. 
doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2006.11.004 

Fewtrell, L., Prüss-Üstün, A., Bos, R., Gore, F., Bartram, J., 2007. Water, Sanitation 

and Hygiene: quantifying the health impact at national and local levels in countries 
with incomplete water supply and sanitation coverage. WHO Environ. Burd. Dis. 
Ser. no 15. 

Grogger, J., 1997. Local Violence and Educational Attainment. J. Hum. Resour. 32, 

659–682. doi:10.2307/146425 

Guarcello, L., Mealli, F., Rosati, F., 2003. Household vulnerability and child labor: the 
effects of shocks, credit rationing, and insurance. Understanding Children’s Work, 
An Inter-Agency Research Cooperation Project. 

Hallegatte, S., Hourcade, J.C., Dumas, P., 2007. Why economic dynamics matter in 

assessing climate change damages: Illustration on extreme events. Ecol. Econ. 62, 
330–340. doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2006.06.006 

Hyder, A., Behrman, J.R., Kohler, H.-P., 2015. Negative Economic Shocks and Child 

Schooling: Evidence from Rural Malawi. Dev. South. Afr. 32, 458–479. 
doi:10.1080/0376835X.2015.1039707 

Insa/MCTI, 2014. População do Semiárido brasileiro ultrapassa 23,5 milhões de 

habitantes. 

IPCC, 2013. Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. New York. 
Kreft, S., Eckstein, D., Junghans, L., Kerestan, C., Hagen, U., 2014. Global Climate 

Risk Index 2015: Who Suffers Most From Extreme Weather Events? Berlim. 

Kruger, D., Soares, R.R., Berthelon, M., 2012. Household Choices of Child Labor and 
Schooling: A Simple Model with Application to Brazil. J. Hum. Resour. 47, 1–31. 
doi:10.1353/jhr.2012.0002 

Marengo, J., 2009. Mudanças climáticas e eventos extremos no Brasil. 
Miguel, E., Kremer, M., 2004. Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and Health in 

the Presence of Treatment Externalities. Econometrica 72, 159–217. 
doi:10.1111/j.1468-0262.2004.00481.x 

Monteiro, J., Rocha, R., 2017. Drug Battles and School Achievement: Evidence from 

Rio de Janeiro’s Favelas. Rev. Econ. Stat. 99, 213–228. 
doi:10.1162/REST_a_00628 

Park, J., 2018. Hot Temperature, High Stakes Exams, and Avoidance Behavior: 

Evidence from New York City Public Schools, Unpublished Manuscript, Harvard 
University Economics Department, Submitted. 

Rocha, R., Soares, R.R., 2015. Water scarcity and birth outcomes in the Brazilian 

semiarid ☆. J. Dev. Econ. 112, 72–91. doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2014.10.003 

Shah, M., Steinberg, B.M., 2017. Drought of Opportunities: Contemporaneous and 
Long-Term Impacts of Rainfall Shocks on Human Capital. J. Polit. Econ. 125, 
527–561. doi:10.1086/690828 

Souza, E.C. De, Coelho, A.B., Lima, J.E. de, Cunha, D.A. da, Féres, G.J., 2013. 

Impactos das mudanças climáticas sobre o bem-estar relacionado à saúde no Brasil. 
Pesq e Planej Econ. 43, 49–8. 

Todd, P.E., Wolpin, K.I., 2007. The Production of Cognitive Achievement in Children: 

Home, School, and Racial Test Score Gaps. J. Hum. Cap. 1, 91–136. 
doi:10.1086/526401 

Todd, P.E., Wolpin, K.I., 2003. On the specification and estimation of the production 

function for cognitive achievement. Econ. J. 113, 3–33. doi:10.1111/1468-

0297.00097 

Wargocki, P., Wyon, D.P., 2007. The Effects of Moderately Raised Classroom 

Temperatures and Classroom Ventilation Rate on the Performance of Schoolwork 
by Children (RP-1257). HVAC&R Res. 13, 193–220. 
doi:10.1080/10789669.2007.10390951 

WHO, 2016. Natural Disaster Profiles. Geneva. 
WHO, 2008. Water Quality Interventions to Prevent Diarrhoea: Cost and Cost-

Effectiveness. Geneva. 

Zivin, J.G., Hsiang, S.M., Neidell, M., 2018. Temperature and Human Capital in the 

Short and Long Run. J. Assoc. Environ. Resour. Econ. 5, 77–105. 
doi:10.1086/694177 

Zivin, J.G., Shrader, J., 2016. Temperature Extremes, Health, and Human Capital. 

Futur. Child. 26, 31–50. 

 
 

Table 1. Summary Statistics 

  
  
Panel A - Prova Brasil takers - 5th graders 
Portuguese score 
Math score 
Age 
% white 
% boys 
%low educated mother 
% low educated father 
% have repeated a grade 
% have dropped out 
Observations 

 
Panel B - Prova Brasil takers - 9th graders 
Portuguese score 
Math score 
Age 
% white 
% boys 
%low educated mother 
% low educated father 
% have repeated a grade 
% have dropped out 
Observations 

 
Panel C - Teacher-level variables 
Age 
Male 
White 
BA diploma 
Pos diploma 

Rural schools 

Mean 

SD 

N 

167.56 
181.98 
11.27 
0.23 
0.52 
0.64 
0.65 
0.45 
0.16 

 

228.52 
233.11 
14.36 
0.20 
0.41 
0.64 
0.73 
0.27 
0.05 

 

 

 

42.05 
42.95 
1.39 
0.42 
0.50 
0.48 
0.48 
0.50 
0.36 

 

43.43 
42.99 
0.66 
0.40 
0.49 
0.48 
0.44 
0.45 
0.21 

 

 

 

326433 
326433 
326433 
278508 
326433 
210799 
178181 
318991 
319933 
326433 

162828 
162828 
162828 
144723 
162828 
131364 
108588 
162037 
162240 
162828 

 

 

36.50528 
0.329967 
0.253986 
0.621282 
0.002777 

8.803206 
0.470202 
0.435291 
0.485069 
0.052624 

251906 
251906 
251906 
251906 
251906 

  
Observations 
  Notes: This table provides summary statistics of students characteristics. 
 

  

251906 

 

 

 

  

Table 2. Drought shocks effects on student achievement 

 

1 

Math  
Score 

2 

Math  
score 

3 

4 

Portuguese  

Portuguese  

Score 

score 

Panel A - Prova Brasil takers - 5th graders 

 
Drought shock 

 

-0.61 

 

-0.65 

 

-0.51 

 

-0.53 

[0.3371]* 

[0.3248]** 

[0.3088]* 

[0.2974]* 

 
 
N 
R-sq 

 

 

326433 
0.192 

 

326433 
0.238 

 

326429 
0.169 

 

326429 
0.248 

 
Panel B - Prova Brasil takers - 9th graders 

 

 

 

 
Drought shock 

 

-0.72 

 

-0.81 

 

-0.67 

 

-0.67 

[0.3352]** 

[0.3512]** 

[0.3971]* 

[0.4029]* 

 
 
N 
R-sq 

 

162828 
0.133 

 

162828 
0.167 

 

162838 
0.122 

 

162838 

0.17 

 

 

 

No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

 
Basic controls 
Temperature control 
Year FE 
Municipality FE  
Note: Basic controls include students' sex, race, age fixed effects, dummy for level of mother’s education, 
and  dummy  for  level  of  father's  education,  also  some  school  characteristics  as  dummies  indicating 
whether there is a computer lab, science lab, cistern and free transportation for students. We report robust 
standard errors clustered at the municipality level (in brackets). Significance levels: ***p < 0.01, **p < 
0.05, *p < 0.1. 

No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 
 
  

Table 3. Student selection 

1 

2 

3 

4 

Male  White 

Low 

educated 
mother 

Age 

5 

Rate of 

participation in 

Prova Brasil 

exam 

Panel A - Prova Brasil (5th grade) 

 
Drought shock 

 
 
N 
R-sq 

 

 
-0.0004 
-0.0013 
[0.0019]  [0.0017] 

 

327824 
0.031 

 

327824 
0.023 

 
Panel B - Prova Brasil (9th 
grade) 

 

 

 
 

0.003 

 
-0.0035 
[0.0025]  [0.0019]* 

 

 

 
 

0.0013 
[0.0018] 

 
-0.0014 
[0.0082] 

 

327824 
0.178 

 

327824 
0.106 

 

 
 
-0.0107 
[0.0068] 

-0.0018 
[0.0023] 

 
 

 

 
 

 

163243 
0.027 

 

163243 
0.037 

 

163243 
0.177 

 

163243 
0.071 

 
Temperature control 

 
Year FE 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 
Drought shock 

 
 
N 
R-sq 

-0.0322 
[0.2664] 

 

27080 
0.97 

0.0784 
[0.3473] 

 

20552 
0.959 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

 

 

 

 

Yes 

Yes 

 
Municipality FE  
Note: Basic controls include students' sex, race, age fixed effects, dummy for level of mother’s education, 
and  dummy  for  level  of  father's  education,  also  some  school  characteristics  as  dummies  indicating 
whether there is a computer lab, science lab, cistern and free transportation for students. We report robust 
standard errors clustered at the municipality level (in brackets). Significance levels: ***p < 0.01, **p < 
0.05, *p < 0.1. 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 
  

Drought shock 

 
Temperature control 

 
Year FE 

 
Municipality FE  

Table 4. School routine 

1 

2 

Interruption of 

Teacher 

3 

Student 

classes 
0.0025 
[0.0086] 

Absenteeism 

Absenteeism 

0.0054 
[0.0068] 

0.0113 
[0.0078] 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

 

 

 
N 
R-sq 
Note:  Basic  controls  include  some  school  characteristics  as  dummies  indicating  whether  there  is  a 
computer  lab,  science  lab,  cistern  and  free  transportation  for  students.  We  report  robust  standard  errors 
clustered at the municipality level (in brackets). Significance levels: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1. 

15259 
0.149 

15259 
0.114 

15259 
0.154 

Table 5. Drought effect on infant hospitalization rate 

 

  

 
  

 
Drought shock 

 
Temperature control 
Month FE 
Year FE 
Municipality FE  

 
N 
R-sq 

Dependent variable: hospitalization rate 
1 

2 

3 

Ages 9-15 

Ages 9-11 

Ages 12-15 

 

0.032 

 

0.019 

 

0.013 

[0.0129]** 

[0.0088]** 

[0.0076]* 

 

Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

 

450394 

0.48 

 

Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

 

450394 
0.424 

 

Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

 

450394 
0.365 

Note:  The  dependent  variable  is  infant  hospitalization  rate  per  1,000  inhabitants.  We  report  robust 
standard errors clustered at the  municipality level (in brackets). Significance levels: ***p < 0.01, **p < 
0.05, *p < 0.1. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 
  

Table 6. Drought effect on infant hospitalization rate by cause  

 

1 

2 

3 

4 

Infectious and 

parasitic 
diseases 

Malnutrition 

Respiratory 
diseases  

Other 
causes 

 

 

 

 

0.0116 

 

0.0033 

[0.0050]** 

[0.0013]** 

0.0197 

 
[0.0059]***  [0.0048]*** 

-0.0125 

 

 

450394 
0.389 

 

450394 
0.135 

 

450394 
0.347 

 

450394 
0.144 

0.0097 

[0.0031]*** 

 

450394 
0.352 

 
 

0.0011 
[0.0007] 

 

450394 
0.097 

 
 
[0.0023]*** 

0.0079 

 
 

 

450394 
0.283 

-0.0052 
[0.0041] 

 

450394 
0.115 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 

Yes 

 
Children aged 9-11 

Drought shock 

 
N 
R-sq 

 
Children aged 12-15 

 

Drought shock 

 
N 
R-sq 

 
Temperature control 

 
Month FE 

 
Year FE 

 
Month-by-year FE 

 
Municipality FE  

Note:  The  dependent  variable  is  infant  hospitalization  rate  per  1,000  inhabitants.  We  report  robust 
standard errors clustered at the municipality level (in brackets). Significance levels: ***p < 0.01, **p < 
0.05, *p < 0.1. 

Table 7. Drought shocks and child labor 

 

  

 
Drought shock  

 
Temperature control 
Month FE 
Year FE 

Child labor 

 

0.0106 

[0.0049]** 

 

Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

Municipality FE  
N 
R-sq 

Yes 

28665 
0.214 

Note:  We  report  robust  standard  errors  clustered  at  the  municipality  level  (in  brackets).  Significance 
levels: ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1. 

  

  

Table A1. Heterogeneity in the drought shocks effect by students' socioeconomic characteristics 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

Math score 

Math score 

Math score 

Math score 

Portuguese 

Portuguese 

Portuguese 

Portuguese 

score 

score 

score 

score 

APPENDIX A 

 
Drought shock 

 
Drought shock x white 

 
Drought shock x boy 

 
Drought shock x  
low educated mother 

 
 
N 
R-sq 

 

 
Drought shock 

 
Drought shock x white 

 
Drought shock x boy 

 
Drought shock x  
low educated mother 

 
N 
R-sq 
Basic controls 
Temperature control 
Year FE 
Municipality FE  

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

-0.61 

[0.3371]* 

326433 
0.238 

-0.8114 

 

 

 
 

 

 

Panel A - Prova Brasil takers - 5th graders 

-0.6287 
[0.3243]* 
-0.0909 
[0.1889] 

 

-0.9072 

 

[0.3320]*** 

-0.477 
[0.3293] 

 
 

0.5306 

[0.1709]*** 

 
 
 
 

-0.4435 

[0.1766]** 

 
 

326433 
0.238 

326433 
0.238 

 

326433 
0.238 

 

 

 

-0.5319 
[0.2974]* 

 
 
 
 

 

326429 
0.248 

 
Panel B - Prova Brasil takers - 9th graders 

 

 

-0.8417 

 

-1.127 

 

-0.7617 

 

[0.3512]** 

[0.3440]** 

[0.3554]*** 

[0.3658]** 

 

 

 

162828 
0.167 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

0.2008 
[0.3926] 

 

 

162828 
0.167 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

 
 

0.784 

[0.2681]*** 

 

162828 
0.167 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

 
 
 
 

-0.1088 
[0.2439] 

 

162828 
0.167 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

-0.6747 
[0.4029]* 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

162838 

0.17 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

 

 
 
 

 

 

-0.4899 
[0.2963]* 
-0.2265 
[0.2405] 

 
 

326429 
0.248 

-0.7285 
[0.3929]* 

0.3566 
[0.4124] 

 
 
 
 
 

162838 

0.17 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

 

-0.813 

[0.3224]** 

 

-0.3124 
[0.3136] 

 
 

0.5699 

[0.1904]*** 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

326429 
0.248 

-0.9582 

[0.4092]** 

 
 

0.7043 

[0.2695]*** 

 
 
 

162838 

0.17 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

-0.5778 

[0.2213]*** 

 

 

 

326429 
0.248 

-0.4865 
[0.4223] 

 
 
 
 

-0.4126 
[0.2699] 

 

162838 

0.17 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

Table A2. Heterogeneity in the drought shocks effect by school characteristics 

 
  

1 

Math 
score 

2 

Math score 

3 

Math 
score 

4 

5 

6 

Portuguese 

Portuguese 

Portuguese 

score 

score 

score 

Panel A - Prova Brasil takers - 5th graders 

Drought shock 

-0.6455 

-0.8177 

-0.574 

[0.3248]** 

[0.3249]**  [0.3388]* 

-0.5319 
[0.2974]* 

 
Drought shock 
x cistern 
Drought shock 
x 
transportation 

 
 
 

 

0.9926 

[0.4526]** 

 

 

 
 

-0.1924 

[0.3728] 

 
 
 

 

-0.6994 

[0.2978]** 

0.9655 

[0.4516]** 

 

 

-0.4953 
[0.2923]* 

 
 

-0.0984 

[0.3577] 

 
N 
R-sq 

 

326433 
0.192 

 

326433 
0.238 

 

326433 
0.238 

 

326429 
0.172 

 

326429 
0.248 

 

326429 
0.248 

 
Drought shock 

 

 
Drought shock 
x cistern 
Drought shock 
x transportation 
N 
R-sq 

 
Basic controls 
Temperature 
control 
Year FE 
Municipality 
FE  

 
Panel B - Prova Brasil takers - 9th graders 

 

 

 

-0.8114 

-0.9692 

-0.686 

[0.3512]**  [0.3685]***  [0.4152]* 

-0.6747 
[0.4029]* 

 
 
 
 

162828 
0.167 

0.955 

[0.5663]* 

 
 

162828 
0.167 

 
 

-0.2674 
[0.4434] 
162828 
0.167 

 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

 
 
 
 

162838 

0.17 

 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

-0.8393 
[0.4282]* 

0.9963 

[0.5899]* 

 
 

162838 

 

-0.6339 
[0.5108] 

 
 

-0.087 
[0.5227] 
162838 

0.17 

 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

0.17 

 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Note: Basic controls include students' sex, race, age fixed effects, dummy for level of mother’s education, 
and  dummy  for  level  of  father's  education,  also  some  school  characteristics  as  dummies  indicating 
whether there is a computer lab, science lab, cistern and free transportation for students. We report robust 
standard errors clustered at the municipality level (in brackets). Significance levels: ***p < 0.01, **p < 
0.05, *p < 0.1. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

  

Table A3. Drought effect on student achievement in different times 

1 

Math 
score 

2 

Math 
score 

3 

Math 
score 

4 

5 

6 

Portuguese 

Portuguese 

Portuguese 

score 

score 

score 

Panel A - Prova Brasil takers - 5th graders 

 
Drought shock 
(current year) 

-0.65 

 
[0.3248]** 

 

-0.43 

 

-0.61 

 

-0.53 

 

-0.48 

 

-0.51 

[0.3590] 

[0.3220]* 

[0.2974]* 

[0.3377] 

[0.2999]* 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

-0.01 

[0.2867] 

 

0.92 

[0.4655]** 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-0.34 

[0.2747] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

326433 
0.238 

 

326433 
0.238 

 

326433 
0.238 

 

326429 
0.248 

Panel B - Prova Brasil takers - 9th graders 

 

 

 

 

 

 

-0.13 

[0.2402] 

 

0.51 

[0.3983] 

 
 
 

326429 
0.248 

-0.60 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-0.28 

[0.2360] 

326429 
0.248 

-0.68 

 

 

 

-0.81 

 
[0.3512]**  [0.4022]**  [0.3396]** 

-0.80 

-0.81 

 

 

 

-0.67 

[0.4029]* 

[0.4634] 

[0.3889]* 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

0.13 

[0.3512] 

 

-0.28 

[0.5027] 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-0.05 

[0.3215] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

-0.12 

[0.3429] 

 

-0.13 

[0.5444] 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.07 

[0.3209] 

 

162828 
0.167 

 

162828 
0.168 

 

162828 
0.168 

 

Yes 

Yes 

 

Yes 

Yes 

 

Yes 

Yes 

 

162838 

 

162838 

 

162838 

0.17 

 

Yes 

Yes 

0.17 

 

Yes 

Yes 

0.17 

 

Yes 

Yes 

 
Drought shock 
(Lag, Year -1) 

 
Drought shock 
(Lag, Year -2) 

 
Drought shock 
(Lead, Year +1) 

 
N 
R-sq 

 

 
Drought shock 
(current year) 

 
Drought shock 
(Lag, Year -1) 

 
Drought shock 
(Lag, Year -2) 

 
Drought shock 
(Lead, Year +1) 

 
N 
R-sq 

 
Basic controls 
Temperature 
control 
Year FE 
Municipality FE  

Yes 
Yes 

Yes 
Yes 

Yes 
Yes 
Note: Basic controls include students' sex, race, age fixed effects, dummy for level of mother’s education, 
and  dummy  for  level  of  father's  education,  also  some  school  characteristics  as  dummies  indicating 
whether there is a computer lab, science lab, cistern and free transportation for students. We report robust 
standard errors clustered at the municipality level (in brackets). Significance levels: ***p < 0.01, **p < 
0.05, *p < 0.1. 

Yes 
Yes 

Yes 
Yes 

Yes 
Yes 

