Labor Market Equilibrium Eﬀects of Cash Transfers

Evidence from a Structural Model and a Randomized Experiment

M. Christian Lehmann‡

July 16, 2014

ANPEC: ´Area 13 - Economia do Trabalho

Abstract: Critics argue that cash transfers (e.g. Bolsa Familia) to poor households would discourage work
incentives. The few existing studies on the subject are far from conclusive: some do ﬁnd a negative, others a
positive, and again others no eﬀect of cash transfers on labor supply. Important questions remain unanswered:
In which context have cash transfers which eﬀect on labor supply? What is the relationship between the size of
the transfer and labor supply? I address these questions using a structural model and data from a large cash
transfer program in Mexico. Perhaps surprisingly, I ﬁnd that large cash transfers have a stimulating eﬀect on
labor supply, while small transfers provide disincentives to work.
Keywords: Poverty, Cash Transfers, Labor Supply

Resumo: Cr´ıticos dizem que programas de transferˆencia de renda (como Bolsa Fam´ılia por exemplo) diminuem
os incentivos dos beneﬁci´arios de trabalhar. Os poucos estudos existentes sobre este tema n˜ao s˜ao conclusivos:
alguns estudos encontram um efeito negativo, outros um efeito positivo, e outros nenhum efeito das trans-
ferˆencias sobre a oferta de trabalho. Quest˜oes importantes permanecem sem resposta: em que contexto as
transferˆencias tem qual efeito sobre a oferta de trabalho? O que ´e a rela¸c˜ao entre o tamanho da transferˆencia e
oferta de trabalho? Este artigo busca respostas a estes perguntas atrav´es de um modelo estrutural e dados de
um programa de transferˆencia de renda no M´exico. Talvez surpreendentemente, meus resultados sugerem que
transferˆencias maiores estimulam oferta de trabalho, enquanto transferˆencias pequenas geram desincentivos ao
trabalho.
Palavras-chave: Pobreza, transferˆencia de renda, oferta de trabalho

JEL Classiﬁcation: C81, D31, H23, I38, O12.

‡Assistant Professor, Department of Economics, University of Brasilia (christianlehmann0@gmail.com)

1

1

Introduction

Cash transfer programs, such as Bolsa Familia in Brazil or Progresa in Mexico, are increasingly
being implemented by governments to reduce poverty and inequality in rural areas.1. Such pro-
grams, however, also have a signiﬁcant number of critics. One of their main arguments is that
such transfers would discourage work incentives of recipients. The existing empirical evidence
is far from conclusive: some studies ﬁnd no eﬀects on labor supply (Parker and Skouﬁas, 2000;
Foguel and de Barros, 2008) while others ﬁnd positive eﬀects (Ribas and Soares, 2011; Alz´ua
et al., 2012), while again others ﬁnd negative eﬀects (Tavarez, 2010).

The inconclusiveness of existing empirical ﬁndings calls for more theoretical work on the rela-
tionship between cash transfers and labor supply. In this paper we use data from a cash transfer
program in Mexico to estimate and a structural labor supply model. Comparative statics show
how not only the magnitude but even the direction of the labor supply eﬀect depends on
parameters that describe the program and the environment in which it is implemented.

2 The Model

2.1 A simple two-household-two-commodities model

Consider a village populated by a poor household (henceforth P) and a rich household (hence-
forth R). Each household is composed of a male (henceforth Mi) and a female member (hence-
forth Fi) where i ∈ {P, R}. Mi has the opportunity to go out of village to work at exogenous
wage ¯pM
L . This captures the fact that the often only source of wage labor is seasonal work on
some large commercial farm or seasonal construction work in some large city.
Fi cannot work abroad because she has obligations inside the village such as for example child
and/or livestock care. Fi, however, can work in the household’s family business which oper-
ates inside the village (typically petty trade activities, i.e. buy commodities in a nearby town
and resell with a mark-up inside the village).2 We assume that a household cannot hire in
non-household members to work for the family business (because of, for example, prohibitively
high monitoring costs). Consequently, female labor supply is a function of the endogenous
household speciﬁc female shadow wage pF,i
L . The latter is determined in the household internal
labor market equilibrium where demand for female labor must equal supply.
There are two commodities in the village economy: A staple (henceforth q) which may be pro-
duced by one or both of the two households using their respective land endowments and the
available supply of female labor.
The second good in the economy is a (composite) manufactured commodity (henceforth y) that
is produced outside the village and hence has to be imported by the two households (typically
items such as soap, cooking oil, recharge cards for cell phones, batteries, etc.).

1see Lindert et al. (2006) and Fizbein and Schady (2009) for a comprehensive overview.
2Of course, in reality such labor market segregation by gender will not always be perfect. For example, a
female without child care obligations may have the opportunity to do out-of-village wage labor work. Accom-
modating the possibility of a not perfectly segregated labor market would add complexity to the model that is
disproportional to the little additional amount of information that we gain from doing so. In this paper we’ll
be using data from rural Mexico to estimate and validate the model. Descriptive statistics (see table 1) show
that share of females in out-of village wage labor activities is only 10.5 percent. With a male share of roughly
50 percent the within-village service labor market is not as gender segregated as the out-of-village wage labor
market.

2

Each household is assumed to maximize a utility function

ui : f (qi; yi; li,M ; li,F ) → (cid:60)

i ∈ {P, R}

i(·) > 0 and u(cid:48)(cid:48)

(1)
i (·) < 0 and where qi, yi, li,M , li,F being household i’s consumption of
where u(cid:48)
the staple, imported (composite) manufactured commodity, male leisure, and female leisure,
respectively. For males, leisure is deﬁned as li,M = ¯Lnet
i,M is the male’s
net time endowment and LM denoting his labor supply. Similarly, female leisure is deﬁned as
li,F = ¯Lnet
Each household maximizes (1) subject to it’s full budget constraint:
L × li,M

i,M − Li,M , where ¯Lnet

i × qi + py × yi + pF,i

L × li,F + ¯pM,i

i,F − Li,F .

Ii ≡ pq

(2)

where Ii is a household’s (full) income, pq
i denotes household speciﬁc shadow price of the staple,
and py is the village price of the imported manufactured composite commodity. Maximizing
(1) with respect to (2) yields the demand function for the manufactured imported commodity

for the staple

yi : f (Ii; py; Ω) → (cid:60)

qi : f (Ii; pi

q; Ω) → (cid:60)

and leisure, so labor supply is given by

Li,M : f (Ii; ¯pL

M ; Ω) → (cid:60)

Equivalently, labor supply of the female is given by:

Li,F : f (Ii; pL

F ; Ω) → (cid:60)

where Ω is a vector of preference parameters.

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(i.) Transaction Costs
An important characteristic of the model is the presence of transactions costs in consumption
and production. Many items that form part of the consumption basket of villagers these days
are not produced by the village, but have to be imported from the next market (e.g. some
big town). Such items include soap, cooking oil, medicine, etc. Thus the eﬀective price that a
villager pays for the imported composite manufactured commodity is

py = ¯pz + ¯my × ps

(7)

where ¯pz is the (exogenous) price of one unit of y at the next market from which it is imported.
But then in order for this one unit to reach the village ¯my units of an ’import service’ with
price ps are required.

3

Also, if a household sells one unit of its staple production, mq units of export service are required
for the one unit of staple to get from the household’s plot to the market where it is sold.3 The
q = ¯pq − mq × ps. Similarly, if a household wishes to buy one unit
selling price is consequently ps
of staple, mq units of import service are required. The purchase price of staple is consequently
q = ¯pq + mq × ps.
pp
If a household is selling, buying or stays self suﬃcient is determined by the household speciﬁc
shadow price for the staple. If the shadow price is lower (higher) than the selling (purchase)
price, then utility maximization requires the household to sell (buy) the staple. If the shadow
price falls in between the selling and purchase price, the household should stay self suﬃcient
(i.e. neither sell nor buy). The household shadow price is determined in the household internal
staple equilibrium

i + qp
qx
is household i(cid:48)s staple production, qp

where qx
i
spectively, and qi is consumption.

i ≡ qi + qs
i
i and qs
i is the purchased and sold quantity re-

(8)

(ii.) Service production
Above we described how both consumption of y as well as purchases and sales of q require some
amount of export/import ’service’ for these commodities to get from the village to the market
and/or vice versa. Technically, we assume that the household acts as a ﬁrm which ’produces’
this import/export ’service’ according to the production function s : f (LF,s,i, Ks,i, Θ) → (cid:60),
where LF,s,i denotes female labor, Ks,i is capital, and Θ a vector of technology parameters
K(·) < 0. We think of capital as
where s(cid:48)
cash (e.g. money needed to by commodities in bulk in order to resell with a mark-up inside
the village.). We assume that capital is a share ¯µi of the household’s cash income:

L(·) < 0, as well as s(cid:48)

K(·) > 0 and s(cid:48)(cid:48)

L(·) > 0 and s(cid:48)(cid:48)

Ks,i = ¯µi(Li,M × ¯pL

M + qs

i + Ti)

Proﬁt is thus given by

πs,i = ps × f (LF,s,i, Ks,i, Θ) − pL

F × LF,s,i − Ks,i

Proﬁt maximizing labor demand for service production is arg maxLF,s,i πs,i:

LD

F,s,i : f (ps, pF

L , Ks, Θ) → (cid:60)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(iii.) Agricultural Production
The staple production function maps female labor (LF,q,i), a household’s land endowment ( ¯Ai)

3The assumption here is that there is no farm gate selling. That farmgate selling is rather the exception that
the rule has stated in (?;(?);(?)). Furthermore, we assume that there are no sunk costs that would arise from
a household transporting staple to the market without being able to sell it (and hence would have to transport
it back to the village after the market day)

4

(14)

(15)

and a vector of agricultural technology parameters (Ξ) onto the output space qx
i :

i : f (LF,q,i, ¯Ai, Ξ) → (cid:60)
qx

(12)

We assume land to be ﬁxed endowment, and there is no land land market. Proﬁt maximizing
labor demand for agricultural labor is arg maxLF,q,i πi,q = pi
F , ¯Ki, Ξ) → (cid:60)

F × LF,q,i :

F,q,i : f (pi

i − pL

q × qx

q, pL

(13)

LD

(iv.) Household Internal Labor Market Equilibrium
The female shadow wage pF
rium where demand for female labor must equal supply
F,q,i ≡ Li,F

F,s,i + LD

LD

L is then determined in the household internal labor market equilib-

(v.) Poverty
In our model poverty manifests itself in two ways. Firstly, R possesses a larger land endowment
than P

¯AP < ¯AR.

Secondly, we assume that P has less eﬀective labor endowment. The negative relationship
between poverty and labor productivity is well documented in the literature (?, ?, ?). For
example, malnourished individual’s concentration and capacity to do heavy physical work is
limited. Furthermore, limited access to health care (e.g. medicine) translates into more sick
days, hence less potential days of labor supply (?, ?, ?).
In our model we’ll assume that the labor endowment of a household member is discounted by
the degree of household poverty ψi, such that the net labor endowment is ¯L/(1 + ψi), where ψi
is zero if i ∈ R and strictly positive otherwise. For example if ¯L =365 days and ψP,F = 1/3,
then this would imply a net labor endowment of the rich female of 365 days while that of
the poor female would only be 275 days. Lastly, the government implements a redistributive
transfer to aid the poor household. That is, P receives monetary support (a “cash transfer’)
by the government while R does not.4

(vi.) Household Income
Consequently, household full income is deﬁned as

Ii = ¯L/(1 + ¯ψi,F ) × pL

i,F + ¯L/(1 + ¯ψi,M ) × ¯pL

M + πq + πs + Ti

(16)

The ﬁrst and second term denote the value of M’s and F’s net labor endowment. The third
and fourth term denote proﬁts made from staple and service production. The last term denotes
a cash transfer by the government, whereby TR = 0 and TP > 0.

(vii.) Equilibrium of the village economy

4We ignore how the transfer is ﬁnanced.

5

In equilibrium, the village’s staple market is characterized by the identity

qP + qR + qex ≡ qx

R + qx
P

(17)

where the ﬁrst two terms on the left hand side correspond to the staple demanded by the
two households, respectively. The right hand side corresponds to staple production of the two
households. Equation (17) determines the equilibrium trade balance qex. The village exports
staple if qex > 0 and imports staple if qex < 0.

Secondly, in equilibrium the service market must clear

(yP + yR) ¯my + (qp

P + qp

R)mp

q + (qs

P + qs

R)ms

q ≡ sP + sR

(18)

where the right hand side is the service supplied by P and R. The left hand side represents the
demand for service. The ﬁrst term on the left hand side is the service demand for importing
the manufactured commodity, and the second (third) term being the service demand to import
(export) staple. Equation (18) determines the equilibrium price of the service ps.

2.2 Model Solution
The model can be written as an n × n system of (non-linear) equations. The world market
price of the imported manufactured good ¯pz is the numeraire of the system. The non-convexity
exhibited by the ’switching’ staple shadow price makes it that there is no closed form solution.
We thus turn to a numerical approach to obtain a solution to the model. This requires functional
form assumptions for (a) the utility function and the production function of (b) the service and
(c) the staple. In the following we’ll therefore assume a Stone-Geary utility function of the
form
ui = ¯αi log(qi− ¯qi)+ ¯βi log(yi− ¯yi)+¯γF log

(cid:18) ¯LM

(cid:18) ¯LF

− Li,M

− Li,F

+¯γM log

(cid:19)

(cid:19)

(19)

1 + ¯ψi,F

1 + ¯ψi,M

where ¯qi and ¯yi are subsistence thresholds. For the service we assume a simple constant returns
to scale production function of the form

Si = ¯σi × L¯ηi

F,s,iK 1−¯ηi

s,i

where ¯σi is a scale parameter. We further assume that staple production is Leontief:

i = inf{ ¯A/¯ai, Li/¯bi}
qx

(20)

(21)

where ¯ai and ¯bi are the Leontief input share parameters. Since the land distribution is exoge-
nous in this model, this functional form assumption implies that the labor demand for staple
production is ﬁx.5

5In the appendix we present results for alternative functional form speciﬁcations

6

3 Parameter estimation and within-sample ﬁt

In order to solve the model numerically we need values for its parameters. The model parameters
are obtained from data collected on the control group of a randomized control trial (RCT)
conducted in Mexico, which we henceforth refer to simply as the Progresa experiment. The
next subsection brieﬂy describes the Progresa experiment.6

3.1 The Progresa Experiment

In 1997, the Mexican government started the so called Progresa program with the aim of re-
ducing rural poverty and inequality (Schultz, 2004). The program provides monetary grants
to the lower tail of the village welfare distribution, i.e. the poorest households of a village. In
order to identify the latter, the Mexican government used a multidimensional poverty index.7
Progresa monetary grants are of substantial size, amounting to about 20 percent of average
household monetary income in rural Mexico.

For the purpose of impact evaluation and feasibility of program implementation, the program
was initially not implemented simultaneously in all villages. In 1997, the Mexican government
determined all eligible households. Then, a set of villages where the program ought to be im-
plemented ﬁrst was chosen randomly. Households classiﬁed as ‘poor’ in these villages would
receive the ﬁrst Progresa transfer payment in early 1998. The remaining villages would only be
incorporated into the program two years later. Households classiﬁed as ‘poor’ in these villages
would receive the ﬁrst Progresa transfer only in early 2000. The latter, therefore, serve as a
control group for the years 1998 and 1999. In some 320 villages where the program would be
implemented ﬁrst (henceforth referred to as ‘treatment villages’) and in another 186 villages
where the program would start two years later (henceforth referred to as ‘control villages’)
the Mexican government conducted a comprehensive baseline, and a three follow-up surveys
between and 1998 and 1999. These surveys are village censuses, i.e. data on all residents of
these 506 villages was collected. We thus have a panel of the entire village welfare cumulative
distribution function, consisting of program-eligible households at the lower tail and program-
ineligible households at the upper tail, in each of the 320 treatment and 186 control villages.

Prior to the start of the program these 506 villages have characteristics that would describe
many village economies across the globe. The average village size is 45 households, 95 percent
of which report agriculture to be their main source of livelihood. One year after the start of
the program, on average 60 percent of residents in treatment villages receive the government

6Progresa stands for Progama de escolarisacion salud y alimentation which is Spanish for ’program for
schooling, health, and nutrition’. For more details on the Progresa program we refer the reader to Hoddinott
and Skouﬁas (2004)

7see Skouﬁas et al. (2001) for a description of the method.

7

Table 1: Characteristics of the control group sample

Household and Community Characteristics
Gini Index for agricultural land ownership

Pre-program household poverty score

Monthly Food consumption (per capita, peso value)

Monthly Food expenditure (per capita, peso value)

Monthly non-purchased food consumption (per capita, peso value)

Monthly household disposable income (in peso)

Cultivated area (in hectare)

Hourly wage rate

Livestock holding index

Household size

Indigenous household head

Education of head
no
primary
secondary
tertiary

Eligible Households

Ineligible Households

Mean

[Std.Dev.]

Mean

[Std.Dev.]

0.71

[120.7]

701.6
[120.7]

182.5
[163.6]

137.3
[130.1]

38.85
[591.9]

662.1
[362.6]

0.46
[2.77]

5.27

[36.14]

-0.21
[2.41]

5.44
[2.60]

0.36
[0.48]

[124.9]

882.5
[124.9]

198.4
[153.2]

169.6
[145.4]

27.86
[48.1]

795.3

[2129.8]

0.75
[2.31]

6.97

[25.12]

0.06
[3.63]

4.82
[2.53]

0.17
[0.37]

32.55
62.03
4.92
0.51
6857

26.35
64.52
6.95
2.19
1949

N
Notes: standard deviations are reported in parenthesis. Livestock index calculated using principal component analysis

8

‘poor’) and
transfer. Table 1 shows descriptive statistics of households classiﬁed eligible (i.e.
‘non-poor’) by the government.8 The table suggests that
households classiﬁed ineligible (i.e.
the program was eﬀective in targeting the lower tail of the village welfare distribution, i.e. the
poorest households of a village. Program-eligible households have, on average lower food con-
sumption, income and education levels, as well as lower land and livestock holdings, compared
to program-ineligible households. These diﬀerences are all statistically signiﬁcant.

3.2 Obtaining values for the model parameters

In this section, we estimate the parameters of the model exploiting the data available from the
control group of the Progresa experiment. The vector of parameters writes:

Γ = { ¯Ai, ¯pz, ¯pq, ¯pL

M , ¯Li,F , ¯Li,M , ¯ψi,F , ¯ψi,M , ¯α, ¯β, ¯γM , ¯γF , ¯mp

q, ¯ms

q, ¯my, ¯ηi, ¯σi, ¯ai, ¯bi}

(22)

that is land endowment ( ¯Ai); the world world market price of the staple ¯pq; the out-of-
M . The net yearly labor endowment of male and female respectively ¯Li,F /(1 +
village wage ¯pL
¯ψi,F ), ¯Li,M /(1 + ¯ψi,M ); the price of the imported composite manufactured commodity ¯pz; as well
as the preferences for staple (¯α), imported manufactured commodity ( ¯β), and male and female9
leisure (¯γM and ¯γF ); the amount of service needed to import one unit of the imported manu-
factured commodity ( ¯my); the amount of service needed to import or export one unit of the
staple ( ¯mp
q), the labor intensity and scale parameters of the service production function
(¯ηi and ¯σi), as well as the Leontief share parameters ¯bi and ¯ai for agricultural production.

q and ¯ms

Values for a subset of Γ can be observed directly from the data available on the control group.
Denote C and T the set of households in the experimental data that live in control and treatment
villages, respectively. Also, let P denote the set of households in the experimental data that
are eligible for the Progresa transfer, and R those that are not. For the poor household of
our model, we can then obtain an estimate for some model parameter κP ∈ Γ by taking the
sample average of the observed value of this parameter across program eligible households in
the control group:

κexp
i

(23)

(cid:99)κP = n−1

i∈{C∩P}

(cid:88)

i∈{C∩P}

i

where κexp
denotes the observed value for household i in the experimental data. In an analog
manner, for the rich household of our model, we do obtain an estimate for some model parameter
κR ∈ Γ by taking the sample average across program ineligible households in the control group
8We present descriptive statistics of the control group, one year after the start of the program. Ideally, we
would present characteristics of all sample households in both treatment and control villages prior to the start
of the program. Unfortunately, key variables such as food consumption and income plus value of consumed own
agricultural production are not available in the baseline survey.
9Due to the assumption of a constant returns to scale utility function, we have that ¯γF = 1 − ¯α − ¯β − ¯γM

9

of the experimental data:

(cid:99)κR = n−1

i∈C∩R

(cid:88)

i∈C∩R

κexp
i

(24)

For example, an estimate of the parameters ¯AP and ¯AR (land endowment of P and R, respec-
tively) is obtained by taking the average land endowment of program eligible and ineligible
households in the control group, respectively. We are thus following a representative household
approach in our numerical simulations.
Furthermore, respondents in the control group were asked for the daily wage that an agricul-
tural worker can earn, and we take the average of these answers across the control group to
obtain and estimate for ¯pM
L .
The market price of the staple ¯pq can be obtained from administrative records of the Mexican
Ministry of Agriculture. We then assume a gross labor endowment ¯L of 365 days for each F
and M, respectively. As the numeraire of the system we set the world market price of the
imported manufactured composite commodity (¯pz) to one. The Leontief production function
was calibrated using data from a household survey10 representative for rural Mexico which was
conducted around the same time as the Progresa control group data collection took place. This
survey gives us information about the amount of labor days needed to cultivated one hectare
of corn.
However, there is a vector Λ ∈ Γ of model parameters that can neither be observed directly
from the data nor obtained from administrative records. This vector writes Λ = {¯α, ¯β, ¯γM ,
q, ¯ηi, ¯σi, µi, ψM,i, ψF,i}. In order to obtain values for these parameters we do exploit
¯my, ¯mp
the fact that we do observe from the control group data a couple of in the model endogenous
variables, such as the average yearly quantity of consumed staple per household qexp
, as well
as the average yearly out-of-village labor supply of men Lexp
i,M , and lastly women’s average
yearly labor supply to service activities Lexp
i,s,F .11 The superscript exp is used to indicate that
these values are obtained directly from the experimental data (we will denote from the model
predicted values with the superscript sim).
i,s,F}. And denote Ysim(Λ) the vector of from the model
Deﬁne the vector Yexp
obtained values of these variables. We then select Λ so as to minimize the standardized squared
distance between Yexp

C = {qexp

and Ysim(Λ)

i,M , Lexp

q, ¯ms

, Lexp

i

i

C

(cid:18)Yexp

min

Λ

E =

C − Ysim(Λ, X(Λ))

Yexp

C

(cid:19)2

s.t. X = g(Λ)

(25)

10Encuesta nacional de hogares rurales
11actually, we observe weekly values for these variables that we then aggregate to yearly variables. The

potential pitfalls of this kind of aggregation are discussed below.

10

The full Lagrangian writes12:

i − (¯q + ¯α

i=P,R

qexp
(cid:88)
Lexp
i,M −(cid:16) ¯L
Lexp
i,F −(cid:16) ¯L

1+ ¯ψi,F

1+ ¯ψi,M

2

Ii−¯y×(py)− ¯lM×¯pL

M− ¯lF ×pL

F,i

pq
i

qexp
i

− ¯lM − ¯γM
Lexp
i,M

Ii−¯q×pq

i −¯y×py− ¯lF ×pL

F,i

¯pL
M

Ii−¯q×pq

i −¯y×py− ¯lM×¯pL

M

pL
F,i

− ¯lF − ¯γF
Lexp
i,F

2
(cid:17)
2

(cid:17)

min

Λ

E =

+

+

(cid:33) ¯ηi

(−1+¯ηi)

× pL
−1+¯ηi
K
s,i
(¯ηi × ps × ¯σi)

F,i

∀ i ∈ {P, R} s.t.

Si = ¯σi × K 1−¯ηi

q × ps)
i = (¯pz − ¯ms
pq
(cid:32)
py = ¯pz + ¯my × ps
s,i ×
(cid:32)

Ks,i = µ(Li,M × ¯pL

LD,s,i =

(cid:33) 1

i + Ti)
(−1+¯ηi)

M + qs
× pL
−1+¯ηi
K
i,s
(¯ηi × ps × ¯σi)
i × qx

F,i

i − pL
πq,i = pq
πs,i = ps × Si − pL

F,i × LD,q,i
F,i × LD,s,i

Ii =

¯L

1 + ¯ψi,M

× ¯pM
L +
Ii − ¯q × pq

1 + ¯ψi,F
i − ¯lM × ¯pM

× pL
L − ¯lF × ¯pF

L

F,i + πs,i + πq,i + Ti

yi = ¯y + ¯β

¯L

py

i

i + qs

i = qexp
i,F = LD,s,i + LD,q,i
R = qP + qR + ROW

i + qp
qx
Lexp
P + qx
qx
SP + SR = (yP + yR) ¯my + (qp

P + qp

R) ¯mp

q + (qs

i + qs

i ) ¯ms
q

(26)

(27)
(28)

(29)

(30)

(31)

(32)

(33)

(34)

(35)

(36)
(37)
(38)
(39)

12For the purpose of readability, we omit henceforth the subscript C, which applies to all variables of the

Lagrangian.

11

Table 2: Parameter values

M in USD/day

land endowment ( ¯Ai) in ha.
price of the staple ¯pq in USD/kg
out-of-village wage ¯pL
labor endowment of M ( ¯Li,M ) in days/year
labor endowment of F ( ¯Li,F ) in days/year
labor productivity discount factor of M ( ¯ψi,M )
labor productivity F ( ¯ψi,F )
price manufactured commodity ¯pz = 1

preference staple (¯α)
preference manufactured commodity ( ¯β)

preference leisure of M (¯γM )

preference leisure of F (¯γF )

service per import of manuf. cmdity ( ¯my);
service per import staple ( ¯mp

q);

labor intensity in service production (¯ηi)

technology in service production and (¯σi)

capitalization share of family business (µ)

Poor Household (P ) Rich Household (R)

[0.528]

[.276]

[3.5]

[365]

[365]

[.056]

[.321]

[1.0]

[ 0.056]

[0.502]

[0.123]

[.32]

[.027]

[.010]

[.10]

[8.64]

[0.087]

[1.227]

[.276]

[3.5]

[365]

[365]

[0]

[0]

[1.0]

[ 0.056]

[0.502]

[0.123]

[.32]

[.027]

[.010]

[.10]

[1.33]

[0.43]

Table 2 shows the parameters obtained from this exercise, as well as all other parameter values
of the model.

3.3 Within-sample ﬁt

C∩P, with the from the model simulated value, Y sim

The ﬁrst row in each panel of table 3 compares the actual from the control group observed value
of some endogenous variable, Y exp
P (Γ). We’ll
refer to the diﬀerence between the latter two as the ’within-sample goodness of ﬁt’. We call it
’within-sample’ because the parameters underlying the simulation were obtained partly from
the control group, i.e. from the same sample that we are comparing the simulated values to.
Table 3 reveals that the within sample ﬁt is perfect, i.e. the from the model simulated value re-
produces exactly the actual from the control group observed value of some endogenous variable.

A good within-sample ﬁt is an important starting point to ensure the benchmark model can
replicate behavior observed in the data. However, this provides no direct evidence on how
reliable the model predictions are under changes to the policy environment. In the next section

12

Table 3: Results: Within-sample & out-of-sample validation (program-eligible households)

Male

Female

simulated

actual

simulated

actual

annual labor supply (in days)

control
treatment
ATE (se)
Ln ATE

228.0
191.53
-36.492
-0.160

228.0
215.8

-10.58(7.97)
-.155 (.109)

17.3
19.10
1.71
0.098

17.3
29.8

12.41 (8.41)
.151(.112)

Notes: The values in parenthesis in the third row of each panel are the standard errors of the regression
coeﬃcient obtained from OLS regression in equation (41)

we’ll analyze the model’s performance in out-of-sample tests, where we’ll see if the model is
able to reproduce the outcomes of the Progresa treatment group sample. Recall that we did
not use the latter sample during the calibration of the model (we have exploited exclusively
information on the control group). Therefore the label ’out-of-sample validation’.

4 Model (Out-of-Sample) Validation

4.1 Method

Now we add a cash transfer to the income of P in our model, and then solve the model to
obtain the predicted outcomes of the treatment group. As a measure of the performance of the
model, we compare the latter to the actual from the experimental data observed outcomes of
the treatment group.

Formally, we compute the simulated treatment eﬀect for some outcome Yj as the diﬀerence
between simulated control group and simulated treatment group:

¯θsim = Y sim

P,TP >0(Γ) − Y sim

P,TP =0(Γ)

(40)

We then compare θsim to the experimental benchmark ¯θexp, an estimate of which is obtained
from the OLS regression

Yj,i = α0 +(cid:100)θexp × Di + βXi + ui

(41)

where Di is a dummy that takes the value one if some program-eligible household i resides in
a treatment village, and zero if in a control village. Xi is a vector of controls.

13

4.2 Cautionary note

Diﬀerences in levels between simulated and actual experimental data are very likely to be due
to the simpliﬁed nature of our model which may not capture the entire set of mechanisms
underlying household behavior. Additionally, however, there a couple of other factors one has
to take into consideration. Comparing simulated treatment and actual treatment eﬀect as a

source of model validation relies on the assumption that (cid:98)θexp = θexp, i.e that the experimental

benchmark is correctly identiﬁed. In the case of the Progresa experiment, there are a couple
of sources of bias which pose a threat to identiﬁcation (in the following, we’ll just mention the
most important)
(i.) Randomization bias
Random treatment assignment shall ensure that the treatment group is similar both in terms of
observable and unobservable characteristics to the control group. As documented in Behrman
and Todd (1999), due to village level rather than individual randomization, household charac-
teristics in treatment vs. control group are not entirely balanced in the Progresa experimental
data. In the OLS regression (41) we are controlling for some of these unbalanced variables.
The presence of such pre-program diﬀerences between treatment and control group, however,
suggests that there may be other unobserved variables (that consequently cannot be control for)
which may confound the identiﬁcation of θexp. We do not expect that the lingering diﬀerences

are large enough to bias the sign, but it may well aﬀect the level of(cid:98)θexp.

(ii.) Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption
Another serious concern for the identiﬁcation of θexp is that control villages are ’contaminated’
by treatment villages (violation the Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption (SUTVA)). If

households in control villages are indirectly aﬀected by the program, then(cid:98)θexp is either upward

or downward biased, depending on the sign of the externality on households in control villages.
Externalities exhibited by a cash transfer program across villages have not received much at-
tention yet in the literature. Very recent evidence by Bobba and Gignoux (2011), however,
suggest that these externalities do exist. Again, we do not expect that such externalities are

large enough to bias the sign of the estimate, but it may well aﬀect the level of(cid:98)θexp.

(iii.) Measurement Error
The experimental data is probably measured with some non-zero degree of error. Sources of
measurement error include under/over reporting (e.g. individuals have an incentive to underre-
port wealth related variables such as labor supply or consumption in order to seem ’poor’ and
hence eligible for Progresa), recall bias (respondents don’t remember exactly how much they
consumed), enumerator bias (respondents answer are aﬀected by the presence of a stranger)
etc. Since the model does not explicitly account for measurement error, any diﬀerence in levels
of variables and treatment eﬀects between simulated and experimental treatment group may be
in part due to the measurement error in the data. Rather than comparing the levels of variables
and treatment eﬀects of simulated vs. actual treatment group as a source of model validation,
it seems more appropriate to just focus on the sign of simulated vs. actual treatment eﬀect.
The latter is more robust to measurement error.

14

The conclusion of this subsection is that, due to the presence of sources of bias which pose
a threat to the identiﬁcation of the experimental treatment eﬀect, comparing the levels of
simulated vs. actual treatment group as a source of model validation may not be appropriate.
It seems therefore more adequate to focus on the sign of simulated vs. actual treatment eﬀect,
which is much more more robust to these sources of bias.

4.3 Results (Out-of-Sample) Validation

Table 3 compares simulated to experimental treatment group. The ﬁrst row in each panel shows
again the simulated level of the P’s annual labor supply under a zero cash transfer, vis-a-vis
average labor supply of eligible households in the control group, which we’ve seen and discussed
already above in the ’within-sample ﬁt’ section.

Now, the second row in each panel contrasts the level of labor supply of the simulated treat-
ment group to the experimental benchmark. The third row then compares the simulated

treatment eﬀect, θsim (left column), to the experimental treatment eﬀect, (cid:98)θexp (right column).
The left column in the fourth row expresses the simulated treatment eﬀect in relative terms:
P,TP >0(Γ) − Y sim
[Y sim
P,TP =0(Γ). The experimental equivalent (fourth row right column)
is obtained by replacing the level of the dependent variable in OLS regression (41) by its natural
logarithm.

P,TP =0(Γ)]/Y sim

The model predicts a decrease in male labor supply from 228.0 to 191.5 days per year, i.e.
an annual decrease of 36.5 days (-16 percent). In the model this is because the cash transfer
constitutes a positive income eﬀect. The latter leads to an increased demand for leisure and,
consequently, a decrease in labor supply. This compares to an actual from the experimental
data observed treatment eﬀect of -10.58 days (-15.9 percent). Thus, the model correctly pre-
dicts the direction and relative magnitude of the eﬀect.

For females the model predicts an increase in labor supply from 17.3 to 19.1 days per year, i.e.
an annual increase of 1.71 days (+9.8 percent). Why is it that female labor supply increases
while male labor supply decreases? In our model, this is because the cash transfer generates a
positive income eﬀect which, ceteris paribus, increases demand for leisure (i.e. decreases labor
supply). Contrary to the male case, however, there is a substitution eﬀect in the female case:
the cash transfer, via the household internal labor market equilibrium, increases the female
wage which, ceteris paribus, increases female labor supply. Since the male wage is assumed to
be exogenous, the substitution eﬀect for the male is zero. In our model, the income eﬀect for
females is smaller than the substitution eﬀect and, consequently, female labor supply increases.
The simulated treatment eﬀect compares to an actual from the experimental data observed
treatment eﬀect of 15.1 percent. Thus, the model correctly predicts the direction of the eﬀect,
but somewhat underestimates both the absolute and relative magnitude of the experimental
treatment eﬀect.

15

Figure 1: role of cash transfer amount

5 The Role of the Cash Transfer Amount

In section 4 we have used the actual Progresa transfer amount (which is roughly 20 percent
of an eligible household’s baseline income) in order to validate our simple model. Using this
particular cash transfer amount, the model predicts a decrease in male labor supply from 228.0
to 191.5 days per year, i.e. an annual decrease of 36.5 days (-16 percent). In the model this is
because the cash transfer induced positive income eﬀect leads an increased demand for leisure
and, consequently, a decrease in labor supply.

An exogenous male wage impedes the presence of any substitution eﬀect. It is, consequently,
only the income eﬀect that aﬀects male labor supply. It is thus straight forward to conclude
that an increase (decrease) in the cash transfer amount will further decrease (increase) male
labor supply.

Not as straight forward is to see the the sign of the second order derivative of the treatment
eﬀect. The latter tells us whether the marginal treatment eﬀect is decreasing, increasing, or
constant in TP . Figure 1 shows the from the model predicted relationship between male labor
supply and cash transfer amount. The ﬁgure reveals that the marginal treatment eﬀect is in-
creasing. At a ﬁrst glance this result may seem counterintuitive. Because one would expect
a concave relationship due to the decreasing marginal utility of consumption of leisure. The

16

0.000.050.100.150.200.250.30−0.3−0.2−0.10.00.10.20.3share of cash transfer on baseline incomeATE (in percent)ATE Labor Supply P (male)ATE Labor Supply R (male)ATE Labor Supply P (female)ATE Labor Supply R (female)reason for this at a ﬁrst glance puzzling result will become clear when we look at the second
order derivative of the female labor supply treatment eﬀect.

In section 4 we saw that, applying the Progresa cash transfer amount, the model predicts an
increase in female labor supply from 17.3 to 19.1 days per year. In the model this is because the
positive income eﬀect generated by the transfer is smaller than the substitution eﬀect generated
by an increase in the female shadow wage. Consequently, female labor supply increases.
The important question that arises is if the substitution eﬀect is always greater than the income
eﬀect along the entire interval of possible cash transfer amounts? Figure 1 shows that the answer
to this question is no. For small cash transfer amounts, the substitution eﬀect is smaller than
the income eﬀect. There exists some cash transfer amount T ∗ for which the substitution eﬀect
equals the income eﬀect. This leads to three possible scenarios. First, if TP = T ∗, income
and substitution eﬀect oﬀset each other and, consequently, the female labor supply treatment
eﬀect is zero. Second, if TP < T ∗, then the income eﬀect is greater than the substitution eﬀect
and female labor supply, consequently, decreases. Lastly, if TP > T ∗, then the income eﬀect
is smaller than the substitution eﬀect and the female labor supply treatment eﬀect becomes
positive:

< 0 if TP < T ∗

= 0 if TP = T ∗
> 0 if TP > T ∗

∂LP,F

TP

Since the village’s female labor endowment is assumed to be exogenous (i.e. no immigra-
tion/emigration), the female wage increases exponentially in TP . This explains why the second
order derivative of the female labor supply treatment eﬀect is positive, i.e. the marginal treat-
ment eﬀect is increasing. And the latter, in turn, explains the prima facie puzzling positive
second order derivative of the male labor supply treatment eﬀect. The higher the cash transfer
the more proportionally female labor supply increases, hence the more ’income’ she adds to the
household and, consequently, the proportionally higher the income eﬀect for the male.

6 Conclusion

In the past two decades, redistributive transfer programs have been proliferating in develop-
ing countries. Opponents of such such transfers frequently argue that such transfers would
discourage work incentives of recipients. The few existing (and exclusively empirical) studies
on the subject are far from conclusive: some do ﬁnd a negative, others a positive, and again
others no eﬀect at all on labor supply. The heterogeneity of existing empirical ﬁndings calls for
a theoretical framework that allows to draw more general conclusions on when (i.e.
in which
setting) and why (i.e. through which mechanisms) cash transfers aﬀect labor market outcomes.

In this paper we use data from an RCT to estimate and validate a two-household-two-commodity
model. Comparative statics show how not only the magnitude but even the direction of the

17

labor supply eﬀect depends on parameters that describe the program and the environment in
which it is implemented. Opposite to the common intuition, we ﬁnd that large cash transfers
can have a stimulating eﬀect on labor supply, while lower cash transfer provide disincentives.

References

Alz´ua, M. L., G. Cruces, and L. Ripani (2012). Welfare programs and labor supply in developing
countries: experimental evidence from latin america. Journal of Population Economics, 1–30.

Behrman, J. and P. Todd (1999). Randomness in the Experimental Samples of PROGRESA.

International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC.

Fizbein, A. and N. Schady (2009). Conditional Cash Transfers: Reducing Present and Future

Poverty. World Bank, Washington DC.

Foguel, M. and R. de Barros (2008). The Eﬀects of Conditional Cash Transfer Pro-
grammes on Adult Labour Supply: An Empirical Analysis Using a Time-Series-Cross-
Section. Working Paper . ANPEC 2008, http://www.anpec.org.br/encontro2008/
artigos/200807211655420-.pdf (23.07.2009).

Hoddinott, J. and E. Skouﬁas (2004). The Impact of PROGRESA on Food Consumption.

Economic Development and Cultural Change 53 (1), 37–61.

Lindert, K., W. Skouﬁas, and J. Shapiro (2006). Redistributing Income to the Poor and the
Rich: Public Transfers in Latin America and the Carribean. Discussion Paper No. 36966;
The World Bank, Washington DC .

Parker, S. and E. Skouﬁas (2000). The Impact of PROGRESA on Work, Leisure and Time

Allocation. Working Pager . International Food Policy Research Institute.

Ribas, R. and F. Soares (2011). Is the eﬀect of conditional transfers on labor supply negligible

everywhere? Working paper . IZA.

Schultz, P. (2004, June). School subsidies for the poor: evaluating the mexican progresa poverty

program. Journal of Development Economics 74 (1), 199–250.

Skouﬁas, E., B. Davis, and S. De La Vega (2001). Targeting the Poor in Mexico: An Evaluation

of the Selection of Households into PROGRESA. World Development 29 (10), 1769–1784.

Tavarez, P. (2010). Efeito do programa bolsa fam´ılia sobre a oferta de trabalho das maes.

Economia e Sociedade, Campinas 19 (3).

18

