Outsourcing and efficiency wages: the case of Brazil 

 

Carlos Alberto Belchior Doria Carneiro (UnB) 

Geovana Lorena Bertussi (UnB) 

July 2016 

 

 
 
 
Resumo 
 
Em  2015,  o  projeto  de  lei  4330/04,  que  promove  uma  nova  regulamentação  sobre  as  relações 
contratuais  terceirizadas,  gerou  uma  significativa  discussão  sobre  os  impactos  deste  modelo  de  contrato  no 
país.  Apesar  disso,  ainda  são  escassos  os  trabalhos  que  avaliam  as  consequências  da  terceirização.  Neste 
trabalho  buscamos  contribuir  com  o  debate,  analisando  os  impactos  da  terceirização  sobre  salários  e 
produtividade do trabalho. Construímos um modelo teórico pautado na ideia de assimetria de informação e 
evidenciamos que o não pagamento do salário-eficiência pode implicar em uma diminuição dos salários e da 
produtividade do trabalho. Testamos as implicações do modelo usando dados da RAIS e concluímos que: 1) 
os trabalhadores terceirizados sofrem uma penalização em seus salários de 7% a 10,5%, com características 
individuais controladas e 2) o não pagamento de salário-eficiência é o fator mais importante para explicar o 
gap observado. 
 

Palavras-chave: Terceirização, salários, salário-eficiência, produtividade. 
 
Abstract 
 
 
In 2015, bill of law 4330/04 advocating new regulations for outsourced contract relationships and the 
impacts  of  this  type  of  hiring  generated  significant  debate  in  Brazil.  Nonetheless,  there  are  still  very  few 
studies that evaluate the consequences of outsourcing. In this paper, we seek to  contribute to the debate by 
analyzing the impacts of outsourcing on wages and labor productivity. We created a theoretical model based 
on  the  idea  of  information  asymmetry  and  were  able  to  show  that  not  paying  efficiency  wages  can  imply 
lower wages and labor productivity. We tested the implications of the model using RAIS (Annual Report on 
Social  Information)  data  and  concluded  that:  1)  the  wages  of  outsourced  workers  are  reduced  by  7%  to 
10.5%,  with  controlled  individual  characteristics,  and  2)  the  non-payment  of  efficiency  wages  is  the  most 
important factor for explaining this gap.  
 
Key Words: outsourcing, wages, efficiency wages, productivity.  
 
JEL Classification: J31 
 
 
Área de submissão: Economia do Trabalho 
 

 

I – Introduction 
 
 
Recent decades have shown a tendency for change in the organizational structure of companies. They 
are becoming progressively more horizontal, meaning they are increasingly opting to  reduce the number of 
processes conducted inside the company and to increase their demand for services in the market (RAJAN and 
WOLF, 2006).  
 
One of the most relevant aspects of this process is the outsourcing of the labor force. Hiring workers 
and  conducting  activities  internally  has  gradually  been  substituted  by  contracts  with  specialized  companies 
that either execute the tasks or provide the workers to do so (ABRAHAM and TAYLOR, 1996).  
 
In  Brazil,  the  outsourcing  phenomenon  has  a  strong  presence  that  will  be  substantially  incremented 
once  the  procedure  for  any  type  of  activity  is  regulated  by  bill  of  law  4330/2004.  This  is  likely  due  to  the 
lesser degree of uncertainty that is associated to outsourcing activities, both for workers and business owners.  
 
According to Prado and Takaoka (2002), outsourcing permits company owners to significantly reduce 
their training and payroll costs. Consequently, once operation costs are consistently reduced, what is there to 
restrict the advancement of outsourcing?  
 
The  limiting  factors  of  outsourcing  are  the  same  as  those  that  constrain  company  size  and  market 
organization. Coase (1937) observed that economic theory did not have an explanation for the organization of 
individuals within firms, and suggested that business owners could not resort to the market without incurring 
costs.  And  if  they  did,  they  would  have  a  number  of  transaction  costs  related  to  acquiring  information, 
writing and supervising contracts, etc.  
 
Hence,  companies  chose  to  go  to  the  market  insofar  as  their  marginal  benefits  equaled  the  costs  of 
their  marginal  transactions.  All  other  activities  in  which  costs  were  not  compensated  by  benefits  would  be 
produced inside the company.  
 
Williamson (1971, 2008) emphasizes that the theory of transaction costs is relevant to understanding 
the limits of outsourcing. He argues that because highly specific activities generate greater transaction costs 
(since not all training can be conducted by a personnel company, for example) they have less propensity for 
being outsourced.  
 
Although  Coase’s  contributions  are  relevant  to  understanding  outsourcing,  they  require  additional 
information. The author does not fully explain all the benefits of maintaining fragments of production inside 
the company as opposed to purchasing it on the market.  
Grossman  and  Hart  (1986)  introduce  the  concept  of  incomplete  contracts  to  the  analysis.  They 
 
suggest  that it is  frequently impossible (or very  costly) to  precisely state in  a contract  all future production 
possibilities.  Thus,  maintaining  production  inside  the  company  would  give  entrepreneurs  the  important 
benefit of having control over their utilized assets (the possibility of  exercising power over them), whether 
they are workers or capital.  
 
Several  authors  use  this  theory  of  incomplete  contracts  to  suggest  different  perspectives  about  why 
having control over assets is important. Most of them, however, concentrate on evaluating the importance of 
controlling  financial  assets  or  machinery,  and  very  few  have  explored  controlling  workers  (RAJAN  and 
ZINGALES, 1998).  
 
Dube  and  Kaplan  (2007)  stand  out  as  providing  the  only  explanation  as  to  the  importance  of 
controlling workers. They argue that when entrepreneurs keep employees in the company, they can guarantee 
a  legal  set  of  rights  that  is  different  from  when  the  activities  are  outsourced.  It  is  especially  important  to 
retaining investments in human capital provided by workers. 
 
When  companies  hire  workers  directly,  they  can  appropriate  this  kind  of  investment  by  issuing 
patents  or  licenses  for  technology  use.  In  the  case  of  outsourced  workers,  however,  the  company’s  legal 
ability to assume the fruit of their investment in human capital is very restricted.  
 
This  explanation  is,  however,  rather  limited.  On  one  hand,  it  focuses  on  the  innovation  process 
generated  by  workers,  although  the  majority  of  those  subject  to  outsourcing  conduct  work  with  very  little 

specificity or innovation. On the other hand, it does not relate to other important aspects of the outsourcing 
process – worker remuneration and productivity.  
 
In  this  paper  we  set  forth  an  alternative  element  to  explain  the  importance  of  the  company  having 
control over its workers. We argue that the central element to understanding this concept is that outsourcing 
disengages  the  employers  from  a  fundamental  aspect  of  the  employment  relation,  namely  their  ability  to 
determine wages for each worker. 
 
As stated by Ramos (2012), information asymmetry in the labor market can lead to situations where 
employers have flawed control over the efforts of their employees. There are different mechanisms by which 
employers can incentivize employees to align themselves with the interests of the company. Akerlof (1982), 
for  example,  argues  that  when  a  company  treats  its  workers  fairly  it  motivates  the  workers  to  act 
appropriately  and  to  work  hard  at  their  jobs.  Bowles  (1985),  on  the  other  hand,  builds  a  model  where 
companies  seek  to  make  optimal  investments  in  supervision  technologies  that  obligate  workers  to  apply 
maximum intensity to their work.  
 
The  most  relevant  contribution  to  such  explanations  is  made  by  Stiglitz  and  Shapiro  (1984).  They 
argue  that  companies  would  be  willing  to  pay  workers  more  than  the  clearing  market  wage  to  stimulate 
productivity. This would increase the relative cost to the workers of losing their jobs, which would motivate 
them to exert greater efforts and thus increase the productivity of the company.  
 
Consequently,  being  able  to  determine  wages  can  be  seen  as  an  important  control  mechanism  over 
workers. The more outsourcing removes this instrument from companies that effectively use labor, the more 
it can aggravate the disparity of incentives between the workers and the companies.  
 
In this paper we will evaluate the economic consequences of outsourcing, while keeping in mind the 
changes  it  generates  in  the  relationship  between  employers  and  workers.  It  is  divided  into  four  sections, 
besides this introduction. The second section reviews literature that addresses the impacts of outsourcing on 
wages and productivity. The third section presents our theoretical model that relates outsourcing to efficiency 
wages. The fourth section is an empirical analysis using Brazilian data. Finally, the conclusion is presented in 
the fifth section.  
 
II – The Consequences of Outsourcing  
 

 

2.1 Effects on Productivity 

In this section we will outline a review of state of the art studies on outsourcing. We are interested in 
the  effects  that  hiring  modes  can  have  both  on  wages  and  productivity.  Because  no  article  addresses  both 
effects  simultaneously,  this  chapter  is  divided  into  two  parts,  each  with  the  state  of  the  art  of  a  specific 
subject.  
 
 
 
 
Feenstra and Hanson (1998, 1999)  created a database for each industrial sector in  the United States 
using  census  information  collected  from  1972  to  1994.  The  authors  defined  outsourcing  as  the  quantity  of 
imported intermediate inputs for each industrial segment as a fraction of the total purchase of materials.  
 
Although their work does not evaluate the impacts of outsourcing on productivity, it was fundamental 
in making subsequent estimations. Nevertheless, the data is seriously limited in that it refers only to imported 
intermediate inputs, thus addressing only the offshore phenomenon.  
 
Consequently, phenomenons such as the purchase of inputs that are initially made in the United States 
and later substituted by imports (outsourcing of raw materials), and activities conducted inside the firm that 
are later outsourced or substituted by finished inputs (outsourcing of labor) cannot be differentiated.  
 
Raa and Wolff (2001) used a similar methodology to the one above to calculate estimates about the 
impact of outsourcing on the industrial productivity in the United States during the 80s and 90s. The authors 
argue that outsourcing was the determining  factor that reignited  growth productivity after the slowdown of 
the 70s.  

 
The main result of their work is a decomposition of the variation in the total factor productivity (TFP) 
of each sector of American manufacturing. They observed that the determining factor for increases in  TFP 
during the period being analyzed was a diminished need for input materials in the productive process. They 
concluded  that  the  results  are  consistent  with  the  explanation  that  outsourcing  contributed  to  increasing 
productivity.  
 
Nonetheless,  they  did  find  an  unexpected  result.  The  productivity  of  industrial  services  did  not 
contribute  to  the  increase  in  productivity.  To  the  contrary,  the  result  pointed  out  that  the  TFP  variation  for 
this sector was negative in the 1980s and was marginally positive in the 1990s. Thus, the results suggest that, 
despite  the  lower  quantity  of  inputs  used,  the  productivity  incorporated  into  the  purchase  of  factors  either 
diminished or was very low during the period.  
 
Amiti and Wei (2005) used outsourcing measurements similar to those in the works mentioned above. 
The  authors  created  a  panel  for  the  various  sectors  of  the  United  States  between  1992  and  2000,  and  then 
added to the analysis by decomposing outsourced goods and services.  
 
As  a  basis  for  their  calculations  of  productivity  effects,  the  authors  used  a  linearized  equation  of  a 
rather general function of production. Thus, variations of basic inputs  were used as controls to estimate the 
equation.  First,  the  authors  used  a  grouped  least  squares  estimator  and  concluded  that  both  types  of 
outsourcing positively affect TFP in ways that are statistically significant.  
 
It  should  be  noted  that  the  results  could  be  biased  because  of  the  presence  of  fixed  effects  in  the 
industrial  sectors.  To  avoid  this  problem,  a  re-estimation  is  done  using  the  difference-GMM  method 
developed by Arellano and Bond (1991). The variables were instrumented by all the available lagged values 
from each variable. The estimated coefficients are similar to those obtained in previous estimations.  
 
Furthermore, the authors perform new regressions with additional controls for using extremely high-
technology  capital  supply  adopted  by  sectors  that  tend  to  outsource  and  to  have  an  evolving  TFP.  In  this 
manner  they  ensure  the  results  are  not  driven  by  an  omitted  variable  bias.  Once  again,  the  results  do  not 
undergo any significant alterations.  
 
McCann  (2010)  builds  a  similar  database  for  Ireland  between  1991  and  2005.  One  of  the 
particularities of this data source is that it permits the author to exclude materials imported from subsidiary 
companies from the sample.  
 
The author argues that including intercompany trade in outsourcing calculations biases the analysis in 
that  knowledge  transfers  can  positively  affect  the  estimates  of  outsourcing.  This  factor  is  not  motivated  by 
outsourcing itself, but rather by the specific characteristics of the transactions. Therefore, it is suggested that 
the removal of these transactions could lead to more consistent estimates of the impacts outsourcing has on 
productivity.  
 
The  calculations  are  done  using  the  method  developed  by  Arellano  and  Bond  (1991).  It  was 
concluded  that  outsourcing  only  has  a  positive  effect  on  the  TFP  of  companies  in  the  domestic  market. 
However, the effect of outsourcing on larger companies that tend to export is insignificant, and in some cases 
negative. The authors attribute this only to the relative inefficiency of domestic companies in Ireland and to 
the significant impact that any improvement to the productive structure has on productivity indicators.  
 
Gorzig  and  Stephan  (2002)  create  a  panel  of  German  companies  for  the  period  between  1992  and 
2000.  Contrary  to  the  previous  studies,  these  authors  have  access  to  company  level  data.  The  gross 
operational surplus is used as a proxy for company performance and as a dependent variable for the empirical 
analysis.  The  outsourcing  of  variables  is  measured  by  the  purchase  of  material  inputs  and  the  hiring  of 
outside services or labor.  
 
The covariance  of the companies is  analyzed to  identify the determinants  of their performance. The 
analysis found that, although the three types of outsourcing increase company productivity in the short term, 
outsourcing has a slightly negative effect on long-term returns. Thus, the authors conclude that an excessive 
amount of activities are outsourced, and that the managers underestimate the costs of outsourcing.  
 
The  only  literature  that  relates  production  decentralization  to  company  productivity  using  Brazilian 
data  is  Moreira’s  (2015).  He  composed  a  panel  that  included  companies  in  29  sectors  over  a  period  of  17 

years.  The  data  is  obtained  from  the  Annual  Industrial  Research  (Pesquisa  Industrial  Anual)  conducted  by 
the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE). 
 
The  author  uses  the  participation  of  service  consumption  as  a  proportion  of  the  intermediate 
consumption of each sector as a proxy for decentralizing production. Thus, an equation is built that defines 
company productivity as a function of the proxy and of several control variables.  
 
The  author  regresses  this  equation  using  grouped  ordinary  least  squares.  The  coefficients  estimated 
for  the  decentralization  variable  are  positive  and  statistically  significant.  It  is  suggested  that  the  previous 
estimation  possibly  incurred  an  endogeneity  problem.  The  positive  relation  can  occur  because  more 
productive companies opt to outsource their activities and not because decentralization generates productivity 
gains. Different than the others, this author does not employ a more advanced empirical technique to control 
the problem.  
 
Moreover, the author performs an additional regression adding dummy variables that interact with the 
different  sectors  and  services  consumed  as  intermediate  goods.  The  intention  is  to  estimate  the  effects  of 
decentralization on the productive process in the many sectors.  
 
The  results  indicate  that  outsourcing  positively  impacts  productivity  only  in  sectors  that  are  rich  in 
natural resources.  The results in terms of the impact of outsourcing on labor and knowledge intensive sectors 
are negative. Moreira (2015) suggests that outsourcing is more important to the production of goods that are 
differentiated by price. The process would be counter-productive for sectors that differentiate by product.  
 
In  evaluating  the  empirical  literature  on  the  impacts  of  outsourcing  on  productivity,  Windrum, 
Reinstaller, and Bull (2008) suggest that there is an unexplained paradox. The relation between outsourcing 
and  productivity  is  much  less  immediate  than  expected  and,  as  suggested  by  most  of  the  aforementioned 
literature,  many  estimates  show  that  decentralizing  production  generates  insignificant  and  sometimes 
negative impacts on company productivity. Nonetheless, firms are increasing their outsourced processes.    
 
The  authors  affirm  that  there  is  no  theoretical  explanation  for  the  phenomenon,  and  thus  try  to 
develop one. They suggest that companies tend to adopt a process of “total outsourcing” where an entire area 
and its responsibilities are transferred to third parties.  
This  process  could  generate  a  management  split  and  would  separate  specific  areas  of  the  company. 
 
Having  less  contact  between  areas  would  diminish  the  organizational  flexibility  of  the  company  and  any 
innovation associated to  it. Therefore, productivity gains would be observed in the short term with reduced 
payrolls, but organizational inflexibility would hurt productivity in the long term.  
Although the explanation presented by the authors is coherent, it has several gaps. It does not explain 
 
the impact  of outsourcing on different  areas of the productive process,  nor why certain  types of  companies 
usually show better results than others.  
 

2.2 Effects on Wages  
 
 
There  are  a number of  studies that have  tried to  estimate the effects  of international  outsourcing on 
the demand for labor in each country. In this case, outsourcing functions to commercialize production factors 
and generate equalization in the price of the factors (MANKIW, 2006). The expectation is to see a tendency 
toward falling wages in wealthier countries and rising wages in poorer countries.  
 
Feenstra  and  Hanson  (1998),  for  example,  attempt  to  estimate  the  effects  of  outsourcing  on  worker 
wages in the United States using their previously discussed methodology. The authors performed a regression 
on  wage  variations  not  associated  to  production  (skilled  labor)  as  a  function  of  the  quantity  of  outsourced 
inputs and of controls for the sectoral composition of the inputs.  
 
The  authors  found  that  between  1979  and  1990,  outsourcing  activities  contributed  to  increasing  the 
wages  that  were  not  associated  to  production.  This  suggests  that  outsourcing  caused  significantly  greater 
demands for skilled labor in the United States, to the detriment of less qualified workers.  
 
This type of study focuses solely on the effects of the international market through outsourcing. This 
perspective  is  very  limited  because  the  vast  majority  of  outsourced  processes  are  conducted  locally 

(WILLCOCKS and PLANT, 2003). Therefore, we must concentrate on the domestic effect of outsourcing on 
wages.  
 
Munch  and  Skaksen  (2009)  attempted  to  separate  the  effects  of  domestic  and  international 
outsourcing.  According  to  them  domestic  outsourcing  must  equally  benefit  the  wages  of  both  skilled  and 
unskilled  workers,  since  it  fosters  increased  division  of  labor  and  positively  impacts  their  productivity. 
International  outsourcing,  however,  should  benefit  workers  in  those  countries  with  greater  relative 
abundance. 
 
The  authors  created  a  panel  for  Danish  workers  in  the  period  between  1993  and  2002.  They  use 
sectoral  data  and  a  methodology  similar  to  Feenstra  and  Hanson’s    (1998)  to  build  an  equation  that  links 
workers’  wages  to  individual  characteristics  and  company  characteristics,  in  addition  to  the  quantity  of 
outsourced inputs they used.  
 
The  equation  is  estimated  using  a  fixed  effect  methodology.  To  address  the  potential  problem  of 
endogeneity  similar  to  those  found  in  the  previously  discussed  articles  that  relate  outsourcing  with 
productivity, the authors instrument an outsourcing variable.  
 
The  estimates  point  out  that  international  outsourcing  negatively  affects  the  wages  of  lesser-skilled 
workers  and  increases  the  wages  of  higher-skilled  workers.  Furthermore,  domestic  outsourcing  positively 
affects the wages of lesser-skilled workers and does not affect the wages of more qualified workers. Thus, the 
estimates are in accordance with the authors’ hypothesis.  
 
What is little discussed in this study is that the authors are unable to use this method to capture the 
effect  of  decentralized  production  on  outsourced  workers.  They  are  only  able  to  estimate  the  effect  of 
company outsourcing on the remaining workers.  
 
Additionally, a large part of the explanation for their estimates is based on the effects of outsourcing 
on  the  division  of  labor  in  the  company.  However,  as  suggested  by  Abraham  and  Taylor  (1996)  and 
Willcocks and Lacity (2006), the main motivation for outsourcing does not seem to be the fragmentation of 
activities,  but  rather  the  reduction  of  costs  for  a  specific  process.  This  makes  the  explanation  that  says  the 
division of labor is responsible for the obtained estimates implausible. 
Berlinski  (2008)  seeks  to  evaluate  the  impact  that  switching  to  a  different  hiring  modality  has  on 
 
outsourced workers. He creates a database for outsourced workers in the United Kingdom between 1995 and 
2001.  
 
The author performs a regression based on generalized least squares (GLS) using the Mincer equation 
that  includes  a  dummy  for  outsourced  workers  and  a  set  of  exogenous  controls  that  are  related  to  the 
individual. It is estimated that outsourced workers earn approximately 17% less than non-outsourced workers 
and that the gap does not vary substantially according to professions.  
 
An alternative estimate is also conducted. A propensity score-matching estimator based on a logistic 
regression attests to similar results: outsourced workers tend to earn 19% less than non-outsourced workers. 
The author does not outline any explanation for this phenomenon.  
 
Dube  and  Kaplan  (2010)  also  conduct  an  empirical  study  in  an  attempt  to  evaluate  the  effects  of 
outsourcing  on  the  wages  earned  by  security  guards  and  janitors  in  the  United  States.  The  outsourcing  is 
measured by combining information about the profession being exercised by each worker and  the sector in 
which they work using microdata from the Current Population Survey from 1983 to 2000. 
 
The  authors  create  a  Mincer  equation  and  estimate  it  based  on  ordinary  least  squares  (OLS).  They 
determined that  the  wages of  outsourced janitors  were penalized by  approximately 5%  and that of security 
guards by approximately 20%, when compared to non-outsourced workers exercising the same profession.  
 
These results can be  caused by a process  of endogeneity:  companies that tend to  outsource workers 
also  tend  to  pay  lower  wages.  To  control  the  problem,  the  authors  performed  a  regression  on  an  equation 
similar  to  the  previous  one,  but  where  janitors  and  security  guards  are  categorized  with  office  workers 
working in the same company. By using this additional group as a reference, they were able to verify whether 
wage differences are due to company behavior or to worker characteristics. They observed that the penalties 
for outsourced workers were maintained: approximately 4% for janitors and 15% for security guards.  

 
It was suggested that penalties for a type of workers could only be established within a competitive 
equilibrium if the productivity of the workers is  different,  or  if one of the jobs  has non-pecuniary  benefits. 
Thus, Dube and Kaplan (2010) try to test each of the hypotheses.  
 
First,  they  evaluated  whether  the  non-observable  differences  in  the  productivity  of  the  agents  could 
explain  the  differences  in  wages.  They  create  a  two-period  panel  and  observe  the  individuals  in  the  same 
profession in each one. Then they estimate a new wage equation using a fixed effects model. It is supposed 
that  the  agents’  non-observable  skills  do  not  vary  over  time.  The  penalties  for  outsourced  workers  are 
maintained, with approximately 7% for the janitors and 12% for the security guards.  
Second, the authors test whether the outsourced occupations have particular non-pecuniary benefits. 
 
They  test  whether  the  outsourced  workers  receive  greater  health  insurance  benefits  –  a  proxy  for  worker 
benefits – than the non-outsourced workers. There is evidence that the opposite occurs, meaning outsourced 
workers receive less benefits.  
Thus, the authors conclude that outsourced workers receive less because of their contract model, and 
 
that  the  result  is  not  compatible  with  a  competitive  labor  market  model.  The  penalties  that  occur  must  be 
associated  to  some  kind  of  income  that  is  not  extracted  by  the  worker,  but,  for  example,  obtained  through 
labor unions.  
 
In  Brazil,  the  Unified  Workers’  Central  –  CUT  (2014)  sought  to  estimate  the  causal  impact  of 
outsourcing  on  wages.  They  concluded  that  outsourced  workers  earned  approximately  24%  less  that  non-
outsourced. The employed methodology, however, is severely flawed. The authors only compare the average 
wage of individuals that exercise typically outsourced professions with other workers wages.  
 
The  study  is  not  clear  about  which  methodological  options  were  adopted  to  determine  the  typically 
outsourced professions and does not control the different characteristics that can influence wages besides the 
contract  model.  As  previously  discussed,  the  less  specific  and  productive  activities  tend  to  be  more  often 
outsourced, which most likely generates an uncontrolled selection bias in the estimate.  
 
There are few theoretical studies on the impact of outsourcing on wages. The only one that explains 
the  penalization  that  was  empirically  observed  by  Berlinsky  (2008)  and  Dube  and  Kaplan  (2010)  is 
conducted by Holmes and Snider (2011).  
 
The authors build a model where the only product of the economy must be produced in two stages, 
one  capital-intensive  and  one  labor-intensive.  The  companies  decide  whether  their  production  will  be 
integrated or if they will outsource one of the stages in the process.  
The labor market is unionized, which guarantees a “monopoly in labor supply.” The demand for labor 
 
from  companies  that  decide  to  conduct  an  integrated  production  is  less  flexible  that  the  demand  from 
decentralized companies. Therefore, workers’ wages diminish pari passu with the increasing intensity of the 
outsourcing process in the economy.  
 
In  this  paper,  out  attempt  is  to  develop  a  model  that  integrates  the  empirical  insights  of  literature 
about the impact of decentralized production on productivity and wages, without resorting to the hypothesis 
of the powerful unionization of all the segments. We will also evaluate if the suggested model can be adapted 
to the reality of the Brazilian labor market.  
 
III. Theoretical Model  
 
 
Therefore, we will build a model that is similar to the one established by Stiglitz and Shapiro (1984).  
 
 
 
 
workers are identical and their preferences are denoted by 

3.1 Basic Model 
 
Let us assume that our economy has n workers, only labor input, and only one  final product a. The 

We suggest that information asymmetry can generate important impacts on the outsourcing process. 

 

          

(1) 

where   is  a variable that indicates whether the worker is  making an effort or not. We will assume that  the 
effort  is  a  binary  variable.  The   variable  is  the  received  wage.  We  then  notice  that  our  utility  function  is 
increasing in wages and decreasing in effort.  
Unemployed workers have unemployment benefit   guaranteed by the government. Additionally, the 
 
workers are not perfectly supervised. If the employer catches them in some form of cheating (not making an 
effort), they will be fired. This occurs with probability q.  
 
effort, they are not subject to any uncertainty and their utility will be:  

The workers decide their behavior according to the theory of expected utility. If they  are making an 

 

           

and if they are not making an effort, 

 

                         

 
which implies that workers will make an effort if, and only if,  

 

                 

 
 

 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

 
The  wage  is  positively  associated  to  unemployment  benefits,  in  that  it  raises  the  reservation  wage,  and  is 
negatively associated to the probability of detection1. 
 
in a competitive market. The profit of each one is understood as 

Let us assume that there are m companies, all dedicated to the production of product a and all inserted 

 

                                              

(5) 

 
The prices of our economy are given and will be maintained as such until the end of the model. In this 
 
way we follow Laffont and Martimort (2002) and will model a function       to denote company revenue. We 
will assume that the function is increasing and concave.  
Variable n denotes the quantity of workers hired by the company. Each worker will receive salary  w 
 
and we will assume that the companies incur additional costs (C) – associated to paying for training, human 
resource management, etc. – that varies linearly with the chosen quantity of work.  
 
Additionally, we note that if the workers are making an effort, they push  the company’s production 
function upward by a   factor greater than zero. However, they only make an effort if the condition described 
in equation (4) is met. It is observed that the company has two distinct cost functions. If it pays wages that 
are only sufficient to attract labor,  

 

                      

(6) 

 
where CP is the company’s unit cost. 
 
is greater than in the previous situation. In this case, the company’s total cost will be:  

If the company wants its workers to make an effort, it must pay an efficiency wage to individuals that 

                                                        
1 The model incorporates the essential characteristics of Stiglitz and Shapiro’s work (1984), albeit only working in one period. 

It is useful to define that the inverse function of what was derived from the company revenue function 

 

       

 
 

                  

 
 

 

 
where     indicates the company’s unit cost when it pays an efficiency wage.  
 

The   productivity of the economy is given as  

 
 
is 

 

 

                        

               

 
It is observed that, because the revenue function is concave,       is decreasing and convex. 
 

Lets us assume that  

 

 
and  

 

        

 
 

 

                                               

(7) 

(8) 

(9) 

(10) 

(11) 

 
where    is the quantity produced when a company pays an efficiency wage and  n is the quantity produced 
when one is not paid.  
 
The hypothesis specified in equation (10) guarantees that the costs associated to paying an efficiency 
wage are greater than the total cost when the company does not pay it, even when considering a shift in the 
production function.  
Equation  (11)  indicates  that  the  additional  income  generated  by  worker  efforts  more  than 
 
compensates the higher costs generated by paying efficiency wages.  Thus, the profit function is maximized 
when the company chooses this type of payment.  
 
incentivizing or not the efforts of their workers.  
 

Companies  in  the  economy  maximize  profits.  Hence,  they  can  do  so  in  two  different  ways  –  by 

The company’s problem when it does not incentivize the efforts of its workers will be:  

 

   

 

                        

                             

 

(12) 

It is easy to note that at optimum the restriction will be active and therefore, the problem of the company will 
be solved by: 

 

                                 

(13) 

 
To incentivize the efforts of the workers, the company must increase paid remuneration so it can meet 
the requirements of equation (4). Let us say that in this case the company pays an efficiency wage to ensure 
that   is equal to 1. Its problem will be:  

 

                                     

   

 

                                      

 
 

 

 

 
The restriction will once again be active and resolving the company’s problem will imply  

 

                           

        

            

     

 
 

 
 

  

(14) 

 

(15) 

 
 
When a company pays an efficiency wage, it hires fewer workers since labor is more expensive. Yet 
even so, its revenues increase. This occurs because of worker efforts, which pushes the income curve upward, 
and because labor productivity is greater when fewer workers are employed in production.  

 
3.2 Outsourcing Model  

 
Now we will insert  an additional company2 into our model. As opposed to the others, this one does 
 
not produce final good a, but it does supply labor that enables other companies to do so. Let us assume that 
this  company  is  more  efficient  in  labor  management,  which  translates  into  a  reduction  in  C  since  the 
company  is  specialized  in  this  work  and  can  have  economies  of  scale.  To  simplify  the  notation,  we  will 
assume that the company’s labor management cost is zero.  
 
We  will  follow  Holmes and  Snider  (2011)  in  modeling  outsourced  labor  supply.  The  company  will 
pay the lowest wage possible to obtain labor (   ), which they will pass on to the companies that produce the 
final good for price   , so that 

 

       

(16) 

 
 
The company model that supplies outsourced labor described above translates the main insight of the 
model.  The  company  that  supplies  intermediary  inputs  concentrates  on  lowering  the  costs  of  labor 
management and obtains its profits from the spread between the minimum costs it pays to attain labor and the 
price of transferring it to the other companies.  
 
A  fundamental  implication  for  the  model  is  that  outsourcing  creates  an  asymmetry  of  incentives. 
Companies  that  outsource  labor  does  not  accrue  additional  profits  from  the  efforts  generated  by  their 
workers, and therefore do not pay greater wages to guarantee those efforts.  
 

Companies that produce final goods will only choose to use outsourced labor if 

 

           

(17) 

                                                        
2 The company acts as a monopoly. Baccara (2007) shows that this is the only efficient equilibrium when the technology used for 
production is not publically known. In order to maintain simplicity, we did not insert such considerations into our model, but the 
hypothesis is in line with the development of microeconomic theory on the decentralization of activities.  

 
Supposing  the  previous  condition  is  met,  the  company’s  problem  when  hiring  outsourced  labor  can  be 
described as 

 

                     

   

  

 
where    is the amount of hired outsourced labor. The resolution would be given as:  

 

 
 

 

                           

If the    cost is sufficiently low, we can guarantee that 

                                                 

(18) 

(19) 

(20) 

 
so that the company opts to only hire outsourced labor.  
Now  we  can  summarize  the  consequences  of  outsourcing.  Hiring     labor  is  greater  than  in  the 
 
previous  period.  Because  the        function  is  decreasing,  we  can  guarantee  that  labor  productivity  in  the 
economy goes down.  
 
Additionally, the wage paid by the labor-supply  company is lower than in the previous equilibrium. 
This occurs because it does not have any incentive for an efficiency wage, since labor productivity does not 
directly affect its profits.  
Our  model  provides  a  unified  framework  to  explain  the  main  evidence  obtained  from  literature. 
 
Companies  seek  outsourced  labor  with  the  main  objective  of  lowering  costs  (ABRAHAM  and  TAYLOR, 
1998),  the  wages  earned  by  outsourced  workers  is  lower  than  non-outsourced  workers  (DUBE  and 
KAPLAN, 2010 and BERLINSKY, 2008), and company productivity can be reduced even if costs are also 
reduced (RAA and WOLFF, 2001).  
 
outsourcing data.  
 
IV – Empirical Evaluation 
 
 
In  this  section  we  will  try  to  evaluate  the  economic  consequences  of  outsourcing.  First,  we  will 
present  the  equations  to  be  estimated.  Second,  we  will  give  a  detailed  description  of  the  database  and  the 
chosen variables. Finally, we will present the obtained outcomes.  
 
 
 
 
dummy variable to indicate whether the workers are outsourced (MINCER, 1974). 
Formally, 

Our estimation-base will be a variation of the traditional Mincerian equation regression with an added 

In  the  next  section  we  will  examine  whether  the  previsions  of  the  model  are  in  line  with  Brazilian 

4.1 Econometric Model 

 

                        

(21) 

 
Thus,  we  place  the  natural  logarithm  of  the  individual  wage  i  (  )  as  function  of  a  variable  that  indicates 
whether the worker is outsourced (  ), and a vector of control variables (  ).   is our coefficient of interest 
and  represents  the  percentage  impact  of  outsourced  contracting  on  wages,  once  the  other  variables  in  the 

equation  are  controlled.  Furthermore,   is  the  coefficient  vector  of  the  control  variables  and    is  the  non-
observable part of our estimate, which we assume to have a zero average.  
 
The  above  equation  is  estimated  using  feasible  generalized  least  squares  (FGLS).  This  estimator  is 
more  appropriate  for  regressing  the  Mincerian  equation  than  OLS  because  the  variance  of  the  dependent 
variable  is  usually  an  increasing  wage  function,  meaning  the  equation  would  present  heteroscedasticity 
(SCHAFFNER, 1999).  
 
Some  authors  argue  that  the  above  estimate  can  be  biased  by  the  presence  of  human  capital  that  is 
non-observable in research, but that is observable by employers (DUBE and KAPLAN, 2010). In seeking to 
control this type of bias, we will do an additional estimate.  
 

We will consider a specification that is very similar to the first regression:  

 

                                 

(22) 

 
where    represents individual characteristics that are fixed in time and affect wages.  

Now, the same individuals are followed over time and we assume they have characteristics that vary 

in time, our original regressors, and fixed effects. By differentiating the above equation in time, we find:  

 

                               

(23) 

 
In  this  way  we  eliminate  the  fixed  effects  and  can  regress  the  new  equation  without  the  risk  of 
generating  biases.  This  methodology,  however,  produces  some  inconveniences.  We  cannot  use  fixed 
variables such as gender, ethnicity, or region of origin as regressors in the equation. 

Moreover,  our  occupational  status  variable  is  largely  fixed.  Consequently,  we  can  only  analyze  the 

impact on people that changed statuses between one period of time and another, which reduces our sample.  

Next we will investigate whether the wage-efficiency influences the wage gap of outsourced workers 
– estimated in previous equations. Our model foresees that outsourced workers will work in larger companies 
(since  they  have  economies  of  scale  and  lower  labor  management  costs),  but  that  their  wages  will  not  be 
raised as a way to guarantee their efforts.  

To evaluate the previsions of the model, we will first estimate the size of the company as a function of 

the control vector stipulated in equation (21) and of the dummy variable that indicates outsourced workers:  

 

                    

(24) 

Again, we are interested in  , the marginal impact of outsourcing on the size of the company where 

 
where    is the size of the company where individual i works. 
 
the individuals are working.  
 
Next  we  will  perform  Oaxaca-Blinder  decomposition,  developed  simultaneously  by  Oaxaca  (1973) 
and  Blinder  (1973).  The  decomposition  takes  the  average  difference  between  the  wages  of  two  distinct 
groups – outsourced and non-outsourced workers:  

 

                                  

        

(25) 

 
where variables with the superscript t refer to outsourced workers.  
 
individual endowments and of their impacts on wages.  
 

In particular, we will report  

The equation allows decomposing the average difference in wages initially observed in variations of 

 

 
and  

 

       

          

       

        
  

(26) 

(27) 

 
Both equations above represent the variation that occurs in the wages of outsourced workers if: (1) they had 
the same factor endowments as non-outsourced workers, and (2) they received the same payment as the non-
outsourced  workers  for  each  endowment.  Our  model  foresees  that  the  remuneration  of  our  proxy  for  the 
efficiency wage must be lower for outsourced workers, which should largely explain the gap between the two 
groups.  
 
 
 

4.2 Description of Variables 

Our  dependent  variable  is  the  natural  logarithm  of  the  average  remuneration  of  each  worker  during 
the year of analysis. Our control vector is composed of the following variables: education, experience (level 
and squared), age, geographic region of residence, sector in which they work3, gender, ethnicity, and size of 
reported establishment.  

The education variable, measured by the highest academic level reached, seeks to control the different 
productivity  of  individuals.  Some  authors  suggest  that  this  should  be  the  most  relevant  factor  used  for 
explaining wage differences (BECKER, 1975). 

By  adding  age  and  experience  variables,  this  study  tries  to  identify  the  presence  of  specific  human 
capital  that  is  acquired  over  time  worked.  A  quadratic  term  was  included  to  identify  non-linear  relations 
between experience and wages, seeing as the generated productivity gains are exhausted over time (ARROW, 
1962). The variables are measured in months and identify the period in which the individual worked in the 
same company.  

Variable  dummies  are  added  to  control  structural  and  regional  tendencies  in  determining  wages  or 
patterns of discrimination against minorities. We use the northeast region as a reference and add dummies to 
the other regions. The ethnic binary variable takes on a one value if the individual is white and zero value for 
any other ethnicity.  

We also used a binary variable to identify outsourced and non-outsourced workers, which is carefully 

explained in the next subsection.  

Finally, we added to the regression the size of the establishment as an indicator of the propensity for 
an  individual  to  receive  an  efficiency  wage.  It  is  supposed  that  it  would  be  more  costly  to  oversee  an 
establishment with more employees. Therefore, this would increase the incentives for the company to offer 
higher  wages  (OI  &  IDSON,  1999).  The  size  of  the  company  is  determined  by  the  quantity  of  workers, 
according  to  the  classification  recommended  by  SEBRAE  (2013)  when  using  data  from  the  Annual  Social 
Information Report (RAIS)4.  

Comparative analyses of outsourced and non-outsourced individuals suggest that another variable that 
significantly  differentiates  them  is  the  rate  of  unionization  (POCHMANN,  2012).  This  type  of  variable, 
however, is not provided by RAIS and so cannot be included in the study.  

 

                                                        
3 The  sectors  where  we  included  dummies  are:  IT,  electric,  civil  construction,  administrative,  security,  food,  maintenance,  and 
residential. 
4 Our variable takes on four levels: micro-company (up to 9 employees), small company (between 10 and 49 employees), medium 
company (between 50 and 99 employees), and large company (over 100 employees).  

4.3 Forming the Database 
 
We  used  microdata  from  the  Annual  Social  Information  Report  (RAIS)  on  2013,  obtainable  at  the 
Ministry  of  Labor  and  Employment  (MTE).  The  microdata  do  not  explicitly  differentiate  outsourced  and 
non-outsourced workers.  

Following Dube and Kaplan’s (2010) approach, we sought to identify outsourced workers using other 
information.  To  do  so,  we  separated  workers  functioning  in  activities  that  are  commonly  outsourced 
according to the Brazilian Classification of Occupations (CBO) code. We considered outsourced all workers 
that contributed to the productive process with a service and were not hired for the producing firm5.   

Next,  the  worker  activity  sectors  that  we  separated  were  analyzed  according  to  the  National 
Classification of Economic Activities (CNAE) code. We classified as outsourced the workers that are active 
in a sector that provided services to other companies or labor leasing. As a counterpoint, we classified as non-
outsourced  the individuals  who  work directly  for the hiring  company or  are owners of the company  where 
they work. The annex of this study contains a table that details this classification.  

The  case  of  private  security  agents  is  a  worthwhile  example.  If  they  work  in  the  “temporary  labor 
leasing” sector, we assume that they provide services to other companies, and are therefore outsourced. If, on 
the other hand, they work in  the “education” sector, we assume they are  hired by the company where they 
effectively offer their services, and are therefore non-outsourced.  

By  using  this  methodology,  we  were  able  to  synthesize  a  database  for  all  the  states  in  Brazil 
composed  by  all  formalized  Brazilian  workers,  and  were  able  to  differentiate  them  as  outsourced  or  non-
outsourced. Our sample contains over fifty-six million and a half observations.  

The following table summarizes the quantity of workers from commonly outsourced segments in the 

database and decomposes the quantity and the fraction of outsourced workers in each one:  

 

Table I: Descriptive statistics of the participation of outsourced workers relevant to the database 

 

 

Although the RAIS microdata issued periodically by the Ministry of Labor and Employment (MTE) 
allows for a cross-section analysis, it is  inadequate for  performing our second econometric  exercise, which 
requires an information panel. 

We  were able to  obtain  microdata that had  not been public  issued by RAIS  and MTE that  registers 
identification data for individuals. From that, we were able to create a panel and accompany individuals for 
two consecutive years6. The expanded base was for the study’s second estimation.  

 

                                                        
5 This definition falls under very different types of workers. It's noteworthy that we considered consultants, such as accountants for 
example, as potentially outsourced workers.  
6 Because of data availability, we opted to do the first two estimates with 2013 data. The estimates in the panel were done using 
2009-2010 data. 

CategoryOutsourcedTotalShareAdministrative37.138415.4678,9%IT and R&D405.184824.39249,1%Eletricity Sector167.2821.394.11412,0%Civil Construction564.4205.910.6339,5%Security1.082.1102.527.38442,8%Food Sector331.8701.623.28420,4%Maintenance18.753138.87213,5%Residencial Sector1.018.2934.147.81024,6%Total3.625.05016.981.95621,3%4.4 Results 
 
In Table II, we present the regression results of our equation (21) using generalized least squares for 

three vectors with different controls7.  

 

Table II – Mincerian regression (21) results (FGLS) 

 

Note: The statistical significance of the estimated coefficient is identified by the number of asterisks: * is a significance of 10%, ** 

is a significance of 5%, *** is a significance of 1%. 

 
The  first  model  is  a  regression  of  our  dependent  variable  that  just  functions  as  a  dummy  for 
 
outsourced  workers.  It  gives  us  an  average  percentage  difference  in  the  wages  between  one  group  and 
another – approximately 20.5%8.  
 
The  second  model  adds  controls  that  are  more  common  in  Mincerian  equations.  It  can  be  observed 
that  all  the  controls  have  their  coefficient  signs  aligned  with  what  the  theory  suggests  and  all  of  them  are 
statistically  significant  at  a  1%  level.  These  variables  help  explain  the  gap  in  the  wages  of  outsourced 
workers, which is reduced to 7.2% as the variables are controlled.  
 
The third model considers estimates similar to the previous one, but with the addition of our variable 
indicating efficiency wage and dummy variables indicating gender, ethnicity, occupation sector, and region 
of work. Once again, all the variables present coefficients with the expected sign and statistical significance 
at  the  1%  level.  However,  in  this  model  the  added  variables  do  not  contribute  to  explaining  the  penalties 
imposed on outsourced workers. To the contrary, the gap increases again, reaching approximately 10.5%. A 
more detailed decomposition of the explanatory power of each variable will be showed further on. 
 
In Table 2 we saw how the observable human capital contributed to explaining the wage gap found in 
the previous regressions. The regression of equation (22), shown in the table below, seeks to prove whether 
eliminating the model’s fixed effects would contribute to an additional explanation of the phenomenon:  
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                        
7 The regional dummies are all significant at the 1% level and they all indicate positive variations in wages in terms of income.  
8 To register our results we used the following correction for the coefficients:                     
 

VariableCoefficientStandard ErrorCoefficientStandard ErrorCoefficientStandard ErrorOutsourced-0,187***0,0002-0,070***0,00000-0,099***0,00030Education--0,146***0,000050,133***0,00011Experience--0,0033***0,000000,0033***0,00000Experience2---0,00004***0,00000-0,00003***0,00000Age---0,0096***0,000010,0097***0,00001Company size----0,084***0,00006Man----0,2408***0,00041White----0,044***0,00016Ocuppation dummiesno-no-yes-Regional dummiesno-no-yes-Model (1)Model (2)Model (3)Differentiated 
Variables 
Outsourced 
Education 
Experience 
Experience2 
Age 

Size of Company 

∆ln(w) 

Coefficient 
-0,067*** 
0,024*** 
0,003*** 

Standard 
Error 
0,0003 
0,0000 
0,0000 

-0,00004***  0,0000 
0,0004*** 
0,0000 

0,030*** 
 

0,0000 

Note: The statistical significance of the estimated coefficient is identified by the number of asterisks: * is a significance of 10%, ** 

Table III – Result of estimate (22) by first differences in the panel 

is a significance of 5%, *** is a significance of 1%. 

 
 
When controlling the fixed effects of the estimate, the wage difference for outsourced workers fell by 
approximately  7%.  Thus  is  it  possible  that  the  cross-sectional  estimates  were  biased  by  the  presence  of 
unobservable  human  capital.  Nonetheless,  the  larger  part  of  the  gap  between  the  two  groups  continued 
without explanation.  
 
 

In the next table we present the result of the estimate of our equation (24):  

Table IV – Result of regression of company size as a function of the individual characteristics of the workers 

 

Note: The statistical significance of the estimated coefficient is identified by the number of asterisks: * is a significance of 10%, ** 

is a significance of 5%, *** is a significance of 1%. 

 

It  can  be  observed  that  the  outsourced  workers  tend  to  work  in  larger  companies  even  when  we 
controlled our estimate with the control vector described earlier. This result is in line with the premises of our 
model.  

Table  V  shows  the  results  of  the  estimates  of  equations  (26)  and  (27).  The  first  panel  provides  the 
percentage variation in the average wage of the outsourced workers, in case the average endowment for each 
one  of  the  variables  was  equivalent  to  that  of  the  non-outsourced  workers.  The  second  panel  presents  the 
average  variation  in  the  wages  of  outsourced  workers  that  would  occur  if  their  endowments  were 
remunerated in the same way as non-outsourced workers.  

 

 

VariablesCoefficientStandard ErrorOutsourced0,539***0,0006Education0,021***0,00011Experience0,0026***0,0000Experience2-0,0005***0,0000Age-0,005***0,00001Dependent Variable - Company Size 

 

Note: The statistical significance of the estimated coefficient is identified by the number of asterisks: * is a significance of 10%, ** 

Table V – Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition for outsourced and non-outsourced workers 

is a significance of 5%, *** is a significance of 1%. 

 

We  can  observe  that  the  differences  between  the  shares  with  variables  such  as  education  and 
 
experience explain part of the wage gap between the two groups. This implies that the outsourced workers, 
for example, are on average less experienced and, if they had the same  endowments  as the non-outsourced 
workers, they would earn an average wage approximately 6% higher.  
The  estimate  of  greatest  interest  to  testing  our  model  is  the  coefficient  of  our  efficiency  wage 
 
variable. The estimate indicates that, if outsourced workers were remunerated in the same way according the 
size of the company, their average wages would be 26% greater. Thus, changes in this  characteristic would 
imply  that  the  outsourced  workers  would  gain  more  than  non-outsourced  workers,  even  if  their  initial 
endowments were maintained.  
 
When we compare the many coefficients in our decomposition, we find evidence that the size of the 
company is the variable that carries the most weight when explaining the differences in wages. Therefore, our 
econometric analysis creates an empirical foundation for the main hypothesis of our model, namely that the 
efficiency wage must be the essential difference between outsourced and non-outsourced workers.  
 
V – Conclusion and Discussion 
 
 
 
The discussions around the project to regulate outsourcing that began in the Federal Chamber in 2015, 
triggered  debates  on  the  economic  consequences  of  outsourcing.  Our  attempt  in  this  article  has  been  to 
analyze these consequences from both a theoretical and empirical perspective.  
 
process tends to reduce the workers’ wages and is not always associated to productivity gains.  
 
We  developed  a  theoretical  model  based  on  the  notion  of  information  asymmetry  in  an  attempt  to 
explain  the  different  economic  consequences  of  outsourcing  using  a  single  framework.  The  model’s  main 
suggestion is  that the process  can create incentive mismatches between  companies that hire and companies 
that supply outsourced labor, since the latter has no direct concern with worker productivity.  
 
The  model  implies  that  outsourced  workers  earn  lower  wages  because  the  companies  that  hire  and 
manage them have no incentives for paying them an efficiency wage, and that labor productivity goes down 
when such workers are hired.  
 
We used data from the Annual Report on Social Information (RAIS) to test the model’s conclusions. 
First we used a Mincer equation to estimate the wage penalty placed on outsourced workers. Our estimates 
suggest that the penalty is between 7% and 10.5% and that the gap cannot be wholly explained by observable 
individual characteristics or non-observable fixed factors.  
 
Additionally, we performed an Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition and showed that the main explanatory 
factor for the gap is the difference in remuneration given to workers in larger companies (our proxy variable 

The  literature  review  on  the  subject  (predominantly  international)  identifies  that:  the  outsourcing 

VariablesVariationStandard ErrorVariationStandard ErrorEducation0,006***0,0001-0,055***0,0006Experience0,056***0,0002-0,027***0,0003Experience2-0,013***0,00010,003***0,00009Age-0,037***0,000030,021***0,0009White0,0007***0,00074-0,015***0,0003Man-0,008***0,00008-0,004***0,0004Company Size-0,013***0,000010,233***0,0009EndowmentCoefficientthe  payment  of  an  efficiency  wage).  If  the  workers  had  been  remunerated  in  the  same  manner  as  the  non-
outsourced workers according to the increasing size of the company where they work, their wages would be 
over 26% higher.  
 
Therefore,  this  article  was  able  to  deliver  a  single  theoretical  framework  that  is  aligned  with  the 
empirical  facts  suggested  by  Brazilian  data  and  identified  in  international  articles.  Furthermore,  this  study 
offers a more careful perspective on the potential beneficial and detrimental effects of outsourcing and opens 
the door to new research topics, such as the heterogeneous impacts on workers with different human resource 
shares, for example.  
 

VI - References 
 
 
ABRAHAM,  K  e  TAYLOR,  S.  Firms  use  of  outside  contractors:  theory  and  evidence.  Journal  of  Labour 
Economics, vol.14, p.394-424, 1996. 
AKERLOF, G. Labor contracts as a partial gift exchange. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.97, n.4, 
1982. 
AMITI,  M  e  WEI,  S.  Service  offshoring,  productivity  and  employment:  evidence  from  the  United  States. 
International Monetary Fund working paper, n.05/238, 2005. 
ARROW, K. The economic implications of learning by doing. The Review of Economic Studies, vol.29, n.3, 
p.155.173, 1962. 
BACCARA,  M.  Information  leakage  and  Consulting  firms.  The  RAND  jornal  of  economics,  vol.38,  n.1, 
p.269-289, 2007. 
BECKER,  G.  Human  capital:  a  theoretical  and  empirical  analysis  with  special  reference  to  education. 
National Bureau of Economic Research, 1975. 
BERLINSKY, S. Wages and  contracting out: does the law of one price  hold?  British  Journal of Industrial 
Relations, vol.46, n.1, p.59-75, 2008.  
BLINDER,  A.  Wage  discrimination:  Reduced  form  and  structural  estimates.  Journal  of  human  resources, 
vol.8, n.4, 436-455, 1973. 
BOWLES,  S.  The  production  process  in  a  competitive  economy:  Walrasian,  neo-Hobbesian  and  marxian 
models. American Economic Review, vol. 75, n. 1, p.16-36, 1985.   
COASE, R. The nature of the firm. Economica, vol.4, n.16, p.386-405, 1937. 
DUBE, A  e KAPLAN,  E. Does outsourcing reduce the wages in  low wages service occupations: Evidence 
from janitors and guards. Industrial and Labour Relations Review, vol.63, n.2, 2010. 
DUBE,  A  e  KAPLAN,  E.  The  Labour  Boundaries  of  the  firm:  employment  and  independent  contracting. 
Working Paper disponível em:  http://arindube.com/working-papers/, 2007. 
FEENSTRA,  R  e  HANSON,  G.  Globalization,  outsourcing  and  wage  inequality.  American  Economic 
Review, vol.86, p.240-245, 1998. 
FEENSTRA, R e HANSON, G. The impact of outsourcing and high technology capital on wages: estimates 
for the United States, 1979-1990. Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 114, n.3, p.907-940. 
GORZIG,  B  e  STEPHAN,  A.  Outsourcing  and  firm-level  performance.  German  Institute  for  economic 
research working paper, n.309, 2002.  
GROSSMAN, S e HART, O. The costs and benefits of ownership: a theory of vertical and lateral integration. 
Journal of Political Economy, vol.94, n.4, p.691-721, 1986.   
HOLMES,  T  e  SNIDER,  J.  A  theory  of  outsourcing  and  wage  decline.  American  Economic  Journal: 
Microeconomics, vol.3, n.2, p.38-59, 2011. 
HUANG,  T;  HALLAM,  A;  ORAZEM,  P  e  PATERNO,  E.  Empirical  tests  of  efficiency  wage  model. 
Economica, vol. 65, n.1, p.125-143, 1998. 

KATZ,  L.  Efficient  wage  theory:  a  partial  evaluation.  In:  FISCHER,  S.  National  Beureau  of  Economic 
Research Macroeconomics Annual,  p.235-292,  MIT Press, 1986. 
LAFFONT,  J  e  MARTIMORT,  D.  The  Theory  of  incentives:  the  principal  agent  model.  Princeton  Press, 
2002. 
MANKIW, G. e SWAGEL, P. The politics and economics of outsourcing.  Journal of monetary economics, 
vol.53, n.5, p.1027-1056, 2006.   
MCCAN,  F.  The  heterogeneous  effect  of  international  outsourcing  on  firm  productivity.  Review  of  World 
Economics, vol.147, p.85-108, 2011. 
MINCER, J. Schooling, experience and earnings. Columbia University Press, 1974. 
MOREIRA, R. Descentralização da produção e produtividade no Brasil. Dissertação de mestrado, abril de 
2015, Universidade de Brasília.  
MUNCH, J e SKAKSEN, J. Specialization, outsourcing and wages. Review of world economics, vol.145, n.1, 
p.57-73, 2009. 
OAXACA,  L.  Male-Female  wage  differentials  in  urban  labour  markets.  International  Economic  Review, 
vol.14, n.4, p.693-709. 
OI,  W.  e  IDSON,  T.  Firm  size  and  wages.  In:  ASHENFELTER,  A  e  CARD,  D.  Handbook  of  Labour 
Economics. Elsevier, 1999. 
POCHMANN, M. As relações do trabalho terceirizado. Documento de trabalho Sindeepres, 2012. 
PRADO,  E  e  TAKAOKA,  H.  Os  fatores  que  determinam  a  adoção  da  terceirização  da  tecnologia  da 
informação: uma análise do setor industrial de São Paulo. Revista de Administração Contemporânea, vol.6, 
n.3, p.129-147, 2002. 
RAA, T e WOLFF, E. Outsourcing of services and the productivity recovery in the U.S. manufacturing in the 
1980s and 1990s. Journal of productivity analysis, vol.16, n.1, p.149-165, 2001.  
RAJAN, R e WULFF, J. The flattening firm: evidence from panel data on the changing nature of corporate 
hierarchies. Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 88, n.4, p.759-773, 2006. 
RAJAN, R e ZINGALES, L. Power in the theory of the firm. Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.113, n.3, 
p.387-432.  
RAMOS, C. Economia do Trabalho: modelos teóricos e o debate no Brasil. CRV, Brasília, 2012. 
SCHAFFNER,  J.  Heteroscedastic  sample  selection  and  develping  country  wage  equations.  Institute  for 
economic development working paper, n.101, 1999. 
em: 
SEBRAE. 
http://www.sebrae.com.br/Sebrae/Portal%20Sebrae/Anexos/Anuario%20do%20Trabalho%20Na%20Micro%
20e%20Pequena%20Empresa_2013.pdf.  
STIGLITZ,  J  e  SHAPIRO,  C.  Equilibrium  unemployment  as  a  worker  discipline  device.  The  American 
Economic Review, vol.74, n.3, p.433-444, 1984. 
WILLCOCKS,  L  e  PLANT,  R.  How  corporations  e-source:  from  business  technology  projects  to  value 
networks. Informaiton system frontiers, vol.5, n.2, p.175-193, 2003. 
WILLCOCKS,  L  e  LACITY,  M.  Global  Sourcing  of  business  and  IT  services:  technology,  work  and 
globalization. Palgrave Macmillan, 2006. 
WILLIANSOM, O. The vertical integration of the firm: market failures considerations. American Economic 
Review, vol.61, p.112-123, 1971. 
WILLIANSOM,  O.  Outsourcing:  transaction  costs  economics  and  supply  chain  management.  Journal  of 
supply chain management, vol.44, n.2, 2008. 
WINDRUM,  P,  REINSTALLER,  A  e  BULL,  C.  The  outsourcing  productivity  paradox:  total  outsourcing, 
organizational innovation and long run productivity gains. Journal of Evolutionary Economics, v.19, p.197-
229, 2009.       
 

empresa.  Disponível 

na  micro 

trabalho 

pequena 

Anuário 

do 

e 

 

 
VII – Annex –Database Formation 
 
 
associated sectors that suggest the occupational status of the worker9:  

The  Table  below  indicates  the  professions  that  are  commonly  considered  outsourced  and  their 

                                                        
9 Besides  the  classification  stipulated  in  the  table,  all  workers  belonging  to  the  following  CNAE  classifications  were  considered 
outsourced: 82997, 78205, 78108 e 78302. 

 

CBOCNAECBOCNAE51342056201123151351232513612331234CBOCNAE123851418121482113514270204514369117517235118211351732522106920681117702048121480111CBOCNAE123673114CBOCNAE123782113951114256317313142662073217320373117020471569511872438220273018211386016311995016209502631953195118954170204620CBOCNAE6317151422371524222715342013571547155CBOCNAE71573141432237161286917162314433147716371643312171653314771666190671704321572017202CBOCNAE72115132562017212513425812147241513430562017243ProfessionsProfessionsProfessionsProfissõesProfessions71120Security agent5174DoormanEletricity SectorResidencial sectorElevator operatorCleaner8121443991Manual laborers and builders33210Eletricity Sector workersCivil construction sector80111CookServer61096432159519526399291519153Mechanics and maintenace specialistsMaintenance technicians 3171Programmers82202Telemarketing workersFood SectorIT and R&DProfessionsDirectors of several areasProfessionsDirectors and workers of R&D and IT2123Administrators and network analysts2410LawyersProfessionsFood producer and assistant56201Barman43215Administrative Workers821132124MaintenanceAccountants