 "Does risk aversion increase the willingness to become a teacher in Brazil? An investigation 

of risk preference and occupation choice among students of teacher training programs" 

Ariana Britto (IBMEC), Fábio Waltenberg (UFF) e Roberta Mendes e Costa (UFF)1 

 

July 2019 

 

Resumo  

No Brasil, a maioria dos professores de escolas públicas trabalha dentro de sistemas educacionais que 
fazem  uso de  contratos  de compensação  defasados. Sob tais contratos  de trabalho,  os salários dos 
professores  dependem  essencialmente  da  experiência  e  do  nível  de  qualificação.  Propostas  que 
objetivam  reformar  a  remuneração,  o  recrutamento  e  a  retenção  de  professores  há  muito  tempo 
consideram o uso de sistemas de remuneração baseados no mérito. Os professores geralmente não 
apoiam  tais  propostas.  Uma  possível  explicação  para  essas  objeções  é  o  fato  de  que  mecanismos 
baseados no desempenho introduzem incerteza. Se professores são relativamente avessos  ao risco, 
como  sugere  uma  vasta  literatura  sobre  este  tópico,  um  mecanismo  de  compensação  baseado  em 
mérito poderia reduzir a atratividade da carreira docente a longo prazo e a satisfação dessa carreira a 
curto prazo. Este trabalho contribui para a literatura, investigando o papel das preferências de risco e 
escolha ocupacional entre os alunos de cursos de formação de professores. Os dados foram extraídos 
de uma pesquisa aplicada a uma amostra representativa de concluintes em cursos de formação docente 
no Brasil. Os primeiros resultados parecem sugerir que a profissão docente pode atrair indivíduos que 
possam  ser,  pelo  menos,  mais  receptivos  a  modelos  alternativos  de  remuneração.  Para  abordar  a 
potencial  preocupação  com  a  endogeneidade,  fez-se  uso  de  modelo  de  variáveis  instrumentais  e 
identificou-se  uma  correlação  negativa  entre  indivíduos  que  escolhem  a  carreira  docente  e  a 
disposição para assumir  riscos. Este resultado  aplica-se  apenas  a medida  qualitativa utilizada para 
mensurar riscos. Até agora, esses resultados devem chamar a atenção para a importância de considerar 
as preferências dos professores ao projetar novos sistemas de remuneração para professores. 
Palavras-chaves: Escolha ocupacional, preferências de risco, remuneração docente, educação 

 

Abstract 

In  Brazil,  most  public  school  teachers  work  within  educational  systems  that  make  use  of  lagged 
compensation contracts. Under such employment contracts, teachers’ salaries depend essentially on 
their  years  of  experience  and  level  of  qualification.  Proposals  that  aim  to  reform  teacher 
compensation, recruitment and retention have long considered the use of merit-based compensation 
systems.  Teachers  have  generally  not  embraced  these  policies.  One  possible  explanation  for  their 
objections is the fact that these mechanisms introduce uncertainty into teachers’ income. If teachers 
are  relatively  risk  averse,  as  a  vast  literature  on  this  topic  suggests,  a  merit-based  compensation 
mechanism could potentially reduce the attractiveness of a teaching career over the long term, and 
the satisfaction of this career in the short term. This paper contributes to the literature by investigating 
the role of risk preferences and occupational choice among students of teacher training courses. Data 
were drawn from a survey administered to a representative sample of recent teaching graduates in 
Brazil. First results seems to suggest that teaching profession may attract individuals that might be, 
at  least,  more  receptive  to  alternative  compensation  models.  To  address  potential  concern  about 
endogeneity,  we  use  instrumental  variable  estimation  and  find  a  negative  correlation  between 
individuals who choose a teaching career and willingness to take risks. This result applies only to the 
general  risk  measure.  So  far,  these  results  should  call  attention  to  the  importance  of  considering 
teachers’ preferences when designing new compensation systems for teachers.   
Keywords: Occupational choice, risk preferences, teacher compensation, education 
 
Área ANPEC: 13 (Economia do Trabalho) 
JEL: J24, D81, I20 

                                                           
1 Corresponding authors. Emails: ariana.britto@ibmec.edu.br; rmendes@id.uff.br; waltenberg@economia.uff.br.  

1 

 

1.  Introduction2 

 

In  Brazil,  most  public  school  teachers  work  within  educational  systems  that  make  use  of 
lagged compensation contracts. Under such employment contracts, teachers’ salaries depend not on 
the  performance  of  their  students,  but  essentially  on  their  years  of  experience  and  level  of 
qualification. Some authors believe compensating teachers based on the performance of their students 
would both incentivize teachers to work harder in the short term,  and alter the composition of the 
teaching profession in the long term, attracting better teachers (Lazear, 2003; Biasi, 2018; Dohmen 
&  Falk,  2010;  (Goldhaber,  Bignell, Farley, Walch, & Cowan, 2016).  In line with  this literature, a 
uniform  compensation system, such as that which currently operates in  Brazil, could  be  failing to 
extract maximum effort from teachers and to increase teacher productivity.  

 
However,  the  use  of  merit-based  compensation  systems  would  introduce  uncertainty  into 
teachers’ income,  given  that it would be subject  to  oscillation  over time.  Additionally, pay  would 
depend  on  their  students’  performance,  which  means  teachers  would  not  perfectly  control  their 
incomes. If teachers are relatively risk averse, as a vast literature on this topic suggests (Goldhaber, 
Bignell, Farley, Walch, & Cowan, 2016); (Bowen, Buck, Deck, Mills, & Shuls, 2015); (Dohmen & 
Falk, 2010); (Hernani-Limarino, 2005); (Liang, 2000), a merit-based compensation mechanism could 
potentially reduce the attractiveness of a teaching career over the long term, and the satisfaction of 
this career in the short term, eventually increasing rates of exit from the teaching profession.  

 
A key question related to this dynamic is how the effects of a merit-based compensation model 
may  vary  over  teachers  who  already  have  years  of  experience,  new  entrants  into  the  teaching 
profession,  and  individuals  who  are  currently  choosing  a  future  career.  Recent  studies  appear  to 
document a preference for less-volatile compensation mechanisms, or at least for mixed models that 
retain an element of predictability (Goldhaber, Bignell, Farley, Walch, & Cowan, 2016) (Biasi, 2018). 
It appears that for school districts in the United States that adopted, either totally or partially merit-
based  compensation  models,  the  results  remain  unclear.  Nonetheless,  there  does  appear  to  be  an 
observable tendency in relation to new entrants into the teaching profession. If teachers are not in fact 
more  risk  averse,  teachers’  opposition  to  performance  pay  system  could  be  less  strong  than  we 
supposed, especially regarding new entrants.    

 
Flexible  compensation  systems  are  still  new  to  a  majority  of  teachers,  and  in  this  case, 
teachers’  choices  may  be  affected  not  only  by  aversion  to  income  risk,  but  also  by  information 
asymmetries.  Teachers  may  require  time  to  acquire  the  information  necessary  to  evaluate  new 
compensation  models,  whatever  these  may  be.  In  this  context,  teachers  still  appear  to  exhibit 
relatively high levels of resistance to productivity-based compensation models, perhaps due to their 
complexity and ambiguity. As a result of the limited information available to them, many teachers 
may not be totally cognizant of the magnitude of the potential risks and rewards associated with these 
models (Goldhaber, Bignell, Farley, Walch, & Cowan, 2016). 

 
To our knowledge, there are no studies in the Brazilian literature that specifically analyze the 
individual  risk  preferences  of  a  specific  occupational  group  –  in  Brazil,  the  relation  between  risk 
preferences and career choice has traditionally been examined in the context of  wage differentials 
between public and private sector workers. In general, studies of this topic have demonstrated that 
public  sector  workers  in  Brazil  are  more  risk  averse  than  their  private  sector  counterparts  when 
considering  total  lifetime  earnings,  including  bonuses  and  pension  benefits  along  with  basic  pay 

                                                           
2 This material was carried out with the technical and financial support of the Lemann Foundation and Itau BBA through the "How to 
ensure  that  all  Brazilian  students  have  a  good  teacher  every  day  in  the  classroom?".  All  opinions,  results,  conclusions  and 
recommendations  expressed  in  this  material  are  the  responsibility  of  the  author  (s)  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  the  views  of  the 
Lemann Foundation and Itau BBA. 

2 

 

(Barbosa,  Barbosa-Filho,  &  Lima,  2013);  (Becker  &  Kassouf,  2012);  (Barbosa-Filho,  Pessôa,  & 
Afonso, 2009). 

 
From  a  methodological  point  of  view,  the  primary  difficulty  in  analyzing  heterogeneity  in 
individual risk preferences lies in the fact that these preferences are not directly measurable. Most of 
the economic literature assumes not only that risk preferences are stable over time, but that they are 
homogenous  across  individuals.  A  growing,  albeit  exclusively  international  literature  has  made 
important progress in developing empirical measurement of individual risk preferences (Beauchamp, 
Cesarini, & Johannesson, 2017); (Dohmen, et al., 2011); (Dohmen, et al., 2005).  

 
Further  methodological  limitations  apply  when  considering  the  labor  market  for  teachers. 
First,  there  is  a  lack  of  information  gathered  on  risk  preferences  in  standard  questionnaires 
administered in Brazil. Second, of the data that do exist about teachers, most encompass information 
on  teachers  who  have  already  entered  the  profession.  Yet  these  experienced  teachers’  preferences 
may  already have  been shaped or influenced by their own experiences or  by the opinions of their 
colleagues, and may not represent their original individual preferences (Perez, 2011). Collectively, 
these challenges make it difficult to foresee how teachers’ preferences should be incorporated into 
the design of new incentives to attract future teaching professionals and retain those who are already 
involved in the profession.  

 
In this article, we analyze the responses of undergraduate students in teacher training courses 
on how to identify themselves in relation to their risk behavior from open questions. Open questions 
were used, following the approach of Dohmen et al. (2011, 2005), whose objective was to compare 
the judgment of individuals on open questions versus questions traditionally used in the literature that 
measures  risk  preferences  such  as  coefficients  of  risk  aversion,  measures  based  on  hypothetical 
lotteries, or measures of variance in wages in different segments of the labor market. The hypothesis 
underlying  these  models  is  that  riskier  occupations  may  offer  higher  pay  in  order  to  incentivize 
workers to participate. By correlating results with specific occupations, within which the literature 
has traditionally assumed that risk preferences are homogenous, we hope to find a measure capable 
of reflecting specific individual traits and behaviors (Bowen et al., 2015). 

  
The data used in our analyses come from a survey administered to a representative sample of 
nearly  2,000  undergraduate  teaching  majors,  distributed  over  Brazil’s  five  regions  in  2015.  By 
focusing  on  undergraduate  students  preparing  to  enter  the  teaching  profession,  it  is  possible  to 
incorporate the problem of self-selection into low-risk careers, while eliminating any interference that 
experience may have on behavior. The participants of the research were also analyzed in relation to 
their  possibilities  of  entering  the  teaching  career  and  their  preferences  for  different  remuneration 
systems  that  involve  different  degrees  of  risk.  The  survey  sought  to  directly  measure  the  risk 
preferences of individuals at the moment they are confirming their occupational choice, and to relate 
these preferences to characteristics of the teaching profession, including income risk, job security, 
and chances of upward mobility within teaching careers. One of the fundamental takeaways regarding 
risk preferences is that context matters (Fouarge, Kriechel, & Dohmen, 2014). Thus, we use a context-
specific measure of risk that allow us to correlate the influence of local contexts on risk behaviors. 

 
Descriptive statistics demonstrate that individuals who choose a teaching career seems to be 
not more risk averse than other students, contrary to what theory has tended to predict. Being older, 
having parents with at least a high school education increase willingness to take risks. However, these 
results were unstable among the four measures of risk preferences, including two versions of general 
risk measure that we apply. It is possible that observable characteristics incorporate some aspects of 
individual risk preferences. Other potential explanations are discussed in the text. These results seems 
to suggest that teaching profession may attract individuals that might be, at least, more receptive to 
alternative compensation models, and should call attention to the importance of considering teachers’ 
3 

 

preferences when designing new  compensation systems for teachers.  To address potential concern 
about  endogeneity,  we  exploited  information  of  having  children  and  living  with  them  during 
undergraduate  courses.  Using  instrumental  variable  estimation,  we  find  a  negative  correlation 
between individuals who choose a teaching career and willingness to take risks. This result applies 
only to the general risk measure on 11 points scale.  

 

2.  Risk Measures 

 
To measure risk preferences, four variables were constructed based on survey questions that 
sought to capture how respondents would behave in hypothetical situations involving risk. We define 
these  variables  as  general  risk,  risk  context,  contract  risk,  and  financial  risk.  Risk  attitudes  are 
measured  on  a  discrete  scale,  where  higher  values  represent  a  greater  inclination  to  take  risks  in 
different contexts. The measures were constructed based on (Dohmen, et al. 2005); (Dohmen, et al., 
2011); (Bowen, et al. 2015). Table 1 presents a summary of the four risk measures and their format 
in the econometric models. 
 

Table 1: Description of Dependent Variables 

Dependent Variable 

1. General Risk 

Continuous 

General 

2. Risk Context (risk 
in the labor market–
employability) 

3. Contract Risk 
(risk in the labor 
market – different 
payment models)  

4. Financial Risk 
(hypothetical 
investment) 

Question to Generate 

Measure 

How do you see yourself? Are 
you a person who is inclined to 
take risks, or do you avoid 
risks? 

Choose to live in City 1 (low 
employment rate and relatively 
low salaries) or City 2 (high 
employment rate but higher 
salaries). 
Indicate preferences among 
different types of pay systems 
(using a satisfaction scale, with 
higher values representing 
greater satisfaction).  
Suppose you won R$100,000 in 
the  lottery.  Immediately  after 
receiving  your  prize,  you 
investment  offer 
receive  an 
from 
good 
reputation)  with  the  following 
conditions:  
1.  It  is  possible  to  double  the 
value of your investment in one 
year 
2. It is equally possible to lose 
half of the value invested. 
Respondents should choose 
what fraction of the R$100,000 
they should invest from a set of 
six possible options. 

bank 

(of 

a 

Functional Form 

 
Continuous response scale from 0 to 
10 
Binary 
   1 = Risk-neutral or loving (responses 
≥5) 
   0 = Risk averse (responses <5) 
Binary 
   1 = Risk-neutral or loving (choose 
City 2, the riskier option); 
   0 = Risk averse (choose City 1, the 
less-risky option) 
Binary 
   1 = Risk-neutral or loving (responses 
≥5 for variable compensation based on 
individual and team performance) 
   0 = Risk averse (responses <5) 

Scale constructed from six possible 
responses:  
 
   0 = don’t invest;  
   1 = invest R$20,000; 
   2 = invest R$40,000; 
   3 = invest R$60,000; 
   4 = invest R$80,000; 
   5 = invest R$100,000; 
 
The larger the number, the lower the 
risk aversion 
 

Created by authors 
 

 

4 

Various studies have made use of general self-reported risk aversion measures, demonstrating 
the  ability  of  these  measures  to  predict  individual  risk-related  behaviors  (Dohmen,  et  al.,  2005); 
(Fouarge,  Kriechel,  &  Dohmen,  2014);  (Dohmen  &  Falk,  2010).  In  the  measures  related  to  labor 
market risk, respondents are left free to imagine the risks involved in each choice.  

 
Most of our analysis focuses on the general risk measure. It is possible to observe that it is a 
qualitative  measure  that  does  not  involve  any  explicit  lottery.  Instead,  consider  the  assessment  of 
individual risk-taking in general, which may incorporate various types of lottery-based risk elicitation 
tools – including those that do not involve monetary rewards – that could be addressed in decision-
making processes. 

 
The approach follows that proposed by Dohmen et al. (2011, 2005). For the authors, as there 
are no specific stakes or probability in this general measure, there may be potential factors besides 
risk preferences that lead to a variation in individual responses. Specifically subjective beliefs about 
the degree of risk in the decision environment could affect the stated willingness to take risks. For 
this reason, it is important to evaluate if the general generic variable is able to explain the risk behavior 
in  our  model,  compared  to  other  measures  that  involve  explicit  risks.  A  positive  result  from  the 
validation  exercise  would  confirm  that  the  measure  does  not  only  reflect  subjective  beliefs.  The 
validation exercise is presented in section four. 

 
Risk context was a measure coded as one for respondents who would prefer to live in a city 
with high unemployment and high average wages and zero for respondents who would choose a city 
with both low indicators, average wages and unemployment rate. 

 
In  the  third  measure  respondents  should  choose  their  preferences  from  four  different  pay 
systems,  two  non-competitive  (based  on  experience  and  qualifications)  and  two  competitive  ones 
(based on individual performance and team performance). Like general risk measure described above, 
this  was  constructed  considering  the  discrete  scale  of  grades  from  zero  to  ten,  with  higher  values 
indicating a greater risk propensity. Given that interest here falls on the implications of individual 
heterogeneity  in  incentive  contracts,  regression  models  were  considered  only  responses  to  pay 
systems based on performance, either individual or team. 

 
The  last  measurement  included  in  the  survey  is  a  hypothetical  lottery.  This  measurement 
shares a common characteristic with other lottery measures in that it presents respondents with risks 
and probabilities for each decision, thus holding risk stable across individuals. As argued by Dohmen 
et al. (2005; 2011), this method allows responses to be more clearly attributed to risk preferences by 
holding subjective beliefs constant. 

 
 
 
 

3.  Data 

 
The  sample  consisted  of  approximately  2,000  individuals  distributed  over  35  Brazilian 
municipalities that are representative of Brazil’s five regions. In total, 66 higher education institutions 
(51% public and 49% private) were visited between June and December, 2015. Survey participants 
were  approached  by  enumerators  within  these  institutions’  teaching  departments.  The  universe  of 

 

5 

participants was considered students enrolled in education courses3 and teaching licensure programs4, 
who planned to graduate within eighteen months of the interview. These individuals are referred to 
in the survey as “graduates.”5 Of the 2,000 face-to-face interviews conducted, 1,994 were completed 
successfully  and  were  valid  for  analysis.6  Surveyed  individuals  were  drawn  from  the  following 
majors:  education,  and  seven  teaching  licensure  programs:  biology,  physics,  geography,  history, 
literature, mathematics, and chemistry. 

  
The survey collected information on individuals’ educational background and demographic 
and socioeconomic characteristics, as well as information  on professional plans, choice of college 
major and undergraduate educational trajectory. The key survey questioned focused on whether or 
not they intended to work as a basic education teacher upon graduation, and what their motivations 
were for this choice, including social influences, their perceptions of their own teaching abilities, the 
personal and social attractiveness of the teaching profession, job demands, social status, and financial 
considerations.  Based  on  this  survey,  we  construct  two  comparison  groups  that  are  relatively 
homogenous within themselves: individuals who choose to become basic education teachers upon 
graduating (57.1%), and individuals who affirm that they will not continue with a teaching career or 
are unsure of their plans (Table 2).  

 

Table 2: Proportion of undergraduate students among possibilities of occupational choice7 

Occupational Choices 

Quantity  Participation in 

Act as teacher of Basic Education in the public sector 
Act as teacher of Basic Education in the private sector 
Act as a teacher in preparatory college courses 
Act as a teacher of Higher Education 
Acting in the area of Education, but not as a teacher 
Do not work in the area of Education 
Do not know 
Total  

965 
173 
49 
389 
200 
112 
106 
1,994 

the total (%) 

48.4% 
8.7% 
2.5% 
19.5% 
10.0% 
5.6% 
5.3% 

100.0% 

Constructed by authors based on survey data described in text.  
 
By  focusing  on  undergraduate  students  who  are  preparing  to  enter  the  professional  career, 
whether teaching or not, it is possible to focus on the issue of self-selection in potentially low-risk 
careers,  while  eliminating  the  interference  that  experience  may  have  on  behavior  individual. 
Considering  that  the  results  estimated  in  the  following  sections  depend  on  the  construction  of  the 
comparison  groups,  it  would  be  expected  that  there  would  be  no  significant  difference  between 
students wishing to be teachers of basic education and those who answered negatively or had doubts 
about becoming a teacher. 

 
The  results  presented  in  Table  A  in  the  Appendix  do  not  corroborate  this  differentiation. 
Individuals  who  intend  to  pursue  a  teaching  career  differ  in  terms  of  average  for  most  of  the 

                                                           
3 Education courses trains teacher for preschool and the first years of elementary education. 
4 Teacher training courses in Brazil are called licenciaturas, translated here to licensure. They are four-year undergraduate 
courses encompassing various fields that lead to the teacher profession. Teachers with licensure have pedagogical training 
during those years. 
5 The sampling plan followed the Proportional Probability to Population Size method, considering the total number of 
graduates reported in the School Census (Censo Escolar) of 2011. Based on this framework, we proceeded by selecting 
states, municipalities within each state, and education institutions within each municipality with respect to proportionality 
over each of the three specialty areas mentioned. 
6 The  survey  was  conducted  by  a  company  that  offered  multiple  trained  survey  teams  over  Brazil’s  five  regions.  The 
survey took an average of 20 minutes to complete.   
7 Students should choose only the first preference among the alternatives presented. 

6 

 

observable characteristics, statistically significant at 1%, when compared to those who do not or are 
unsure.  This  difference  was  found  for  the  majority  of  controls:  gender,  age,  parental  schooling, 
previous  work  as  teacher,  except:  color  and  socioeconomic  level.  Among  the  institutional 
characteristics,  most  of  them  presented  differences:  those  who  intend  to  pursue  a  teaching  career 
study  mainly  in  private  institutions,  in  pedagogy  courses  and  have  attended  high  school  in  public 
schools.  Regarding  risk  measures,  the  differences  are  not  maintained:  future  teachers  and  non-
teachers do not differ in terms of preferences regarding risk, regardless of the measure used. 

 
Therefore, it is observed that, in general, the sample that was used to carry out the estimations 
of  occupational  choice  underestimates  individual  characteristics,  family  background  and  school 
situation of the graduates wishing to pursue their career as teachers of basic education, but in terms 
of preferences in relation to risk, the differences are less relevant. 

 

4.  Determinants of Risk Preference Measures 

 

This  section  presents  the  distributions  of  preferences  regarding  risk  in  the  population  of 
students to be become teachers measured by the general question. Figure 1 describes the distribution 
of  risk  preferences  in  our  sample.  Each  bar  represents  the  fraction  of  respondents  who  chose  a 
particular  point  on  the  11-point  scale.  The  figure  reveals  some  heterogeneity  in  risk  preferences 
among the population: mode is 8, demonstrating that there seems to be a higher concentration of data 
at the higher levels, which may indicate individuals less risk averse. A fraction greater than 10% of 
the respondents chose the value 10, indicating that they are fully willing to take risks, while about 4% 
of all individuals chose 0, indicating that they would be totally at odds in taking risks. Nevertheless, 
it was observed that preferences regarding risk vary throughout the scale. 

Figure 1: Willingness to take risks in general: full sample  

Answers to general risk measure 

0: Completely inclined to avoid risks, 10: Completely inclined to take risks 

Constructed by authors based on survey data described in text. 

 

 
The next step is to assess whether any heterogeneity in preferences over risk is systematic, 
thus  leading to  differences in  economic decisions between the two comparison groups. That  is,  to 
what extent this heterogeneity prevails when analyzing the impact of other observable traits that could 
affect attitudes toward risk: gender, age, color, wealth, and family background. These characteristics 
may be considered exogenous to preferences and risk behavior. Dohmen, et al. (2005; 2011) show 
that, if this were the case, some causal interpretation would be possible for correlations and regression 
results. 

7 

 

 
Table 3 summarizes the results. The coefficients presented in columns 1-4 correspond with 
average marginal effects, which capture effects on the mean graduate, while the results in column 1 
are from Ordinary Least Squared (OLS) with heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors. The majority 
of  estimated  coefficients  are  not  statistically  significant,  and  this  result  appears  stable  across 
alternative risk measures. Nevertheless, it is important to highlight the impact of a few exogenous 
and  statistically  significant  characteristics  in  each  of  the  specifications.  The  dependent  variable 
represents the individual responses to each of the risk measures described in the previous section. 

 
Age appears to be positively correlated with disposition to take risks (statistically significant 
at  the  5%  level  in  columns  1  and  5).  Older  graduates  would  also  be  more  satisfied  with  payment 
models based on either individual or team performance. The table also shows that whites are relatively 
more  risk  averse  than  black  or  brown  individuals.  These  results  are  robust  to  changes  in  the 
formulation of the outcome variable and are negative and significant only in the general risk measure 
(columns  1  and  2).  One  possible  explanation  for  this  association  may  be  self-selection  of  white 
individuals at the moment of choosing a course of university study. Less risk averse white students 
may  self-select  into  riskier  occupations,  as  characterized  by  greater  variability  in  incomes.  In  this 
sense, those white students that become teachers would be disproportionately risk averse.  

 
Furthermore,  not  only  is  access  to  higher  education  unequal  between  whites  and  blacks  in 
Brazil; relative career opportunities are unequal as well. Relatively more black students are required 
to  balance  their  time  between  pursuing  their  undergraduate  degrees  and  participating  in  the  labor 
market,  and  are  more  likely  to  pursue  night  courses  or  distance-learning,  leading  to  lower 
participation  in  courses  of  study  that  require  full-time  participation  or  whose  cost  is  high  (e.g. 
medicine or engineering). For those black students that not only managed to make it to university, 
but who are within sight of graduating, the disposition to take risks is likely an important part of the 
characteristics that enabled them to get there. 

 
The relation between our indicator of wealth per capita and measures of risk is substantially 
less consistent. Within theories of uncertainty, an important question regards whether risk aversion 
should  increase  or  decrease  with  individual  or  family  wealth  (Nicholson  &  Christopher,  2008); 
(Weiss, 1972). Intuitively, one may argue that as family wealth increases, the disposition to take risks 
will increase as well, given that potential losses are less relevant. This would make wealth endogenous 
in our model. This is indeed the result identified, though only in the lottery risk measure (column 3) 
and only at the 10% level of significance.  

 
The  coefficients  for  parents’  education  are  less  robust.  Father’s  education  is  statistically 
significant  at  the  5%  level  in  the  specification  that  analyzes  determinants  of  preference  for  merit-
based contracts. Evidently, having a more educated father is associated with increased satisfaction 
with merit-based contracts, while having a more educated mother has the opposite effect. In contrast, 
mother’s education has a positive effect (significant at the 5% level) on general disposition to take 
risks.  

 
A comparison of the results presented in columns 1-5 shows that the estimated coefficients 
for each of the observable characteristics in each of the risk measures seem to be – weakly – correlated 
with the way the risk preferences are measured. Although a causal interpretation is not possible, it 
does not seem that we can completely rule out the idea that these measures reflect only subjective 
opinions. 

 

 

Table 3: Determinants of Risk Preferences in Different Contexts 

Dependent  

General Risk 

Financial  

Risk 

Contract 

8 

Variable 

Continuous 

Binary 

(1) 

(2) 

Risk 
(3) 

Female (=1) 

Age (in years) 

Mother graduated 
high school 
Father graduated 
high school 

White (=1) 

Wealth per capita  

Constant 

R-squared 
Observations 

0.264 
(0.206) 
0.0272** 
(0.0125) 

0.324 
(0.239) 
-0.259 
(0.206) 
-0.519** 
(0.245) 
0.137 

(0.0968) 
5.903*** 
(0.533) 
0.051 
1,711 

0.0143 
(0.0366) 
0.00312 
(0.00234) 
0.0808** 
(0.0362) 
-0.0624 
(0.0424) 
-0.103** 
(0.0454) 
0.0198 
(0.0214) 

 
 
 

-0.0362 
(0.0574) 
-0.00498 
(0.00354) 

0.0123 
(0.0365) 
0.0839* 
(0.0435) 
0.0620* 
(0.0369) 
0.0379* 
(0.0207) 

 
 
 

Context 

(4) 

0.0234 
(0.0427) 
0.00205 
(0.00256) 
-0.0280 
(0.0406) 
0.0561 
(0.0360) 
0.0557 
(0.0516) 
0.0205 
(0.0220) 

 
 
 

Risk 
(5) 

-0.00724 
(0.0338) 
0.00476** 
(0.00201) 
-0.0788* 
(0.0443) 
0.0634** 
(0.0292) 
0.0102 
(0.0285) 
0.00413 
(0.0140) 

 
 
 

1,711 

1,711 

1,711 

1,708 

Note: All specifications include the complete sample of graduates. Colum 1 present average effects estimated based on a 
linear probability model (OLS). Columns 2 and 5 present average marginal effects estimated based on a probit model. 
The variable High School Graduated assumes a value of 1 in cases where each parent possesses at least a completed high 
school  education,  and  assumes  a  value  of  0  otherwise.  The  measure  of  wealth  per  capita  was  constructed  based  on 
questions regarding household assets and number of household members. The maximum value observed for this variable 
was 8. Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. We estimate all models with standard errors clustered at the 
educational institutional level. Regional fixed effects are included in all models.  
***, **, *   indicate significance at the 1%, 5% e 10%, respectively.  

 
The fact that we have a pre-selected sample of individuals who are relatively homogenous 
over observable characteristics facilitates our analysis of risk preferences by making it possible to 
separate  background  socioeconomic  characteristics  from  risk-related  behaviors.  Furthermore,  our 
focus on a specific occupational category allows us to examine the effects of individual heterogeneity 
in risk preferences on choices made by young individuals just as they are preparing to enter the labor 
market.  
 
On the other hand, it is  possible that individuals who have  chosen teaching-related majors 
have already self-selected in terms of risk preferences. Fouarge, Kriechel, and Dohmen (2014) argue 
that self-selection on risk preferences may occur because individuals who are more disposed to risk-
taking  will  be  more  likely  to  opt  for  riskier  occupations,  and  to  receive  higher  compensation  as  a 
result. In this sense, the predictive power of our measures of risk preferences may not be sufficiently 
strong to capture heterogeneity at the individual level.  

 

5.  Results: Are Future Teachers More Risk Averse? 
 

One of our aims in this paper was to evaluate individual heterogeneity in students’ decisions 
regarding  career  choice.  To  do  so,  we  sought  to  understand  the  preferences  of  young,  soon-to-be 
graduates of teacher licensure and education programs, who may be distinct from individuals who 
have already worked in the teaching profession for some time. Could it be the case that future teachers 
have already self-selected by opting for a course of study that is relatively less risky than engineering 
or  medicine,  for  example?  If  this  were  true,  these  future  teachers’  preferences  would  still  be  less 
influenced  by  experience  or  the  visions  and  opinions  of  the  teaching  profession  than  would  the 
opinions of their future colleagues who have already taught for some time (Perez, 2011) 8. 

                                                           
8 It is important to note that two in every ten graduates interviewed had already had some sort of teaching experience. 
One of the survey questions dealt directly with this topic: “Before beginning your current course of study, had you ever 
9 

 

 
 
The  analyses  above  were  focused  on  individual  heterogeneity  in  risk  preferences  and  the 
determinants of these individual differences. In this final section, we adopt a different perspective in 
order to evaluate whether measures of risk preferences are capable of predicting risk-related economic 
decisions, specifically the decision of whether or not to become a teacher. The hypothesis underlying 
this  analysis  supposes  that  the  measures  of  risk  are  valid  proxies  of  real  risk  preferences  and  that 
heterogeneity in these preferences is an important determinant of individual variation in risk-related 
behaviors among students deciding whether to become basic education teachers.  
 
 
In order to analyze these questions, we focus on analyzing behavior of the two occupational 
groups as a function of the risk measures discussed previously. The empirical strategy was developed 
based on the idea that occupations offer systematically different risk profiles and lifetime earnings 
curves. To keep things simple and analogous to other studies that analyze occupational choices, we 
assume that risk is a characteristic that may be separated from the bundle of additional factors that 
determine individual occupational choice. 
 

Each  estimated  coefficient  is  based  on  a  regression  of  a  reported  occupational  decision 
(whether or not to become a basic education teacher) on associated measures or risk preference. All 
regression  specifications  include  an  extensive  set  of  control  variables,  including  region,  sex,  race, 
wealth, family composition,  parents’  education, course of study, presence of children, a proxy for 
individual ability, an indicator of whether the respondent had previously worked as a teacher, and 
educational background. The outcome variable of interest is the binary variable that assumes a value 
of one if the respondent reports they will choose to enter the basic education profession as a teacher 
upon graduation, and assumes a value of zero if the respondent is unsure of their plans or plans to 
follow a different career path. 

 
The estimated equation for the probit model takes the form: 

 

Equation 1: 𝑦𝑖

∗ =   𝛽0 +   𝛽1𝑋𝑖 +   𝛽2𝑅𝑖 +   𝜖𝑖 

∗ = 1, if the i-th student intend to become a teacher of Basic Education and  𝑦𝑖

∗ = 0, otherwise. R 
Where: 𝑦𝑖
represents each of the risk measures considered separately in the regressions; i indexes each of the respondents 
and X contains a set of control variables. Our observations presuppose multiple individuals who study at the 
same institution of higher education, so we need to cluster our standard errors at the institutional level. 

 
For  each  result,  Table  4  presents  average  marginal  effects  based  on  estimates  from  a 
traditional probit model9. Columns 1 through 4 and 6 present the relationship between the outcome 
variable  (occupational  choice)  and  each  of  the  measures  of  risk  individually.  Columns  5  and  7 
estimates occupational choice as a function of all risk measures simultaneously. It is evident from the 
results  that,  independently  of  specification,  there  does  not  appear  to  be  a  significant  association 
between willingness to take risks and the decision of whether or not to become a teacher. Previous 
international  studies  that  sought  to  measure  risk  preferences  have  argued  that  a  common  problem 
among studies seeking to analyze occupational choice and risk preferences is that of self-selection 
(Guiso  &  Paiella,  2005).  The  idea  behind  this  critique  is  that  individuals’  occupational  choice  is 

                                                           
worked before? [If necessary, mark more than one option].” The possible responses for a student who had already worked 
as a teacher before included: as a school teacher, as a private tutor, as a teaching assistant, or as a teacher in some other 
institution (college prep courses, nonprofits, companies, churches, social movements, etc.). As a robustness check, we 
opted to re-estimate all specifications in Table 4 including a variable to take into account whether the respondent had had 
some previous contact  with the teaching profession. Results are similar in sign and significance when we include this 
measure of occupational choice. 
9 Coefficients were estimated for marginal effects at the mean and average marginal effects, which should yield similar 
results to those from a linear ordinary least squares model (Cameron & Trivedi, 2010). We present results only for the 
marginal effects at the mean, which take into account the behavior of the mean individual.  

10 

 

endogenous,  since  individuals  who  are  more  risk  averse  self-select  into  “safer”  occupations  with 
lower variability in pay (King, 1974) or less risky conditions (Bonin et al., 2007), which may include 
the teaching profession (Bowen, Buck, Deck, Mills, & Shuls, 2015). We specifically address to this 
problem in next section. 
 
 
Table 4: Individual risk attitude and occupational sorting: Probit (Marginal Effects at Means –MEM) 

and OLS Models 

Dependent Variable: Occupational choice of undergraduates  
 

 

 

 

(3) 

 

(4) 

 

(5) 

 

(6) 

 

 

 
General Risk –  
Binary Variable 
 
Financial Risk 
 
Risk Context 
 
Contract Risk Performance 
 
General Risk –  
Continuous Variable 
 
Observations 

(1) 

(2) 

-0.00513 
(0.0362) 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

0.0597 
(0.0406) 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

-0.0493 
(0.0404) 

 
 
 
 
 
 

-0.0423 
(0.0327) 

-0.0102 
(0.0330) 
0.0574 
(0.0397) 
-0.0398 
(0.0415) 
-0.0337 
(0.0321) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1,677 

1,677 

1,677 

1,674 

1,674 

1,677 

1,674 

 
 

 
 

0.00862 
(0.00745) 

0.00774 
(0.00685) 

 

(7) 

 
 

0.0505 
(0.0394) 
-0.0434 
(0.0407) 
-0.0386 
(0.0320) 

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. We estimate all models with standard errors clustered at the educational institutional 
level. Regional fixed effects are included in all models. 
***, **, *   indicate significance at the 1%, 5% e 10% levels, respectively. 
Source: Constructed based on survey data described in text. 
 

Thus, it is necessary to develop measures of risk preference that are consistent with individual 
behavior and specific to the context of economic choices (Dohmen, et al., 2005). Our study replicated 
specific measures of risk, and sought to explore individual heterogeneity by considering individuals 
who are near the point of making an occupational choice and who have previously self-selected into 
a specific course of study.   

 
In  a  recent  paper,  Beauchamp,  Cesarini  &  Johannesson  (2017)  associate  the  difficulty  in 
evaluating the effects of individual risk preference heterogeneity on economic decision-making with 
errors in the construction of risk measurements. The authors estimate proxies for risk preferences that 
account  for  individual  behavior  in  diverse  risk  contexts,  including  financial  risks,  alcohol 
consumption, smoking, or opening a new business. They draw data from a national survey of nearly 
25,000 twins born in Sweden between 1926 and 1958. They use their proxies for risk preferences to 
estimate a model of generalized method of moments (GMM) to measure the role of risk in individual 
behavior. The authors find that their measures of risk preferences have robust and strongly significant 
effects,  illustrating  the  importance  of  constructing  meaningful  and  well-measured  proxies  for  risk 
preferences.  

 
Beyond the insignificant effects of risk measures on individual occupational choices,  other 
characteristics do appear to be associated with the choice to enter the teaching profession. Estimated 
coefficients  that  appear  statistically  significant  in  any  specification  remain  so  over  alternative 

 

11 

specifications. In terms of magnitude, the inclusion of risk measures appears to have little effect on 
the magnitudes of other estimated coefficients10. 

 
These results appear to confirm the findings of an extensive literature on teacher labor supply, 
which has largely focused on understanding which types of individuals feel attracted to the teaching 
profession. In sum, the profile of future basic education teachers is composed primarily of women, 
those with children and who are enrolled in academically weaker private education institutions. Many 
of these individuals come from  families with  lower levels  of  education, with  parents  employed in 
sectors such as commerce, services, and domestic services. If these characteristics already incorporate 
some levels of relative risk preferences, it is possible that the teaching profession does indeed attract 
individuals who are relatively more averse to risk. 
 
6.  Taking into account the selection effect  
 

In  this  section  we  discuss  a  potential  issue  concerning  to  our  analyses  around  career  risk 
attitude and occupational sorting. Individual decisions can have an effect on risk attitudes. In other 
words, not only can risk attitudes affect individual decisions, but the opposite is possible as well. To 
address potential concern about endogeneity, we exploited information of having children and living 
with then during undergraduate courses. Using this variable as an instrumental variable estimation. 
The hypothesis behind this argument is that parents might be more risk averse. In our sample, 20% 
of undergraduate students have children and live with them. 

 
We  exploit  the  effect  of  having  children  on  occupation  sorting  in  instrumental  variable 

estimations of the following form:  

 

Equation 2: 

First stage: 𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘 𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑖 =  𝛼 + 𝛽1𝑋𝑖 + 𝐾𝑖𝑑𝑠𝑖 +   𝜖𝑖 

 

Second stage: 𝑦𝑖

∗ =   𝛽0 +   𝛽1𝑋𝑖 + 𝛽2𝑅𝑖𝑠𝑘 𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑖

̂ + 𝜖𝑖 

 
In  order  for  the  variable  to  live  with  the  children  to  be  a  good  instrument,  it  could  not  be 
correlated with the error term. The second requirement is that risk measures and having children are 
to some extent correlated. When we tested this correlation, we observed a negative correlation only 
regarding the generic measure of risk. Not all other risk measures are statistically significance and 
coefficients signals are now positive, sometimes negative in relation to the risk measures.  

 
Estimates  of  IV  regression  are  given  in  Table  5.  Results  shows  that  there  is  a  negative 
relationship  between  willingness  to  become  a  teacher  and  general  risk  measure,  statistically 
significant at 1%. This coefficient implies that, with the other fixed factors, those who wish to pursue 
a teaching career would be, on average, more risk averse than those who do not intend or are not sure 
about being a teacher of Basic Education. The findings in Table 5 hold once despite several relevant 
background characteristics. The covariates are reported at Annex C.  

 
 
 

 

 

                                                           
10 The covariates are reported at Annex B.  

 

12 

Table 5: Individual Risk attitude and occupational sorting: IV Model 

Dependent Variable: Occupational choice of undergraduates  
Instrumental Variable: having children and live with them 
 
VARIABLES 

(1) 

 

 

(2) 

General Risk – Binary 

Financial Risk 

Risk Context 

 

 

 

Contract Risk: Performance  

General Risk – Continuous 

 

 

-0.517 
(0.520) 

 
 

16.12 
(185.1) 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

(3) 

 
 
 
 

-3.078 
(8.096) 

 
 
 
 

 

(4) 

 

(5) 

 
 
 
 
 
 

-2.351 
(3.729) 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-0.401*** 
(0.0225) 

1,677 

Observations 
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. We estimate all models with standard errors clustered at the educational institutional 
level. Regional fixed effects are included in all models. 
***, **, *   indicate significance at the 1%, 5% e 10% levels, respectively. 
Source: Constructed based on survey data described in text. 
 
 

1,674 

1,677 

1,677 

1,677 

 

 

7.  Discussion and Final Considerations 

 
Heterogeneity in risk preferences is a frequently recurring feature of observational data. This 
paper makes two important contributions. First, it investigates a collection of measurements of risk 
as  applied  to  a  specific  occupational  group.  Second,  it  investigates  whether  or  not  variation  in 
measurement of risk preferences, based on cross-sectional data, may explain self-selection into the 
teaching  profession,  where  risk  preferences  are  measured  in  terms  of  alternative  compensation 
models, job security, financial decisions, and general disposition to take risks. To do so, we surveyed 
a  representative  sample  of  young  soon-to-be  graduates  of  education  and  seven  teacher  licensure 
programs who were planning to enter the labor market or had entered only recently. Risk preferences 
were measured for each surveyed individual, taking into account these diverse scenarios.   

 
Analyses of occupational choice did not demonstrate any effect of risk types or preferences. 
These findings appear to suggest that behaviors in risk-related activities do not constitute important 
factors in the determination of future decisions to enter the teaching profession. Further, results did 
not indicate that future teachers are more risk averse, as the literature has sometimes proposed. At the 
same time, it is not possible to affirm whether or not graduates were more or less favorable of merit-
based compensation systems. It appears that the measurements of risk considered in our survey were 
not capable of explaining why some individuals choose to pursue teaching careers.  

 
In the following paragraphs, we analyze five possible explanations for the lack of robustness 
in these results. First, our survey collected cross-sectional data from a sample of individuals who had 
not  yet  had  substantial  experience  in  the  labor  market.  Studies  on  this  topic  have  argued  that  one 
difficulty in responding accurately about one’s risk preferences is that these preferences may only 
solidify some years after making one’s occupational choice. Ideally, we would be able to measure 
risk preferences repeatedly over time for the same individuals (panel data) or measure preferences in 
comparison to other occupational groups or to more experienced teachers. These comparisons would 
assist us in disentangling the extent to which individuals who are attracted to certain aspects of the 

 

13 

teaching profession end up teaching, while other individuals who do not value these characteristics 
eventually abandon the profession (Bowen, Buck, Deck, Mills, & Shuls, 2015); (Findeisen, 2013) 

Second, the questionnaires administered to students were relatively long, potentially reducing 
the level of attention and effort given to responses to specific questions. During the interviews, some 
of  the  risk-related  questions  were  not  explained  as  clearly  as  would  be  desirable  due  to  time 
constraints, which may have led some respondents to answer without completely understanding the 
nuances  of  each  question.    Third,  it  is  possible  that  future  teachers  responded  to  the  risk-related 
questions without effectively considering the different levels of risk associated with different answers. 
This possibility is supported by the fact that students show themselves to be more disposed to take 
risks in hypothetical settings (financial risk) and that they may have erroneous or inflated expectations 
regarding  their  own  future  performance  in  the  classroom  (payment  contract  risk).  Bowen,  Buck, 
Deck, Mills & Shuls (2015) argue that respondents may potentially think that merit-based contracts 
would  merely  offer  bonuses,  without  any  risk  of  pay  cuts.  The  questionnaire’s  focus  on  behavior 
under risk may have given the impression that merit-based contracts and risky financial investments 
would merely result in bonuses, with no risk of loss.  

 
Fourth,  risk  preference  measures  were  observed  as  continuously  distributed  categorical 
variables, thus imparting them with some sort of ordinal significance in our analysis. In fact, true risk 
preferences are unobservable. By imposing an ordinal pattern on these categorical variables, we are 
assuming that a graduate who evaluated their general disposition to take risks to have a value of eight 
is more risk tolerant than a comparable respondent who evaluated their preferences at six. However, 
given that, these responses are highly subjective and only proxy for an underlying latent variable (true 
risk preferences); it is not possible to interpret these reported values as exact magnitudes. By modeling 
the  latent  risk  preference  variable,  it  would  be  possible  to  exactly  interpret  the  effects  of  risk 
preferences (Beauchamp, Cesarini, & Johannesson, 2017). 

 
Finally, it could be the case that the observable characteristics that are robustly significant in 
our specifications already incorporate some aspect of individual risk preferences. The profile of future 
basic education teachers is disproportionately composed of women, with children, who are enrolled 
in  academically  weaker  private  education  institutions,  and  who  come  from  families  or  lower 
socioeconomic standing.  

 
Though there are numerous limitations that should be taken into account when considering 
how individual risk preferences may influence the attractiveness of teaching careers, our results are 
relevant  to  future  studies  that  focus  on  this  topic  in  Brazil.  We  see  this  work  as  a  first  attempt  at 
introducing research methods focused on measuring risk into a literature that asks if, how, and why 
risk  preferences  differ  among  future  teachers.  Finally,  evaluating  how  occupational  choices  are 
correlated with risk preferences may add to our knowledge of public policies focused on improving 
the attractiveness of the teaching profession.  

 
The  results  presented  here  complement  an  extensive  literature  on  teacher  labor  supply 
(Dolton, 2006). The estimates presented in this chapter appear to suggest that teachers (and perhaps 
other public servants) respond to incentive schemes in more complex ways than the basic theory of 
incentives  would  predict.  This  theory  suggests  that  payment  contracts  based  on  individual 
performance are a superior form of compensation when output is well defined and easily measurable. 
Riskier  occupations would  require  greater compensation in  order for individuals to  feel  motivated 
and enticed to enter these professions (Lazear, 2003). In general, performance-based incentives may 
conflict with fundamental characteristics of teachers and public servants more generally, who may be 
more motivated by benefits than career results (Dixit, 2002), (Watt et al., 2012). This is not to say 
that merit-based compensation models should not be considered, but that the specific design of these 
incentive contracts  should take into  account  heterogeneity  in individual preferences for incentives 
(Goldhaber, Bignell, Farley, Walch, & Cowan, 2016); (Perez, 2011). 

14 

 

 

Bibliographic References  

 

 

Barbosa, A. L., Barbosa-Filho, F. H., & Lima, J. R. (2013). Diferencial de salários e determinantes 
na escolha de trabalho entre os setores público e privado no Brasil. Pesquisa e Planejamento 
Econômico, 89-118. 

Barbosa-Filho, F., Pessôa, S., & Afonso, L. (2009). Um estudo sobre os diferenciais de remuneração 
entre os professores das redes pública e privada de ensino. Revista de Estudos Econômicos, 
597-628. 

Beauchamp,  J.  P.,  Cesarini,  D.,  &  Johannesson,  M.  (2017).  The  psychometric  and  empirical 
properties of measures of risk preferences. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 54(3), 203-237. 
Accessed 
at: 
https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%2Fs11166-017-9261-3.pdf 

September 

available 

2018, 

29, 

on 

Becker, K. L., & Kassouf, A. L. (2012). Diferença salarial e aposentadoria dos professores do ensino 
Source: 

Economia 

Aplicada, 

77-104. 

16(1), 

fundamental. 
http://www.scielo.br/pdf/ecoa/v16n1/a04v16n1.pdf 

Biasi, B. (2018). The Labor Market for Teachers under different pay schemes. Working Paper, p. 35. 
Accessed in 2018, available at: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2942134 
Black, S. E., Devereux, P. J., Lundborg, P., & Majlesi, K. (2015). On the origins of risk-taking. IZA 

Discussion Paper (no. 1978), p. 43. Source: https://www.nber.org/papers/w21332 

Bonin, H., Dohmen, T., Falk, A., Huffman, D., Sunde, & Uwe. (2007). Cross-sectional earnings risk 

and occupational sorting: The role of risk attitudes. Labour economics, 14(6), pp. 926-937. 

Borjas, G. (2010). Pagamento de incentivos. Em G. Borjas, Economia do Trabalho (pp. 504-543). 

São Paulo, SP: AMGH. 

Bowen, D. H., Buck, S., Deck, C., Mills, J. N., & Shuls, J. V. (2015). Risky business: An analysis of 

teacher risk preferences. Education Economics, 23(4), 470-480. 

Bowles, S. (2004). Preferences and Behavior. Em S. Bowles, Microeconomics: behavior, institutions 

and evolution (pp. 93-109). Princeton University Press. 

Cameron, L., & Shah, M. (2015). Risk-taking behavior in the wake of natural disasters. Journal of 

Human Resources, 50(2), 458-515. 

Dixit, A. (2002). Incentives and Organizations in the Public Sector: An interpretative review. Journal 

of Human Resources, pp. 696-727. 

Dohmen,  T.,  &  Falk,  A.  (2010,  August).  You  get  what  you  pay:  Incentives  and  Selection  in  the 

education system . The Economic Journal, pp. F256-F271. 

Dohmen, T., Falk, A., Huffman, D., Sunde, U., Schupp, J., & Wagner, G. G. (Setembro de 2005). 
Individual  Risk  Attitudes:  New  Evidence  from  a  Large,  Representative,  Experimentally-
Validated Survey. Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) Discussion Paper 1730. 

Dolton, P. (2006). Teacher supply. Em E. A. Hanushek, & F. (. Welch, Handbook of Economics of 

Education (Vol. 2, pp. 1079-1161). 

Findeisen,  S.  (19  de  April  de  2013).  Risk  Attitudes  and  Occupations:  Self-Selection  or  Adapting 
Preferences? Center for Institutions , Policy and Culture Working Paper Series(420), p. 20. 
Fonte: http://www.econ.uzh.ch/ipcdp/Papers/ipcdp_wp420.pdf 

Fouarge, D., Kriechel, B., & Dohmen, T. (2014). Occupational sorting of school graduates: The role 

of economic preferences. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 335-351. 

Goldhaber,  D.,  Bignell,  W.,  Farley,  A.,  Walch,  J.,  &  Cowan,  J.  (2016,  June).  Who  chooses 
incentivized  pay  structures?  Exploring  the  link  between  performance  and  preferences  for 
compensation  reform  in  the  teacher  labor  market.  Educational  Evaluation  and  Policy 
Analysis, 38(2), pp. 245-271. doi:10.3102/0162373715615233 

 

15 

Guiso,  L.,  &  Paiella,  M.  (February  de  2005).  The  role  of  risk  aversion  in  predicting  individual 
behavior.  Temi  di  discussione  Banca  D'Italia(number  546),  p.  38.  Source: 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=608262 

Hanushek, E. A., Kain, J. F., & Rivkin, S. G. (1999). Do higher salaries buy better teachers? National 

Bureau of Economic Research(WP 7082), 52p. 

Hernani-Limarino, W. (2005). Are Teachers Well Paid in Latin America and the Caribbean? Relative 
wages and structure of returns of teacher. Em E. (. Vegas,  Incentives to improve teaching: 
Lessons from Latin America (pp. 63-150). Washington: World Bank. 

Holt, C. A., & Laury, S. K. (Dezembro de 2002). Risk Aversion and Incentive Effects. The American 
Economic  Review,  92(5),  1644-1655.  Accessed  on  January  23,  2015,  available  at: 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3083270 

King,  A.  G.  (Jul  de  1974).  Occupation  choice,  risk  aversion  and  wealth.  Industrial  and  Labor 

Relations Review, 27(4), pp. 586-596. 

Lazear, E. P. (Dec de 2000). Performance Pay and Productivity.  The American Economic Review, 
at: 

1346-1361.  Accessed 

on  May 

available 

2015, 

28, 

90(5), 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2677854 

pp. 

Lazear, E. P. (2003). Teacher Incentives. Swedish Economic Policy Review, 10(2), 179-214. 
Lazear,  E. P.,  & Rosen,  S. (2014). Rank-order tournaments as optimum labor  contracts. Em G. J. 
Borjas,  The  economics  of  labor:  critical  concepts  in  economics  (Vol.  IV,  pp.  235-257). 
Londres: Routledge. 

Liang, X. (2000). Teacher pay in 12 Latin American countries: How does teacher pay compare to 
other  professions,  what  determines  teacher  pay,  and  who  are  the  teachers?  Washington: 
World 
Source: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/pt/932251468753280102/pdf/multi0page.pdf 

Bank. 

Mas-Collel, W. A., Whinston, M. D., & Green, J. J. (1995). Microeconomic Theory.  
Mostafa, T., & Pál, J. (2018). Science teachers' satisfaction: Evidence from the PISA 2015 teacher 

survey. OECD Education Working Papers, 136. doi:10.1787/1ecdb4e3-en 

Nicholson, W., & Christopher, S. (2008). Microeconomic Theory (10th ed.). Mason: Thomson Higher 

Education. 

Nicholson, W., & Snyder, C. (2008). Uncertainty and Information. Em W. Nicholson, & C. Snyder, 

Microeconomic Theory (pp. 202-235). Canada: Thomson South-Western. 

Perez,  M.  (8  de  July  de  2011).  Inequity  Aversion  Differences:  Experimental  evidence  among 

prospective teachers and lawyers. p. 34. Source: http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2018697 

Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1981). The framing of decisions and the psichology of choice. Science, 
211(4481),  pp.  453-458.  Source:  https://www.uzh.ch/cmsssl/suz/dam/jcr:ffffffff-fad3-547b-
ffff-ffffe54d58af/10.18_kahneman_tversky_81.pdf 

Watt, H. M., Richardson, P. W., Klusmann, U., Kunter, M., Beyer, B., Trautwein, U., & Baumert, J. 
(2012). Motivations for choosing teaching as a career: An international comparison using the 
FIT-Choice scale. Teaching and Teacher Education, 28(6), 791-805. 

Weiss, Y. (Nov - Dec de 1972). The risk element in occupational and educational choices. Journal of 
Source: 

Political 
https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/259965?journalCode=jpe 

1203-1213. 

Economy, 

80(6), 

pp. 

 

 
 
 

 

16 

Appendix  
 

TABLE A  

Comparison of the characteristics of the sample of undergraduate students to become teachers of 

Basic Education with those who do not wish or have doubts 

Comparison groups:  

Demographic controls: 

Married (=1)  

Woman (=1) 

Age (in years) 

 

 

 

 

 

High School_mother (=1) 

 

High School_father (=1) 
 

White (=1) 

 

Per capita wealth index (from 0 to 8)  

 

Bolsa Familia Program (=1)  

 

Previous teacher experience (=1) 

 

Interior (=1) 

Private university (=1)  

Education Course  

 

 

 

Public High School (=1) 
 

Magisterio (=1) 

 

Proxy University performance (=1 good) 

 

Risk Measures 

General Risk – Binary 

 

General Risk – Continuous  

 

Financial Risk  

 

Risk Context 

 

Become teacher  Not to become teacher  Difference 

 

 

 

0,29613 

-0,457 

0,73814 

-0,44 

28,03176 

-8,213 

0,41434 

-0,493 

0,35883 

-0,48 

0,43838 

-0,496 

1,29391 

-1,037 

0,06591 

-0,248 

0,2109 

-0,408 

0,32337 

-0,468 

0,53866 

-0,499 

0,44728 

-0,497 

0,7833 

-0,412 

0,50439 

-0,5 

0,43761 

-0,496 

0,66784 

-0,471 

6,5536 

-2,393 

0,69332 

-0,461 

0,55975 

 

 
 

 

0,22664 

-0,419 

0,61916 

-0,486 

26,33768 

-6,981 

0,49246 

-0,5 

0,46183 

-0,499 

0,43126 

-0,496 

1,37155 

-1,116 

0,06192 

-0,241 

0,15421 

-0,361 

0,30491 

-0,461 

0,43692 

-0,496 

0,35981 

-0,48 

0,65962 

-0,474 

0,46846 

-0,499 

0,49409 

-0,5 

0,64836 

-0,478 

6,4287 

-2,422 

0,71028 

-0,454 

0,63084 

 
 

 

-0,0695*** 

 

-0,1190*** 

 

-1,6941*** 

 

0,0781*** 

 

0,1030*** 

 

-0,0071 

 

0,0776 

 

-0,004 

 

-0,0567** 

 

-0,0185 

 

-0,1017*** 

 

-0,0875*** 

 

-0,1237*** 

 

-0,0359 

 

0,0565* 

 

 

-0,0195 

 

 

-0,1249 

0,017 

 

0,0711** 

17 

 

Contract Risk – Individual and Team 
Performance 

 

Observations 

-0,497 

0,853 

-0,354 

1138 

-0,483 

0,855 

-0,352 

856 

 

0,002 

 

1994 

Note: Standard errors in parentheses.  
***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% e 10% levels, respectively.  
Source: Constructed based on survey data described in text.  

 
 
TABLE B   
 

Individual Risk attitude and occupational sorting: Probit (MEM) and OLS Models 

Dependent variable: occupation choice of undergraduates 

 

(4) 

 

(5) 

 

 

 

VARIABLES 

General Risk Binary 

Financial Risk 

Risk Context 

Contract Risk 

 

 

 

 

General Risk – Continuous  

Woman 

Age  

Age2 

White 

 

 

 

 

 

High School Father 

 

High School Mother 

 
Wealth per capita 

Married 

 

 

Previous work as teacher 

Industry  

Services  

Public Sector 

Education 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

-0.517 
(0.520) 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

(2) 

 
 

16.12 
(185.1) 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

(3) 

 
 
 
 

-3.078 
(8.096) 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

-2.351 
(3.729) 

 
 

0.119*** 
(0.0290) 
-0.00613 
(0.0109) 
0.000129 
(0.000153) 

0.849 
(8.442) 
-0.0321 
(0.367) 
0.000824 
(0.00879) 

0.0541 
(0.146) 
-0.0171 
(0.0560) 
0.000172 
(0.000601) 

0.144** 
(0.0715) 
0.00517 
(0.0208) 
-2.94e-05 
(0.000294) 

-0.0365 
(0.0342) 
-0.0728** 
(0.0289) 
0.0428 
(0.0478) 
-0.0221 
(0.0137) 
0.000684 
(0.0322) 
0.0680 
(0.0438) 
-0.0995* 
(0.0545) 
-0.131*** 
(0.0500) 
-0.0695 
(0.0571) 
-0.0606 
(0.0603) 

-0.300 
(3.144) 
0.166 
(2.881) 
-0.850 
(9.864) 
-0.251 
(2.603) 
0.00983 
(0.401) 
1.380 
(15.46) 
0.432 
(5.814) 
-0.663 
(6.744) 
-0.00276 
(0.765) 
-0.557 
(6.168) 

0.00871 
(0.101) 
0.102 
(0.482) 
-0.0737 
(0.252) 
0.0931 
(0.301) 
0.0439 
(0.142) 
0.0991 
(0.177) 
-0.302 
(0.637) 
-0.188 
(0.315) 
-0.169 
(0.409) 
-0.264 
(0.623) 

0.0367 
(0.111) 
0.0415 
(0.200) 
-0.0439 
(0.102) 
-0.00380 
(0.0472) 
-0.0168 
(0.0714) 

0.106 
(0.128) 
-0.0396 
(0.117) 
-0.0806 
(0.0847) 
-0.0458 
(0.100) 
-0.0984 
(0.159) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-0.401*** 
(0.0225) 
0.0941 
(0.105) 
-0.0471* 
(0.0268) 

0.000763** 
(0.000332) 

-0.156 
(0.0968) 
-0.118 
(0.102) 
0.0906 
(0.104) 
0.0709** 
(0.0353) 
0.0353 
(0.138) 
0.108 
(0.106) 
-0.191 
(0.156) 
-0.177 
(0.119) 
-0.302** 
(0.140) 
-0.164 
(0.130) 

18 

Others 

Interior 

 

 
Private university 

 
Education courses 

Public High School  

 

Proxy University performance 

 

Constant 

Observations 

 

 

-0.0536 
(0.0531) 
0.0170 

P(0.0479) 
0.0969* 
(0.0533) 
0.0283 
(0.0397) 
0.0775* 
(0.0416) 
-0.0301 
(0.0294) 
0.962** 
(0.409) 
1,677 

0.771 
(9.202) 
0.00901 
(0.594) 
0.613 
(6.452) 
0.621 
(6.799) 
-0.416 
(5.714) 
-0.463 
(4.957) 
-10.42 
(126.7) 
1,677 

-0.217 
(0.503) 
0.0543 
(0.198) 
0.111 
(0.150) 
0.0517 
(0.101) 
0.212 
(0.312) 
0.111 
(0.350) 
2.279 
(4.705) 
1,677 

-0.0409 
(0.102) 
-0.0106 
(0.110) 
0.197 
(0.230) 
6.94e-05 
(0.0683) 

0.192 
(0.191) 
0.0834 
(0.180) 
2.058 
(2.428) 
1,674 

0.0457 
(0.126) 
0.0162 
(0.116) 
0.396*** 
(0.0922) 
0.0272 
(0.0894) 
-0.0231 
(0.122) 
-0.100 
(0.110) 

 
 

1,677 

Note: Standard errors in parentheses.  
***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% e 10% levels, respectively.  
Source: Constructed based on survey data described in text.  

 
 
TABLE C  
 

Individual Risk attitude and occupational sorting: IV Model 

Dependent variable:  Occupation choice of undergraduates 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

 
  
General Risk Binary 
 
Financial Risk 
 
Risk Context  
 
Contract Risk 
 
General Risk Continuous 
 
Woman 

Age 

Age² 

White 

 

 

 

 

High School_Father 

 

High School_Mother 

Wealth per capita 

 

Married 

 

 

Previous work as teacher 

 

 

(1) 

  

-0.517 
(0.520) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 

16.12 
(185.1) 

 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
 
 

-3.078 
(8.096) 

 
 
 
 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 

-2.351 
(3.729) 

 
 

0.119*** 
(0.0290) 
-0.00613 
(0.0109) 
0.000129 
(0.000153) 

-0.0365 
(0.0342) 
-0.0728** 
(0.0289) 
0.0428 
(0.0478) 
-0.0221 
(0.0137) 
0.000684 
(0.0322) 
0.0680 

0.849 
(8.442) 
-0.0321 
(0.367) 
0.000824 
(0.00879) 

0.0541 
(0.146) 
-0.0171 
(0.0560) 
0.000172 
(0.000601) 

0.144** 
(0.0715) 
0.00517 
(0.0208) 
-2.94e-05 
(0.000294) 

-0.300 
(3.144) 
0.166 
(2.881) 
-0.850 
(9.864) 
-0.251 
(2.603) 
0.00983 
(0.401) 
1.380 

0.00871 
(0.101) 
0.102 
(0.482) 
-0.0737 
(0.252) 
0.0931 
(0.301) 
0.0439 
(0.142) 
0.0991 

0.0367 
(0.111) 
0.0415 
(0.200) 
-0.0439 
(0.102) 
-0.00380 
(0.0472) 
-0.0168 
(0.0714) 

0.106 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

-0.401*** 
(0.0225) 
0.0941 
(0.105) 
-0.0471* 
(0.0268) 

0.000763** 
(0.000332) 

-0.156 
(0.0968) 
-0.118 
(0.102) 
0.0906 
(0.104) 
0.0709** 
(0.0353) 
0.0353 
(0.138) 
0.108 

19 

Industry 

Services 

Public Sector 

Education 

Others 

Interior 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Private university 

Education courses 

 

Public High School 

 

 

Proxy University performance 

Constant 

Observations 

 

 
 

(0.0438) 
-0.0995* 
(0.0545) 
-0.131*** 
(0.0500) 
-0.0695 
(0.0571) 
-0.0606 
(0.0603) 
-0.0536 
(0.0531) 
0.0170 
(0.0479) 
0.0969* 
(0.0533) 
0.0283 
(0.0397) 
0.0775* 
(0.0416) 
-0.0301 
(0.0294) 
0.962** 
(0.409) 

 

1,677 

(15.46) 
0.432 
(5.814) 
-0.663 
(6.744) 
-0.00276 
(0.765) 
-0.557 
(6.168) 
0.771 
(9.202) 
0.00901 
(0.594) 
0.613 
(6.452) 
0.621 
(6.799) 
-0.416 
(5.714) 
-0.463 
(4.957) 
-10.42 
(126.7) 

 

1,677 

(0.177) 
-0.302 
(0.637) 
-0.188 
(0.315) 
-0.169 
(0.409) 
-0.264 
(0.623) 
-0.217 
(0.503) 
0.0543 
(0.198) 
0.111 
(0.150) 
0.0517 
(0.101) 
0.212 
(0.312) 
0.111 
(0.350) 
2.279 
(4.705) 

 

1,677 

(0.128) 
-0.0396 
(0.117) 
-0.0806 
(0.0847) 
-0.0458 
(0.100) 
-0.0984 
(0.159) 
-0.0409 
(0.102) 
-0.0106 
(0.110) 
0.197 
(0.230) 
6.94e-05 
(0.0683) 

0.192 
(0.191) 
0.0834 
(0.180) 
2.058 
(2.428) 

 

1,674 

(0.106) 
-0.191 
(0.156) 
-0.177 
(0.119) 
-0.302** 
(0.140) 
-0.164 
(0.130) 
0.0457 
(0.126) 
0.0162 
(0.116) 
0.396*** 
(0.0922) 
0.0272 
(0.0894) 
-0.0231 
(0.122) 
-0.100 
(0.110) 

 
 
 

1,677 

Note: Standard errors in parentheses.  
***, **, * indicate significance at the 1%, 5% e 10% levels, respectively.  
Source: Constructed based on survey data described in text.  

 

 

20 

