antimiracle 

Título:  The  rise  and  fall  of  the  brazilian  economy  (2004-2015):  the  economic 
Autor: Fernando Rugitsky 
Filiação: USP 
Área ANPEC: 2 – Economia Política 
 
 
Abstract: The aim of this paper is to interpret the recent trajectory of the Brazilian 
economy, from around 2004 to 2015, focusing on the interaction between demand, 
income  distribution,  and  the  productive  structure.  An  interpretative  hypothesis  is 
formulated within a framework that combines an effective demand schedule from the 
Kaleckian growth and distribution literature and a distributive schedule of Goodwin 
heritage  (following  Taylor,  2004,  and  Barbosa-Filho  and  Taylor,  2006).  Such 
hypothesis indicates the determinants of the growth acceleration and of the increase of 
the wage share on income that started around 2004, as well as the determinants of 
their  later  reversal.  Then,  the  framework  is  modified  to  incorporate  sectoral 
heterogeneity, as suggested by Rugitsky (2016), and a modified hypothesis points out 
that a cumulative process involving reductions of wage inequality and changes of the 
productive  structure  may  explain  part  of  the  recent  Brazilian  trajectory.  Both 
hypotheses  are  examined  empirically.  The  contrast  of  the  cumulative  process 
suggested  with  the  one  that  seems  to  have  taken  place  during  Brazil’s  “economic 
miracle” (1968-1973) allows it to be called an economic antimiracle. 
 
Keywords:  aggregate  demand,  income  distribution,  productive  structure,  Kalecki, 
Goodwin, Brazilian economy 
 
JEL Codes: E11, N16, O11, O54 
 
 
Resumo:  O  objetivo  desse  artigo  é  interpretar  a  trajetória  recente  da  economia 
brasileira, entre 2004 e 2015, enfocando a interação entre demanda, distribuição de 
renda e a estrutura produtiva. Uma hipótese interpretativa é formulada a partir de um 
arcabouço  que  combina  uma  relação  de  demanda  efetiva  extraída  da  literatura 
kaleckiana sobre crescimento e distribuição e uma relação distributiva que remonta a 
Goodwin  (seguindo  Taylor,  2004,  e  Barbosa-Filho  e  Taylor,  2006).  Tal  hipótese 
indica os determinantes da aceleração do crescimento e do aumento da parcela dos 
salários na renda que se iniciaram por volta de 2004, assim como os determinantes de 
sua  reversão  posterior.  Em  seguida,  o  arcabouço  é  modificado  para  incorporar 
heterogeneidade  setorial,  como  sugerido  por  Rugitsky  (2016),  e  uma  hipótese 
modificada aponta que um processo cumulativo envolvendo reduções na desigualdade 
salarial e mudanças na estrutura produtiva pode explicar parte da trajetória brasileira 
recente.  Ambas  as  hipóteses  são  examinadas  empiricamente.  O  contraste  entre  o 
processo  cumulativo  sugerido  e  o  que  parece  ter  ocorrido  durante  o  “milagre 
econômico”  brasileiro  (1968-1973)  permite  chamar  o  primeiro  de  antimilagre 
econômico. 
 
Palavras-chave:  demanda  agregada,  distribuição  de  renda,  estrutura  produtiva, 
Kalecki, Goodwin, economia brasileira 
 
Códigos JEL: E11, N16, O11, O54 

ANTIMIRACLE 

THE RISE AND FALL OF THE BRAZILIAN ECONOMY (2004-2015): THE ECONOMIC 

[TABLE 1 AROUND HERE] 1 

 
1. Introduction 
Several  South  American  countries  are  in  the  midst  of  economic  crises  and  mounting  political 
 
turmoil, after having gone through a decade of relatively high economic growth rates and falling income 
inequality. The so-called progressive governments that came to power in the turn to the 21st century – and 
are  sometimes  identified  as  a  pink  tide  –  have  already  been  replaced  by  right-wing  adversaries  in 
Argentina and Brazil and are facing growing challenges in countries like Ecuador and Venezuela. And the 
gross domestic products (GDP) of Argentina, Brazil and Venezuela have decreased in at least some of the 
last few years. There is an unmistakable feeling of end of cycle throughout. The period from 2004 to 2011 
was characterized, in pink tide South American countries, by an unusual (at least locally) trajectory in 
which economic growth accelerated and inequality was reduced. Although virtuous, this dynamic proved 
short  lived.  The  impact  of  the  reversal  of  commodities’  prices  on  growth  has  been  uneven  across 
countries, but the average rate of growth for the six selected countries during the period between 2012 
and 2015 is lower than the one obtained in the 1990s (Table 1). And the prospects for inequality reduction 
are similarly gloomy, amidst rising unemployment. Hence, it is important to assess this recent trajectory, 
examining its determinants and limits, in order that its lessons can be learned. 

The present paper focuses exclusively on the macroeconomic dynamic, especially the interaction 
between economic growth, income distribution, and the productive structure, aware that it may provide 
only  preliminary  hypotheses  that  should  be  analyzed  in  the  context  of  a  larger  multidisciplinary 
assessment. It also restricts its purview to the case of Brazil. It aims to analyze the determinants of the 
growth  acceleration  and  of  falling  inequality  and  to  examine  the  potential  interaction  of  these  two 
dynamics, in the Brazilian case. While the comparison of the countries’ trajectories might be very useful 
to identify the foreign and domestic determinants of the recent experience, through an examination of 
what is common to most of them and what are the national particularities, this paper will investigate only 
one country, leaving such comparisons to future work. Its specific contribution is to suggest a way to 
bridge the gap between the growing literature on the recent trajectory of the Brazilian economy (which is, 
so far, mostly descriptive) and the literature that attempts to apply the Kaleckian growth and distribution 
framework  to  Brazil  (but  focuses  mainly  on  policy  implications,  rather  than  interpretation  of  growth 
episodes).2 
2. First Hypothesis 
2.1. Theoretical framework 
 
In order to examine the interaction between income distribution and aggregate demand in Brazil, 
one  can  resort  to  a  framework  in  which  the  short-run  equilibrium  levels  of  the  degree  of  capacity 
utilization and of the wage share of income are simultaneously determined by the intersection of two 
schedules  that  represent  equilibrium  in  the  goods  and  in  the  labor  markets.  Such  framework,  in  this 
version due to Taylor (2004: chaps. 4 and 7), can be interpreted as a strand of the Kaleckian growth and 
distribution literature (see Blecker, 2002, and Lavoie, 2014: chaps. 5-7, for summaries). Whereas Dutt 
(1984:  32-35),  in  his  seminal  Kaleckian  model,  had  already  considered  the  effect  of  growth  on 
distribution  and,  thus,  examined  the  interaction  between  the  effective  demand  and  the  distributive 
schedules, he considered that each schedule belonged to a different temporal dimension. The effective 
demand  schedule,  the  Kaleckian  IS,  represented  the  short-run  equilibrium  in  the  goods  market,  as 

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

1 The periodization suggested in Table 1 will be adopted throughout this paper, except in a few arguments. All periodizations 
are,  to  some  degree,  arbitrary,  but  the  suggested  one  seems  to  fit  adequately  the  most  relevant  features  of  recent  Latin 
American economic history, in general, and of the Brazilian case, in particular. It is also useful to mention that the period from 
1990 to 2003 is called “neoliberalism” for lack of a better name, given that there was no unambiguous break with neoliberal 
policies after 2004. 
2 Examples of the former are Barbosa-Filho and Souza (2010), Serrano and Summa (2012, 2016), Palma (2012), Côrrea and 
Santos (2013), Paula, Modenesi and Pires (2015), among others. The latter comprises especially Araújo and Gala (2012), 
Oreiro and Araújo (2013), Carvalho and Rugitsky (2015), Tomio (2016), and Gonçalves (2016). 

!

1 

determined by the functional distribution of income – that is, the distribution of income between wages 
and profits. The causality in the other direction, that is, the impact of growth on distribution, would only 
be felt in the long run, when the economy would move to the intersection of the two curves. However, 
Taylor’s  (2004)  approach,  following  the  trail  opened  by  Goodwin’s  (1967)  model  (something  that  is 
clearer in Barbosa-Filho and Taylor, 2006), assumes that both schedules refer to short-run adjustments 
and that the dynamic derived from the interaction between them can generate short-run cycles.3 
 
The effective demand schedule, in its baseline version (Rowthorn, 1981, Dutt, 1984, Taylor, and 
Bhaduri  and  Marglin,  1990),  reflected  the  impact  of  functional  income  distribution  on  the  degree  of 
capacity utilization through two channels.4 First, by assuming different propensities to consume out of 
wages  and  profits  (originally,  the  propensity  to  save  out  of  wages  was  assumed  to  be  zero),  a 
redistribution of income towards wages, that is, an increase in the wage share, would result in an increase 
of aggregate consumption, as the propensity to consume out of wages is assumed to be higher. Second, 
following Steindl’s (1952/1976) research, aggregate investment was assumed to be a positive function of 
the degree of capacity utilization and of the profit share. The impact of a rising wage share on it would be 
ambiguous, depending on the parameters. Originally, with a specific linear investment function and no 
saving out of wages, aggregate demand was unambiguously wage-led, that is, the derivative of capacity 
utilization  on  the  wage  share  was  positive.  But  extensions  of  the  model,  incorporating  more  general 
investment functions, positive propensity to save out of wages and open economy effects (Blecker, 1989, 
Bhaduri  and  Marglin,  1990,  Taylor,  1990),  soon  showed  the  possibility  of  both  wage-  and  profit-led 
demand regimes. 
 
To keep things simple, the effective demand schedule will be represented as a linear curve in the 
downward-sloping  curve  indicates,  then,  profit-led  demand  and  an  upward-sloping  one,  wage-led 
demand. As mentioned, the potential nonlinearity of the two schedules has been discussed (Nikiforos and 
Foley, 2012, Oreiro and Araújo, 2013, Carvalho and Rugitsky, 2015; see also Bhaduri and Marglin, 1990: 
392-393, and Taylor, 1990: 329-333), but will not be considered in the present paper, being left for future 
research.  The  baseline  version  of  the  effective  demand  schedule  can  be  formally  represented  as  the 

(!,!) plane, where ! stands for the degree of capacity utilization and !, for the wage share of income. A 
isocline in which !=0, where a dot over the variable represents its derivative in relation to time – that is, 
!=!"/!" (see Nikiforos and Foley, 2012, for instance). If the rate of change of the degree of capacity 
utilization depends on the difference between investment and saving – such that !=!!,! −!!,! , 
where ! is investment, ! is savings and a hat over the variable denotes its rate of change (that is, !=!/
!) –, then !=0 requires that !!,! =!!,!  for strictly positive values of !. Hence, the slope of the 
schedule (and the demand regime) depends on the sign of !"!"=!!!!!
!!!!!, with subscripts denoting partial 
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

derivatives.5 
The causality in the other direction, from growth to distribution, has been less studied. In Dutt’s 
(1984: 32) formulation, the distributive schedule was determined by the long-run impact of growth on the 
market  structure,  on  “industrial  concentration  rates.”  Given  Kalecki’s  argument  that  the  functional 
distribution of income was determined by the mark-up and that the latter, in its turn, reflected the “degree 

3 The recent literature that is critical of the concept of demand regimes (Skott, 2016, for instance) argues in terms of Taylor’s 
approach, claiming that distribution cannot be assumed to be exogenous, even in the short run. By restricting the distributive 
schedule to the long run, Dutt (1984) was implicitly assuming short-run exogeneity. As usual, disputes on exogeneity are 
disputes  on  temporality.  In  addition,  the  controversy  is  explained  by  different  interpretations  of  the  determinant  of  the 
functional income distribution. Taylor’s approach root it, mostly, in labor market dynamics and, consequently, consider it a 
short-run phenomenon. (It is also dependent on the dynamics of labor productivity.) Dutt, in his turn, claims that the functional 
income distribution is determined by the long-run transformations of market structures, that is, of industrial concentration. 
4 In light of the widespread existence of idle productive capacity, the equilibrium between investment and saving is thought to 
be brought about by changes in the degree of capacity utilization. In this sense, the degree of capacity utilization is determined 
by effective demand. 
5 Usually, the so-called Keynesian stability condition is assumed, implying that the denominator is negative and that the slope 
of the effective demand schedule depends only on the sign of the numerator. However, as argued by Nikiforos and Foley 
(2012: 204), in a framework that puts together both schedules, the stability of the whole model does not require that the 
Keynesian stability condition be valid. See also Skott (2012). 

!

2 

of  monopoly,”  the  long-run  trajectory  of  industrial  concentration  would  impact  the  wage  share  of 
income.6 In this paper, the approach adopted will be Taylor’s (2004), in which the distributive curve is 
determined  by  the  cyclical  behavior  of  real  wages  and  labor  productivity  and  can  be  thought  as  an 
outcome of the labor market. The wage share of income is, by definition, the ratio of the real wage to 

labor  productivity.  Formally, !=!"/!"=!/!,  where !=!/! is  the  real  wage  (with ! and ! 
denoting, respectively, the nominal wage and the price level) and !=!/! is labor productivity (with ! 
and ! denoting,  respectively,  output  and  the  number  of  workers  employed).  Thus,  the  distributive 
schedule is the isocline defined by !=0, which, given that !=!−!, requires that !=!, for strictly 
positive values of!!. Assuming that the rate of change of the real wage and of labor productivity are both 
distributive  schedule  can  be  defined  as !"!"=!!!!!
!!!!! (Barbosa-Filho  and  Taylor,  2006,  Nikiforos  and 

functions  of  the  wage  share  of  income  and  of  the  degree  of  capacity  utilization,  the  slope  of  the 

positive  slope  in  the (!,!) plane.  Alternatively,  if  the  rate  of  change  of  labor  productivity  tends  to 

Foley, 2012). 
Intuitively, both the rates of change of the real wage and of labor productivity tend to accelerate as 
the degree of capacity utilization increases, due respectively to a tightening of the labor market and to 
technological factors such as economies of scale or learning by doing – so-called labor hoarding could 
also explain a pro-cyclical behavior of labor productivity. The question, then, is which accelerates more. 
If real wages grow ahead of labor productivity, as the degree of capacity utilization increases, the wage 
share rises and the economy would be characterized by a profit-squeeze distributive schedule, with a 
respond stronger than that of real wages to changes in the degree of capacity utilization, a wage-squeeze 
distributive schedule would result.7 Nonlinear dynamics are especially plausible in that case, with, for 
instance, real wages responding little to increases in the degree of capacity utilization for low levels of the 
latter and increasing faster when the degree of capacity utilization is high (Nikiforos and Foley, 2012). In 
addition,  the  sectoral  dynamics  of  growth  tend  to  be  a  seldom  examined,  but  particularly  relevant, 
determinant of the slope of the distributive schedule, an issue that will be further addressed below. 
Putting together both schedules, one obtains at least four possible varieties of interaction between 
demand and distribution: wage-led/wage-squeeze, profit-led/wage-squeeze, wage-led/profit-squeeze, and 
profit-led/profit-squeeze (Taylor, 2010: 188).8 The task, then, is to identify which is more adequate to 
interpret specific economic episodes. The next subsection is devoted to analyzing the recent Brazilian 
trajectory along these lines. 
2.2. Demand and distribution in Brazil 
Plotting Brazil’s labor share of income and degree of capacity utilization, for the period between 
 
previously, the aim is to provide an interpretative hypothesis for, first, the parallel growth of both the 
degree of capacity utilization and the labor share of income between 2004 and 2008 and, second, the 
trajectory since the crisis, with continuing increase of the labor share of income until 2013 but decreasing 
degree of capacity utilization (slowly at first and sharply afterwards). Following Gonçalves (2016), it is 
assumed that the Brazilian economy can be described, during the relevant period, by a profit-led demand 
regime and a profit-squeeze distributive schedule, as in Figure 3a, below.10,11 In such a framework, the 

2000 and 2014, in the (!,!) plane, one obtains Figure 2, below.9 Resorting to the framework presented 

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
7 That is true only if !!−!!<0, which is what Barbosa-Filho and Taylor (2006) find in an econometric investigation of the 

6 On Kalecki’s distribution theory, see Rugitsky (2013). 
United States’ economy. 
8 There can be more varieties, given different assumptions about the stability of each of the schedules. See, on this issue, 
Bhaduri (2008) and Lavoie (2014: 381-386). 
9 Details on the data can be found in appendix 3, which can be provided upon request. 
10 Araújo and Gala (2012) estimate the growth regime rather than the demand one, but if the former is profit-led (which is the 
result they obtain) it is likely that the latter will be as well (see Blecker, 2002). Oreiro and Araújo’s (2013) definition of growth 
regime is different, as seen above, but they obtain a profit-led one, as well, from 2005 onwards. Only Tomio’s (2016) estimates 
point in the direction of a wage-led demand regime. Different assumptions about the demand regime would change, but not 
invalidate, the interpretation below. Appendix 4, available upon request, examines two other possibilities. 

!

3 

[FIGURE 2 AND 3 AROUND HERE] 

economy does not need to be always in equilibrium, that is, in the intersection of the two schedules. It 
does not even need to converge to it – in Goodwin’s (1967) formulation, for instance, the economy would 
continuously cycle around it. But there seems to be plausible evidence, regarding variables that can shift 
the two schedules, that the trajectory starting around 2004 cannot be interpreted simply as an out-of-
equilibrium dynamics around a fixed equilibrium point, but rather reflected a change in the equilibrium 
itself (due to shifts of the schedules). 
 
Beginning  with  the  effective  demand  schedule,  at  least  four  factors  seem  to  have  moved  it 
outwards (in Figure 3b, from ED to ED’): i) a decrease in wage inequality; ii) an increase in household 
borrowing; iii) an increase in public investment; and iv) a positive terms of trade shock. As noted above, 
there is growing evidence that the fall in inequality previously identified was overestimated (Medeiros, 
Souza and Castro, 2015, Medeiros and Souza, 2016), mainly due to the underestimation of capital income 
by household surveys. Consequently, the inequality reduction seems to have been mostly a reduction of 
wage  inequality  and  indicators  like  the  Gini  coefficient  and  income  ratios  estimated  from  household 
surveys may give a good approximation of its decline (Medeiros, 2015: 67, fn. 29). Figure 4, below, show 
a slow fall in inequality during the 1990s and a quicker fall in the subsequent period. Figure 5 offers 
another measure of wage inequality, the ratio of the average to the minimum wage, taking into account 
wages observed in six Brazilian metropolitan areas. It decreases from around 4 in 2002 to 2.82 in 2011 
and from then onwards it remained practically stable around 2.70 (see Carvalho and Rugitsky, 2015: 3-6, 
for further discussion of this issue, focusing on the role of the minimum wage).12 
This  fall  in  wage  inequality  can  be  attributed  to  different  determinants,  from  policies  that 
increased the bargaining power of workers in the bottom of the income distribution (like Bolsa Família – 
a  conditional  cash  transfer  program  established  in  2004  [Lavinas,  2013:  25-34,  and  also  Soares  and 
Sátyro, 2009, and Campello and Neri, 2013] – and an acceleration of the rates of growth of the minimum 
wage) to a transformation of the sectoral job structure that raised the share of low-paying jobs, something 
that will be further examined below (Medeiros, 2015: 79-108). Even conventional analyses, focused on 
the role of education, tend to examine the interaction between the supply of skill and the demand for 
skilled labor, that is, between the workforce level of instruction and the job structure (see, for instance, 
Fernandes  and  Menezes-Filho,  2012,  and  Pecora  and  Menezes-Filho,  2014).  A  worker  that  has  just 
concluded higher education does not necessarily find a job adequate for his level of instruction if the job 
structure is shifting towards sectors that predominantly demand unskilled workers. Hence, the relative 
roles of expanding educational opportunities and of a transformation of the job structure in the recent 
decline in wage inequality deserves further research. 
 
Reinforcing the demand impulse given by falling wage inequality, a steep increase in household 
borrowing was observed in the period, especially since 2004. The observed increase in mass consumption 
was, thus, a result of both rising wages in the bottom of the wage distribution and rising debt (Santos, 
2013:  184-198,  Serrano  and  Summa,  2016:  813-816;  see  also  Schettini  et  al.,  2012,  for  econometric 
evidence about the determinants of consumption and a review of the available literature on the subject). 
Total credit operations to individuals as a share of GDP (Figure 6) took 16 years, from 1988 to 2003, to 
grow about 5 percentage points, from around 1 to around 6 percent. Then, in the 6 years from 2004 to 
2009, it reached 14.9 percent of GDP, growing almost 9 percentage points. Such increase in household 
borrowing is one of the factors that explain the trend reversal of the series of total credit operations as a 
share of GDP, which fell almost continuously from a peak of just below 37 percent in 1994 to a trough of 
around 22 percent in 2002 and then started growing, reaching 45 percent in the end of 2009 (Figure 6). 

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

[FIGURES 4 AND 5 AROUND HERE] 

11 The arrows of Figure 3a assume that both schedules are locally stable, which is not necessary for the model as a whole to be 
stable.  In  the  case  of  the  effective  demand  schedule,  this  means  that  the  Keynesian  stability  condition  holds.  Different 
assumptions would imply different out-of-equilibrium dynamics. This issue could be further explored. 
12 Still another evidence of such compression of wage disparity it the fact that, between 2006 and 2011, the share of workers 
that earn between 1 and 5 minimum wages grew from 54 to 61.2 percent, while the shares of workers that earn less than a 
minimum wage and more than 5 declined: respectively, from 36.1 to 29.9 percent and from 10.0 to 9.1 percent (Medeiros, 
2015: 95, table 4). Thus, the middle of the distribution became larger as the tails became smaller. 

!

4 

[FIGURE 6 AROUND HERE] 

Unfortunately, this series has been discontinued by the Brazilian Central Bank, but a series on 
household debt as a share of disposable income, available since 2005, indicates that the trend continued 
until 2011: household debt (excluding mortgage loans) represented 17.3 percent of disposable income in 
2005, 31.2 percent in 2011, 27.2 percent in 2015, and 24.7 in 2016. The legal establishment, in 2004, of a 
new kind of credit with automatic repayments from the paycheck, known as crédito consignado, is one of 
the explanations for this rising borrowing, along with the gradual reduction of interest rates, allowed for 
by abundant international liquidity and declining interest rates around the world (Serrano and Summa, 
2012: 56-69, Serrano and Summa, 2016: 813-816). In addition, growing income in the bottom of the 
distribution  and  the  formalization  of  the  labor  market  were  also  important,  by  giving  access  to  the 
financial  system  to  numerous  households  that  were  previously  beyond  its  reach,  thus  reducing  credit 
constraints (Santos, 2013: 188-198, Carvalho and Rugitsky, 2015: 9-10, Serrano and Summa, 2016: 813-
816).13 
 
The increase in public investment that began in 2004 is also noteworthy (Orair, 2015b, 2016). As 
Table 2 shows, after experiencing negative average real rates of growth both in the 1980s and in the 
1990s,  public  investment  grew  on  average  10.9  percent  between  2004  and  2011  (despite  the  large 
reduction observed in 2011). Both direct investment by government and investment by state enterprises 
contributed to this increase, which increased public investment as a share of GDP from 2.66 to 4.09 
(between  2004  and  2011).  There  is  evidence  that  public  investment  stimulates  private  investment  in 
Brazil (Santos et al., 2016b), explaining the visible correlation between public investment and gross fixed 
capital formation (GFCF) as shares of GDP, in Figure 7, below. Indeed, GFCF grew on average 7.97 
percent per year between 2004 and 2011, after being almost stagnated for the quarter of century since 
1980  and  actually  falling  as  a  share  of  GDP.  The  growth  of  investment  by  state  enterprises  can  be 
accounted for, to a large degree, by rising investment by Petrobras, the Brazilian oil firm.14 This seems to 
have followed the discovery of new reserves and the rising trajectory of oil prices and is, in this way, 
related to the commodity boom. Direct investment by the government, in its turn, was raised deliberately, 
something that involved excluding such expenditures from the computation of the primary fiscal surplus – 
investment by Petrobras were also excluded from 2009 onwards (Orair, 2016: 21-22). 
The evidence presented in Santos et al. (2016b) suggests that the positive terms of trade shock 
 
may also have played a role in stimulating investment. The Brazilian terms of trade are highly correlated 
with commodities prices’ indexes and reflected the boom in the latter, between 2004 and 2011. There is, 
however,  more  than  one  plausible  mechanism  that  could  explain  this  effect  of  terms  of  trade  on 
investment (Carvalho and Rugitsky, 2015: 10-12). It could be an effect of a positive demand shock to 
sectors that are responsible for a large share of investment; the data from Miguez (2016) seems to point in 
that direction.15 Alternatively, given the high correlation between GDP and terms of trade in Brazil, the 
impact of the latter on investment could simply be capturing demand-induced investment in general. 
 
These four elements can, thus, be plausibly represented as positive demand shocks, that is, as an 
outward shift of the effective demand schedule (from ED to ED’, in Figure 3b).16 The impact of falling 
wage inequality has been examined by Carvalho and Rezai (2016), whereas the positive impact of rising 
public investment and terms of trade in private investment could be formally incorporated, to keep things 
simple, as a positive shock in autonomous investment in the usual Kaleckian framework.17 The impact of 

[TABLE 2 AND FIGURE 7 AROUND HERE] 

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

13 Rising household borrowing was not an exclusively Brazilian phenomenon, in the period, according to dos Santos (2012), 
who interpret it as a result of the changing strategies of financial firms coupled with supportive policies, which were, in their 
turn, promoted by multilateral institutions. 
14 Between  2005  and  2011,  Petrobras’  investments  represented  usually  more  than  80  percent  of  total  investment  by  state 
enterprises, according to Orair (2015b: 122, table 1). 
15 C. H. dos Santos called my attention to this issue. 
16 Potential changes of the slope of the schedule are being disregarded, but would be an interesting issue to pursue in future 
research. 
17 Given that the government’s primary surplus remained stable from 1999 until 2011 (with the exception of 2009 and 2010, 
when  countercyclical  policies  reduced  it),  as  show  by  Gobetti  and  Orair  (2015),  it  might  be  justifiable  not  to  incorporate 
government’s expenditures explicitly in the argument, although an impulse along the lines of the balanced-budget multiplier 

!

5 

rising  household  borrowing,  however,  is  not  as  easy  to  incorporate  formally.  The  analysis  of  the 
conditions under which it results in an outward shift of the effective demand schedule can be found in an 
appendix (available upon request).18 
Potential  shifts  in  the  distributive  schedule  are  harder  to  identify,  given  that  there  were  no 
 
significant changes in labor legislation in the period under consideration (Hall, 2009), beyond an increase 
in the legal recognition of the trade union confederations (centrais sindicais), approved in 2007, and the 
mentioned acceleration of the rate of growth of the minimum wage (a legal rule disciplining the annual 
raises  was  established  in  2011  and  renewed  in  2015).  The  increase  in  the  social  transfers,  first  and 
foremost the Bolsa Família, was probably the most important measure to increase the bargaining power 
of the workers, by raising the recipients’ reserve wage, that is, the lowest wage they require to accept a 
job. Elites’ complaints about the program, which allegedly raised indolence and made it harder to find 
workers to hire, is a clear testimony of this effect. With a substantial share of workers outside the formal 
labor market and being paid less than the minimum wage, one could think that raising it faster would not 
have  much  impact.  However,  the  growth  acceleration  observed  in  the  period  was  accompanied  by  a 
process of labor market formalization that made the minimum wage more relevant (Medeiros, 2015: 79-
108). In addition, the minimum wage also impacts the level of pensions and other transfers received by 
millions of families, with a poverty-reducing role that could also affect the reserve wage of members of 
recipients’ families (even if the pensioner itself is outside the labor market). Hence, social transfers and 
rising minimum wage can plausibly be represented as a shift upwards of the distributive schedule: for any 
level of the degree of capacity utilization, a higher bargaining power implies a larger wage share. 
 
The change in the sectoral job structure, which will be further examined in the next section, likely 
affected the slope of the distributive schedule. By augmenting the share of workers in sectors with lower 
labor productivity, the growth pattern of the period had two effects on the distributive schedule. On the 
one hand, it increased the employment elasticity of growth, that is, the number of jobs created by an 
increase of GDP, and consequently it accelerates the tightening of the labor market.19 On the other, it 
tends  to  push  down  average  labor  productivity,  by  a  composition  effect.  Both  effects  make  the 
distributive  schedule  steeper,  because,  by  pushing  real  wages  up  and  labor  productivity  down,  they 
strengthen the positive impact of the degree of capacity utilization on the wage share of income.20 This 
change of slope together with the shift upwards mentioned above can be graphically represented as a 
dislocation from DC to DC’, in figure 3b, above. 
 
utilization and of the wage share of income, from 2004 to 2008, can be interpreted as the movement 
towards the new equilibrium. The remaining question, then, is how to interpret the trajectory since the 
crisis. The years between 2010 and 2012, when the wage share of income kept growing and the degree of 

The  shocks  examined,  affecting  both  schedules,  changed  the  equilibrium  from   (!∗,!∗) to 
(!∗′,!∗′),  where !∗′>!∗ and !∗′>!∗.  The  observed  parallel  increases  of  the  degree  of  capacity 
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

(Haavelmo, 1945) could have taken place (see Serrano and Summa, 2016: 819-820). What has been more significant in the 
period,  however,  was  the  change  in  composition  of  government’s  expenditures  with  the  mentioned  increase  in  public 
investment and in social transfers and a corresponding decline in interest payments. Such change of composition tends to be 
expansionary, due to heterogeneous multipliers (Pires, 2014, Orair, Siqueira and Gobetti, 2016). 
18 A comment is due on the trajectory of the exchange rate, given that it appreciated almost continuously between 2004 and 
2011. Whether such an appreciation is contractionary or expansionary is a controversial issue (Krugman and Taylor, 1978, 
Razmi, 2007; see also Bresser-Pereira and Rugitsky, 2017, for a broader discussion of exchange-rate policy). Its negative 
impact on competitiveness suggests a negative demand pressure through net exports, while its positive impact on the real wage 
indicates  a  positive  impact  on  consumption.  In  the  Brazilian  context,  given  low  price-elasticities  of  exports  and  imports 
(Schettini, Squeff and Gouvêa, 2012, Santos et al., 2015), at least in the short run, it might be reasonable to assume that its 
short-run expansionary effect predominates. Evidence of a positive effect of exchange-rate appreciation on investment (Santos 
et al., 2016b) gives further confidence on this assumption. 
19 Palma  (2012:  22-24)  identifies  high  employment  elasticity  and  low  productivity  growth  as  broader  Latin  American 
phenomena. Recent research by McMillan, Rodrik and Verduzco-Gallo (2014) suggests that they might result from sectoral 
dynamics. 

20 If this implies that, due to the change of the job structure, !! rises to !!′ and !! falls to !!′, then the resulting slope of the 
distributive schedule will be steeper than the previous one:  !"!"′=!!!!!!!
!!!!!, given that !!−!!is assumed to be 
!

!!!!!>!"!"=!!!!!

negative. 

6 

capacity utilization fell slowly, might also be interpreted as a movement towards equilibrium, assuming 
that the degree of capacity utilization had overshot its new equilibrium level in 2007 and 2008. But the 
available analyses of the period (Paula, Modenesi and Pires, 2015, Serrano and Summa, 2016) suggest 
that the factors that shifted the effective demand schedule in the preceding period were being reversed, 
gradually in the beginning and strongly afterwards. 
 
Beginning  with  wage  inequality,  while  some  measures  indicate  that  it  kept  falling  after  2011 
(Figure 4), the ratio of average to minimum wage remained practically stable after 2011 (Figure 5). This 
apparent deceleration of the fall of wage inequality deserves further investigation, to check if it really 
happened and, in case it did, to establish its determinants. Household borrowing, in its turn, went through 
a  more  clear  change  of  trajectory.  The  ratio  of  household  debt  without  mortgage  loans  to  disposable 
income  peak  in  2011,  as  mentioned,  and  fell  continuously  thereafter.  It  had  grown,  on  average,  10.4 
percent between 2005 and 2011 and it fell an average 2.6 percent between 2012 and 2014 (or 4.4 percent, 
if one includes the last two years, in which the crisis accelerated the decline of this ratio). Serrano and 
Summa (2016: 816-819) examined such reversal in detail. They claim that it might have been provoked, 
in 2010 and 2011, by the macroprudential policies adopted by the Brazilian Central Bank (allegedly to 
avoid  unsustainable  increases  of  private  debt)  and  by  the  interest  rate  hike  that  was  meant  to  curb 
accelerating inflation. The former were gradually reversed and the interest rate resumed falling in the 
second semester of 2011, but this did not lead to a recovery of household borrowing, possibly due to the 
slower labor market formalization observed in the period (which had been decisive to spread the access to 
credit)  and  the  high  level  of  indebtedness  that  households  had  reached  by  that  time  (see  also  Paula, 
Modenesi and Pires, 2015: 423-424). 
As Table 2 shows, public investment went from an average growth rate of 10.90 percent, between 
2004 and 2011, to an average negative rate of 4.87, between 2012 and 2015. Its trajectory was, however, 
not linear. It contracted sharply (12.6 percent) in 2011, due in part to a policy of fiscal adjustment in the 
first year of Dilma Rousseff’s government, then grew in 2012 (5.9 percent) and 2013 (7.0 percent) and 
resumed falling in 2014 (2.0 percent) and 2015 (30.4 percent). The impact of falling oil prices and of a 
huge corruption scandal on Petrobras’ investment certainly contributed to this trajectory, as well as, since 
2015, the shift of economic policy towards austerity. Last, terms of trade peaked in 2011, then fell on 
average 3.7 percent per year between 2012 and 2014 and collapsed 11.0 percent in 2015. 
 
It can be noted that such reversal can be divided in two phases: a first and slow one, from 2011 to 
2013, when some of these factors that stimulated demand in the preceding period were being reversed 
while others kept growing; and a second and fast one, from 2014 to 2015, when all of them pushed 
demand downwards (Table 3).21 Graphically, this could be depicted as two shifts in the effective demand 
schedule – one small and one large – that changed the equilibrium and unleashed a movement of the 
economy towards it. In Figure 8, below, this is represented as a shift of ED’ to ED’’ and, then, to ED’’’, 
had only began falling, but the degree of capacity utilization was in 2014 already below its level of 2004 
(Figure 2, above) and it fell sharply in 2015 and 2016 to, respectively, 0.885 and 0.881.22 
 
This framework and the interpretative hypothesis presented suggest some conclusions about the 
recent Brazilian trajectory. If the assumptions are correct, the observed increase in the wage share of 
income  was  a  combined  result  of  the  growth  acceleration  (of  the  dislocation  of  the  economy  on  the 
distributive schedule), of the pattern of growth (which made the distributive schedule steeper), and of 
policies that increased the bargaining power of workers (which shifted upwards the distributive schedule). 

shifting equilibrium to (!∗′′,!∗′′). Data for the wage share of income is available only until 2014, when it 

[TABLE 3 AND FIGURE 8 AROUND HERE] 

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

21 Given the ambiguity of the trajectory of wage inequality, which might have kept falling in this period (as suggested by the 
Gini) or may have stabilized (as indicated by the average wage/minimum wage ratio), it will not be considered in the following 
argument. 
22 The two phases defined above (2011-2013 and 2014-2015) do not fit well with the trajectory observed in Figure 2, where the 
degree of capacity utilization started to decrease faster in 2013. However, the disaggregated data from Bonelli (2016) shows 
that the capacity utilization of agriculture, industry and several services’ sectors grew in 2013, falling only thereafter. The fall 
in the average degree of capacity utilization observed is, then, entirely due to the fall in what is classified as “other services” 
(including food and lodging, private health and education, services provided to firms, among other activities). 

!

7 

Growth acceleration, as captured by the increase in the degree of capacity utilization, in its turn, can be 
attributed  to  expansionary  policies  (crédito consignado  and  increase  in  public  investment),  to  falling 
wage inequality, and to the expansionary effect of the terms of trade’s boom, all of which shifted the 
effective demand schedule. And, interestingly, given that the economy is assumed to be profit-led, growth 
accelerated despite the countervailing force exerted by a rising wage share of income. The reversal and 
subsequent crisis could be interpreted as a cyclical movement (after a potential overshooting of capacity 
utilization) accentuated by contractionary policies and negative shocks to demand. Or, alternatively, it 
could be interpreted simply as result of the latter, if no overshooting is assumed. 
 
What  does  this  framework  implies  about  the  limits  of  the  growth  acceleration  with  falling 
inequality observed in Brazil? First, it seems clear that the policies behind falling wage inequality and 
rising  household  borrowing  –  mainly,  rising  social  transfers,  increasing  the  minimum  wage,  and 
institutional changes in the credit market like the creation of the crédito consignado – had, so to speak, 
decreasing returns. The fall in wage inequality appears to have decelerated and it is plausible that further 
reductions of inequality would require bolder measures, like making the tax system more progressive. 
One could argue that, absent the macroprudential policies and the interest rate hike of 2010 and 2011, 
household borrowing could have kept increasing. But that is questionable, given that it did not grow after 
those two factors were reversed and that its stagnation might have been caused by stagnating demand for 
credit (due to the level of indebtedness), rather than by restriction of its supply. It is true, however, that a 
lower difference between the interest rates and the growth rates of income may allow further expansion of 
household  credit,  but  interest  rates  in  Brazil  seem  particularly  difficult  to  cut  down.  Another  factor 
pushing demand up, the terms of trade’s boom, cannot be controlled by domestic policy and became a 
contractionary  force  from  2012  onwards.  Thus,  the  only  remaining  factor  that  increased  aggregate 
demand, public investment, would have to bear alone the task of sustaining growth, which was previously 
shared with falling wage inequality, rising household borrowing, and increasing terms of trade. In order to 
provide  a  more  detailed  examination  of  the  limits  of  the  growth  acceleration  with  falling  inequality, 
however, one has to go beyond the present framework and take sectoral heterogeneity into consideration. 
This is the task of the next section. 23 
3. Bringing the productive structure in 
3.1. Modified framework 
Most of the Kaleckian literature, as the framework used above, disregard sectoral heterogeneity, 
 
resorting to single-commodity models.24 This is not a problem in itself, given that this literature could be 
focused  on  issues  that  are  sufficiently  independent  from  sectoral  dynamics.  Rugitsky  (2016)  argued, 
however,  that  sectoral  heterogeneity  could  be  a  decisive  mediation  between  demand  and  income 
distribution. A strand of Latin American structuralism that connects Furtado’s (1965) stagnationism to 
models of social articulation and disarticulation (Taylor and Bacha, 1976, de Janvry and Sadoulet, 1983) 
makes that clear, because it has several affinities with the Kaleckian literature (in its development from 
Steindl’s (1952/1976) work to contemporary models), but gives centrality to sectoral heterogeneity (see 
Rugitsky, 2016). It might be true that this mediation plays a decisive role only on peripheral countries, 
central  economies  being  less  structurally  heterogeneous.  But  this  only  strengthens  the  case  for 
multisectoral Kaleckian frameworks, if they are to be applied to peripheral economies like the Brazilian 
one. 

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

23 This framework might also help to shed light on the dispute about the reasons why the economic policy shift implemented 
between 2011 and 2013, sometimes called the new macroeconomic matrix, failed to sustain growth and ended in a collapse 
(see, for instance, Bresser, 2014: 354-370, Singer, 2015, Rugitsky, 2015, and Serrano and Summa, 2016). On the one hand, 
such shift did have some contractionary aspects, especially the cut in public investment observed in 2011, which was meant as 
a necessary fiscal measure to allow for the relaxation of monetary policy, undertaken from August 2011 onwards. This cut was 
reversed in 2012 and 2013, but the growth rate of public investment never recovered to the level attained in the preceding 
period. On the other hand, considering the decrease of household debt and of the terms of trade that began in 2012 and the 
apparent deceleration of the fall of wage inequality, some policy shift was needed to sustain the previous rates of growth. The 
one chosen was ill suited for the purpose, as private investment demand did not respond to falling interest rates and a rising 
exchange rate due to insufficient demand and stagnant world trade. But pursuing the previous policies was no longer a viable 
strategy. 
24 Notable exceptions can be found in Taylor (1983, 1989) and Dutt (1990). 

!

8 

[FIGURE 9 AROUND HERE] 

Sectoral  heterogeneity  is  not  merely  an  additional  variable  that  can  be  incorporated  in  the 
 
framework  of  the  previous  section.  Rather,  once  accounted  for,  it  often  brings  along  cumulative 
processes, as the one suggested by Figure 9, below.25 Income distribution, in addition to its impact on 
effective demand, may have an impact on demand composition, if the consumption baskets of households 
from  different  income  groups  differ  significantly.  In  this  way,  a  change  in  income  distribution  –  a 
reduction of wage inequality, for instance – changes the aggregate composition of demand, which tends 
to affect relative prices and, consequently, the productive structure itself. The sectors producing the goods 
whose relative share of aggregate demand has risen tend to grow faster than the economy as a whole. If, 
moreover, different sectors require different combinations of skill, the change in the productive structure 
will impact the job structure regarding the relative shares of skilled and unskilled workers.26 Finally, such 
change in the job structure will inevitably feedback into the distribution of wages, either increasing or 
decreasing wage inequality. If wage inequality is further decreased, it is easy to see that a cumulative 
process will be unleashed, restarting the cycle. To borrow Myrdal’s (1957) concept, this would consist in 
a circular and cumulative causation involving income distribution and the productive structure.27 
Concretely, this cumulative process would entail that, in Figure 3b above, once a fall in wage 
 
inequality shifted the effective demand schedule outwards (from ED to ED’), its impact in the productive 
structure would lead to further reductions of wage inequality, pushing the schedule further. Its dislocation 
would  go  on  indefinitely  –  or,  at  least,  until  the  economy  reached  full  utilization  of  capacity.28 
Alternatively,  if  one  disregards  labor  heterogeneity  and  assumes  a  cumulative  process  between  the 
productive structure and the functional income distribution, as Taylor (1989) does, any shift of the wage 
share (due, for instance to a shift of the effective demand schedule) would unleash the cumulative process 
and that would shift the distributive schedule continuously upwards. In addition, incorporating sectoral 
heterogeneity into the framework would likely impact the slope of the effective demand schedule, given 
that aggregate investment may be influenced by the changes in the productive structure. As in Taylor’s 
(1989) formulation, different sectoral responses of investment to the sectoral profit rates could make a 
change in the income distribution, through its impact on the composition of demand and, thus, on the 
productive structure, be either a stimulus or a hindrance to aggregate investment. In this way, income 
distribution  would  affect  investment  not  only  through  the  profit  share  of  income  and  the  degree  of 
capacity utilization, as in the single-commodity framework above, but also through the change in the 
productive structure. 
 
The slope of the distributive schedule could also be impacted by sectoral heterogeneity, with the 
eventual  cumulative  process  probably  generating  instability  in  the  relation  between  demand  and 
distribution.  As  may  be  clear  by  now,  fully  examining  the  implications  of  incorporating  sectoral 
heterogeneity would demand a new model, with at least two sectors, one that could build on Taylor’s 
(1989)  formulation.  That  lies,  however,  beyond  the  scope  of  the  present  paper.  The  aim  in  the  next 
subsection will be restricted to suggesting, in light of some sectoral data, the plausibility of identifying the 
mentioned cumulative process as one of the determinants of the recent Brazilian trajectory. It is hoped 

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

25 A similar examination of structural transformation can be found in Medeiros (2015: 57-59, 110-112), who follows the work 
of Maria da Conceição Tavares – an important reference for the present work as well. 
26 This  distinction  between  skilled  and  unskilled  workers  is  common  among  economists,  but  it  is  more  likely  that  wage 
inequality is predominantly determined not by the differences between individuals, but by differences between jobs. In this 
sense, the cumulative process would operate through changes in the occupational structure, that is, in the shares of high-wage 
and low-wage jobs, independently of the level of skill of the workforce. See, for an analysis of the occupational structure’s role 
in Brazilian inequality, Carvalhaes et al. (2014). 
27 The cycle described is only one possibility among many. Taylor’s (1989) two-sector Kaleckian model is, for instance, a 
slightly different one, in which the cycle would be started by a change in the functional distribution of income. Then, the 
change  in  the  productive  structure,  resulting  from  the  change  in  demand  composition,  would  directly  feedback  into  the 
functional distribution of income, because he assumes that the sectors have different capital/labor ratios. In other words, labor 
is assumed to be homogeneous and, as a result, the cumulative structural transformation has one stage less. 
28 Another possibility is that the dislocation would be halted once the profit share was squeezed to a level considered to be too 
low. The linear representation of the schedule might suggest, misleadingly, that it could be squeezed to zero, with all income 
being wage income. But that is, of course, not realistic. 

!

9 

that this interpretative hypothesis, which goes beyond the one presented in the previous section, serves as 
a  stimulus  to  further  research  on  the  interactions  between  demand,  distribution,  and  the  productive 
structure in the Brazilian economy. 
3.2. Brazil’s economic antimiracle 
In general terms, the following cumulative process seems to describe well an aspect of the recent 
 
trajectory of the Brazilian economy.29 The decline in wage inequality as well as the rise in the wage share 
of income, results (as mentioned above) of the rise of the minimum wage, of increasing social transfers, 
of the pattern of growth and of its acceleration, led to changes in the composition of aggregate demand, 
due to the diffusion of consumption habits previously restricted to richer groups to those in the bottom of 
income distribution. At least part of this change in the composition of demand was, then, reflected in 
changes in the productive structure, while part of it was met through imports (Medeiros, 2015: 115-126). 
Notably, the rise of services as a share of total value added as well as the decline in manufacturing seem, 
at least in part, to be attributable to that. The change in the productive structure, in its turn, led to a 
transformation of the job structure, with a growing share of low-productivity jobs. Such transformation, 
finally, deepened the decline in wage inequality, restarting the cycle.30 
 
The  contrast  of  this  process  with  the  one  observed  during  the  so-called  Brazilian  “economic 
miracle”,  the  growth  spurt  that  took  place  during  the  military  dictatorship  from  1968  to  1973,  is  too 
obvious  to  be  ignored  (see,  for  instance,  Medeiros,  2015:  67,  fn.  31).  Then,  the  shift  of  the  income 
distribution  took  place  in  the  opposite  direction,  that  is,  towards  greater  inequality,  stimulating  the 
mentioned controversy on income distribution in the 1970s (Langoni, 1973/2005, Tolipan and Tinelli, 
1975,  Bacha  and  Taylor,  1978).  The  most  plausible  conclusion  of  this  controversy  is  that  growing 
inequality was a result, especially, of wage policy and of violent repression of labor militancy and union 
activity. Rising inequality led, in its turn, to a change in the pattern of demand towards what where then 
luxury  goods,  mainly  cars  and  electric  appliances,  the  consumption  of  which  seemed  to  be  still 
concentrated on the top groups of the income distribution.31 Such change in the composition of aggregate 
demand affected the productive structure, stimulating the relative growth of the industries that were then 
called  dynamic  and  that  were  intensive  in  capital  and  relatively  more  skilled  labor.  As  expected,  the 
change in the productive structure was felt in the job structure, reinforcing the rise in wage inequality 
(and,  through  the  change  in  the  average  capital/labor  ratio,  the  change  in  the  productive  structure 
accentuated the rise in the profit share – see Marquetti, Maldonado Filho and Lautert, 2010, for evidence 
of this increase). The cycle was, thus, restarted by growing inequality.32 If the “miracle,” then, consisted 
in a cumulative process in which rising inequality and changes in the productive structure reinforced each 
other, a process in which falling inequality and changes in the productive structure reinforced each other 
may be called an economic antimiracle. In order to examine such interpretative hypothesis in more detail, 
some  data  on  the  recent  changes  in  the  consumption  pattern,  the  productive  structure,  and  the  job 
structure need to be analyzed. 
The few studies available that examine consumption with disaggregated data for the period under 
 
consideration are those that resort to household budget surveys available for 2002-2003 and 2008-2009 
(Medeiros,  2015:  51-78,  Carvalho  et  al.,  2016;  see  also  Brunelli,  2015,  and  Kerstenetzky,  2016).  As 
mentioned, Medeiros (2015: 70, table 3) identifies a shift of aggregate consumption away from food and 

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

29 For a similar description, see Medeiros (2015: 130). 
30 Independently of the impact of the changing productive structure on the job structure, the former may have led directly to 
changes in the functional distribution of income, due to heterogeneous sectoral wage shares of income. Dias and Ruiz (2016) 
find that more than 40 percent of the increase in the wage share observed between 2005 and 2009 can be explained by a 
sectoral composition effect. This connection between the productive structure and the functional distribution of income may 
result in a cumulative process like the one suggested by Taylor (1989). In theory, the combination of both processes (with or 
without labor heterogeneity) may result in a stronger cumulative transformation. 
31 Wells (1977) provided a critical examination of that hypothesis, suggesting that it was true, then, only for cars, but not for 
other durables, like electric appliances. 
32 For analysis of the “economic miracle” along those lines, see Tavares and Serra (1971/1976) and de Janvry and Sadoulet 
(1983). Interestingly, the models that attempted to examine the interaction between demand, distribution, and the productive 
structure were largely formulated as an attempt to interpret the “economic miracle,” both in the tradition of Latin American 
structuralism (Taylor and Bacha, 1976, de Janvry and Sadoulet, 1983) and in the Kaleckian one (Taylor, 1989). 

!

10 

clothing and towards housing, transportation, health, hygiene, personal care, and personal services. The 
first group represented, in 2008-2009, about a quarter of aggregate consumption, its share having fallen 
1.2  percentage  points  since  2002-2003.  The  second  group,  in  its  turn,  accounted  for  about  2/3  of 
aggregate  consumption  in  2008-2009  and  its  share  increased  2.6  percentage  points.  This  reflects, 
according  to  Medeiros  (2015:  51-78),  a  process  of  diffusion  of  consumption  habits  beyond  basic 
necessities and it is certainly related to both rising aggregate income and declining inequality – it is in 
part an evidence of Engel’s law.33 In addition, the faster rates of growth of income of the relative poorer 
seems to explain the other shift observed in the consumption pattern: the share in aggregate consumption 
of  education,  leisure,  culture,  and  smoking,  the  consumption  of  which  is  mostly  done  by  the  richer 
households34, fell from 7.2 to 5.5 percent between 2002-2003 and 2008-2009 (Medeiros, 2015: 70, table 
3). There is, thus, strong evidence about the impact of falling inequality on the composition of demand. 
 
Next, the impact of the changing pattern of consumption on the productive structure needs to be 
examined. The main challenge, in this regard, is that there is no simple way to map the categories of 
consumption, from the household budget surveys, to the classification of production activities used in 
national  accounts.  Production  activities  include  both  the  production  of  final  products  and  services, 
destined for household consumption, as well as the production of products and services that are used as 
inputs in other activities. So a change in the patterns of consumption represented, for instance, by the 
increase  in  the  share  of  consumption  of  health-related  goods  and  services  may  impact  not  only  the 
production  activity  named  “private  health”  (a  service),  but  also  the  industrial  activity  called 
“pharmaceutical  products”  and  possibly  several  other  activities  that  provide  inputs  for  the  above 
mentioned ones (maybe “chemical products,” “rubber and plastic goods,” etc.). In addition, households 
consume national products and services as well as imported ones, with the result that changes in the 
composition of demand may not impact the productive structure, if it is based mainly on imports. It can 
also be true that a change in the productive structure is mainly attributable to changes in foreign demand, 
with a stable domestic pattern of consumption. 
Bearing these caveats in mind, an examination of the changing shares in value added of groups of 
 
activities might provide some clues about the interaction between the pattern of consumption and the 
productive structure. The first noteworthy fact that can be observed in Table 435, is that the changing 
shares of agriculture, industry, and services in the period between 2004 and 2011 mostly reverted the 
change, in the other direction, that took place between 2000 and 2004. The shares of agriculture and 
industry fell around 1.5 percentage points between 2004 and 2011, returning in 2011 to a level similar to 
the one observed in 2000. In terms of the productive structure, the subsequent period, from 2011 to 2014, 
that were called “reversal” above, due to the fall of commodity prices and the deceleration of growth, is 
not a reversal: most trends observed from 2004 to 2011 were deepened in it. As a result, from 2004 to 
2014, agriculture lost 1.65 percentage points of its share of value added, industry lost 4.84 and services 
compensatingly gained 6.49. What can be observed, in this very aggregated manner, are both indications 
of the deindustrialization often discussed in the period and of the rise of services’ activities, which may 
reflect the changing pattern of demand discussed above.36 
The trajectory within industry’s and services’ groups of activities were heterogeneous, however. 
Most of the fall of the share of industry is accounted by a fall in manufacturing, whereas both extractive 
industries and construction grew markedly between 2004 and 2011 and fell slightly from then on, with a 

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

33 Data from Carvalho et al. (2016: 23-24, table 7) indicates, for instance, that food (both in natura and processed) accounted 
for 14.46 percent of total consumption of the three poorest out of six income groups, in 2002-2003, but represented only 10.89 
percent in 2008-2009. For the three richest groups, however, this share fell less, from 7.57 in 2002-2003 to 6.14 in 2008-2009. 
The six groups are defined by income levels and not by the number of people. The three poorest groups comprised, in 2002-
2003, around 63 percent of households and, in 2008-2009, around 54 percent. 
34 Almost 2/3 of total expenditures on occasional travels and on higher education, for example, are done by the top 20 percent 
richest households (Medeiros, 2015: 73, table 4). 
35 Due to space constraints, Tables 4 and 5 are not included in the paper, but can be provided by the author upon request. 
36 On the debate whether Brazil experienced or not a “premature deindustrialization,” see Squeff (2012) and the references 
mentioned therein. See also Rodrik (2016). 

!

11 

net  increase  in  their  share  in  the  whole  period  (Table  4).37 The  trajectory  of  the  extractive  industries 
(especially, oil, gas and iron ore, which account for most of them) is certainly related to the commodity 
boom. Construction, in its turn, might have grown along with public investment, having fallen with its 
stagnation  since  2011,  but  the  trajectory  of  privately-provided  residential  housing  might  also  have 
impacted  the  observed  result.  Within  manufacturing,  it  is  noteworthy  that  textile-related  activities 
(including textiles, clothing and accessories, and leather artifacts and shoes) contracted in the period, 
something that may be related to the decreasing share of clothing in aggregate consumption, but also to 
the  growing  penetration  of  imports  from  Asia.38 Regarding  services,  it  can  be  seen  that  its  growth  is 
accounted by the growth of trade, transportation, storage, postal services, and other services (comprising 
food and lodging, private health and education, services provided to firms, among other activities), while 
information services, finance, insurance, and real estate saw their share of value added contract (Table 4). 
This reinforces the suspicion that it is a phenomenon related to the changing pattern of consumption that 
resulted  from  falling  inequality,  inasmuch  as  the  growth  seems  to  have  been  concentrated  on  low-
productivity services focused predominantly on providing for groups on the bottom of the distribution: 
the rise in trade, for instance, may be in part a result of the incorporation in the mass consumption market 
of groups previously excluded from it.39,40 
In order to assess the changes in the job structure, one might begin with Table 5. Industry saw its 
share of total employment grow 2.48 percentage points between 2004 and 2014, despite its falling share 
of value added (Table 4). In addition, agriculture’s share of employment fell much more than its share of 
value added (6.94 and 1.65, respectively), an indication of labor productivity growth. Similarly, services’ 
share  of  employment  grew  less  than  its  share  of  value  added:  respectively  4.46  and  6.49  percentage 
points. Changes within industry’s and services’ groups of activities are less pronounced here than in their 
share  of  value  added,  with  construction  and  other  services  being  the  two  groups  whose  share  of 
employment grew more markedly.41 Despite these differences, the relation between the changes in the 
productive and the job structures, especially regarding the growth of services, seems clear. 

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

37 The manufacturing activities that fell most, in the period, were oil refining and coke, chemical products, production of steel 
and related products, and cars, trucks, and buses. Further research is needed to interpret whether such fall can be accounted by 
changing relative prices, by changing pattern of demand or by other factors. 
38 However,  food  and  beverage  production  increased  its  share  slightly,  in  the  period,  despite  the  falling  share  of  food  in 
aggregate consumption. This may be a result of growing exports of processed primary products, like meat, possibly related to 
the commodity boom. 
39 The rise in services provided to firms is an exception, being related to a different dynamic. It might have been the result of 
outsourcing of activities previously done within industrial firms. Moreover, private education saw its share of value added 
diminish in period, in line with what the analysis of the composition of demand has shown, whereas private health contracted 
slightly until 2011 and grew quickly afterwards, with a net increase of its share in the whole period. 
40 Medeiros  (2015:  109-132)  provides  a  more  detailed  analysis  of  the  interaction  between  the  pattern  of  demand  and  the 
productive structure by examining together household budget surveys and input-output matrices for the period between 2003 
and  2009.  Despite  recognizing  that  the  growth  of  the  services  sector  is  in  part  a  result  of  “structural  and  distributional 
transformations” (115), he seems to underplay the changes in the productive structure, emphasizing the powerful “inertia of the 
structure”  (117).  He  argues  that  the  aggregate  consumption  structure  is  rigid,  despite  the  diffusion  of  consumption  habits 
mentioned above, and that the change in such a structure that did happen were allowed for by changing imports, rather than by 
shifts in the domestic productive structure (see esp. 116-117, 122-126). The somewhat contrasting interpretations that can be 
made from the data he uses and from national accounts’ data (Table 4) should be further investigated. It is possible that the 
comparison between 2003 and 2009, a restriction imposed by the availability of household budget surveys, biases his results, 
given  that  shares  in  value  added  of  several  activities  reverted  their  trajectories  in  2004  and  that  the  change  then  started 
continued after 2009, at least until 2014, in several cases. The next household budget survey that should be made available 
next year may contribute to illuminate this issue. Medeiros’ argument is made more puzzling by the fact that he repeatedly 
emphasizes the impact of the changing pattern of consumption on the job structure, but as suggested in Figure 9, above, this 
effect should take place through the productive structure. It is conceivable that the change in the job structure reflects shifts in 
the occupational structure within sectors, being then independent of changes in the productive structure. But such hypothesis 
would require a specific explanation. 
41 The growth of the share of employment of other services occurred despite the notable fall of the share of one of the activities 
included  in  it,  domestic  services.  Such  fall  seems  to  be  one  of  the  most  symbolic  results  of  the  combination  of  growth 
acceleration and falling inequality, given that Brazil has one of the largest shares of domestic workers in the world. 

!

12 

Further  research  is  needed  to  examine  more  carefully  such  interaction  and  the  impact  of  the 
 
change  in  the  job  structure  on  wage  inequality.42 But  there  seems  to  be  enough  evidence  that  the 
compression of wage disparity that took place is related to the growth of the share of jobs in the middle of 
the wage distribution, above the informal market and below the higher-paid jobs destined to relatively 
more skilled workers. Carvalhaes et al. (2014: esp. 88-93) focusing on the occupational distribution point 
in that direction, estimating that around 18 percent of the reduction of income inequality between 2002 
and  2012  (measured  as  the  variance  of  the  logarithm  of  income)  can  be  attributed  to  changes  in  the 
occupational structure. Such growth, in its turn, appears to be related to the growth of services and of the 
share  of  employment  in  construction,  whereas  the  fall  in  agriculture  employment  may  be  related  to 
declining informality and the relative stagnation of manufacturing employment might be related to the 
relative  stagnation  of  higher-paid  jobs.43 All  that  occurred  along  with  the  acceleration  of  the  rate  of 
growth of the minimum wage, which seems to have increased the bargaining power of workers in the 
middle of the income distribution and, by increasing their income, reinforced the relative growth of jobs 
in services’ activities that catered to them (Medeiros, 2015: 79-108).  
All that evidence, regarding the connections between inequality, demand composition, productive 
 
structure, job structure, and (again) inequality, provide plausibility to the hypothesis according to which 
the recent Brazilian trajectory might be in part interpreted as a cumulative structural transformation, as 
the one represented in Figure 9. Lacking a fully worked-out model, it is not possible to identify precisely 
the implications of such cumulative transformation for the growth acceleration observed in the period. 
But,  if  one  accepts,  as  suggested  above,  that  this  cumulative  transformation  could  be  represented 
graphically as a continuous shift outwards of the effective demand schedule and also as a continuous shift 
upwards of the distributive schedule, it is clear that it would lead to a shift of the equilibrium that would 
push the wage share up. Its impact on demand, however, is ambiguous, depending on how much each 
schedule is dislocated. To account for the observed parallel increases of the wage share and of the degree 
of capacity utilization, it would need to be assumed that the shift of the effective demand schedule would 
predominate over the shift of the distributive one. 
 
This  hypothesis  may  also  have  implications  for  the  limits  of  the  combination  of  growth 
acceleration with falling inequality. First, the impact of the cumulative transformation on services’ share 
of value added could be related to the accelerating services’ inflation observed in the period, resulting for 
instance from Baumol’s cost disease (Santos et al., 2016a, offer a detailed analysis of services’ inflation 
and attempt to relate it to Baumol’s argument; see also Brunelli, 2015). This was only made compatible 
with inflation targeting, adopted in Brazil since 1999, with the aid of a continuous appreciation of the 
exchange rate, which pushed several products’ inflation down and helped maintain the average inflation 
around  its  target  (which  is  4.5  percent  since  2005).  Once  international  liquidity  and  domestic  policy 
started  to  push  the  currency  towards  depreciation,  in  mid-2011,  inflation  started  to  accelerate.  Such 
dependence  of  the  cumulative  transformation  on  exchange  rate  appreciation  to  compensate  services’ 
inflation tends to reinforce, in its turn, the change in the productive structure, given that shifting relative 
prices  negatively  impact  tradable  goods  and  services  (especially,  manufacturing).  This  change  in  the 
productive  structure,  as  a  result  of  changing  demand  composition  and  of  currency  appreciation,  may 
impose two limits to the growth acceleration. The first is a fiscal one: the fall of the share of industry in 
value added may push tax revenues downwards, given the high dependence of the Brazilian tax system on 
the taxation of goods and the difficulties of taxing services. This could eventually limit the capacity of the 

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

42 Some  available  research  along  these  lines  include  Pauli,  Nakabashi,  and  Sampaio  (2012),  Carvalhaes  et  al.  (2014),  and 
Soares (2015). 
43 Lustig, Lopez-Calva, and Ortiz-Juarez (2013: esp. 137-138) report findings that indicate that the decline in the skill premium 
observed in the 2000s in Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico may have been caused by a decline or deceleration in the demand for 
skilled labor, which in its turn might be a result of changing “composition of output and employment” (138). They point, 
however, to some research that suggest that the latter may have been caused by changes in terms of trade, instead of by the 
changing composition of demand. Their inconclusive results on the role of the terms of trade (which seem to be related to the 
falling skill premium, but not to the changing skill composition of employment) could be explained, though, by not taking into 
account its interaction with a changing demand pattern. 

!

13 

government  to  keep  increasing  public  investment,  which  seems  to  have  been,  as  noted,  an  important 
determinant of growth acceleration.44 
The  second  limit  is  related  to  growth’s  external  constraint.45 It  is  plausible  that  the  changing 
productive  structure  observed  increased  the  income-elasticity  of  imports  and  decreased  the  income-
elasticity of exports, given the growing concentration of the export basket on commodities (which tend to 
have below average income-elasticity) and the growing dependence on imports to cater for the changing 
demand  composition.  According  to  the  Thirlwall’s  (1979)  formulation,  the  rate  of  growth  that  is 
compatible with balance of payments equilibrium is determined precisely by these income elasticities and 
the  potential  change  observed  in  Brazil  would  have  pushed  the  “equilibrium”  rate  of  growth  down.46 
Thus,  even  though  the  commodity  boom  relaxed  temporarily  the  foreign  constraint  on  growth,  the 
underlying  change  in  the  productive  structure  (a  result  of  the  cumulative  transformation,  of  currency 
appreciation, and of the commodity boom itself) tended to alter the income elasticities of foreign trade, so 
that the growth of rate would be limited, by the equilibrium of the balance of payments, at a lower level 
than  before.  Once  the  commodity  boom  ended,  such  constraint  would  come  to  the  fore,  as  the 
deterioration of the current account showed. 
The discussion of these limits allows one to examine the policy shift that occurred in 2011 once 
more. The attempt to maintain the exchange rate at a higher level (that is, more depreciated) could be 
understood as a measure to stimulate industrial production and, in this way, counteract the change in the 
productive structure that made the foreign constraint more binding and that tended to accelerate inflation. 
One could argue that its effect, however, would only be felt after some time, since changes in relative 
prices are not able to impact the productive structure immediately, and in the short run the currency 
depreciation tends to be contractionary. But the hypothesis about the cumulative transformation suggests 
that there were deeper limits to the success of such policy shift, inasmuch as it attempted to revert a 
change in the productive structure that was part and parcel of a cumulative process that not only would 
hardly be halted by currency depreciation alone, but also was further stimulated by other policies that 
were inherited from the previous period (the increases in the minimum wage and the growing social 
transfers, for instance). 
4. Concluding remarks 
The preliminary nature of the hypotheses formulated in the present paper has to be emphasized as 
a stimulus to further engagement with the questions raised in the current research. Efforts to formalize 
Kaleckian  models  that  incorporate  sectoral  heterogeneity  and  that  can  result  in  cumulative  structural 
transformations, as suggested in section 4.1, above, are one of the avenues for future research – research 
that  can  build  on  Taylor  (1989)  and  Dutt  (1990:  chaps.  6  and  7).  This  may  allow  more  precise 
examinations about the way in which incorporating sectoral heterogeneity can modify Kaleckian single-
good models. In addition, the examination of how actual data fit the theoretical predictions of the models 
might be pursued, for example, by calibrating the parameters of some version of the framework presented 
in section 3.1 and simulating the shocks in wage inequality, household borrowing, public investment, and 
terms  of  trade.  Moreover,  whereas  the  impacts  of  such  variables  on  aggregate  demand  and  income 
distribution have been investigated empirically, the interaction between inequality, demand composition, 
productive  structure,  and  job  structure  deserves  much  further  investigation.47 It  is  hoped  that  the 
hypotheses presented here help in some way formulating such questions for future research. 

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

44 This limit may not be relevant in practice, inasmuch as the cumulative transformation is also related to the increase in labor 
market formalization, which, in its turn, tend to push tax revenues up. See Orair (2015a). 
45 A similar interpretation can be found in Medeiros (2015: 22, 43, 147). 
46 On  the  so-called  “Thirlwall’s  law,”  see  also  McCombie  and  Thirlwall  (2004)  and  Thirlwall  (2011).  Resorting  to  this 
framework, but making the income elasticities endogenous to the level of the exchange rate, Ferrari, Freitas, and Barbosa Filho 
(2013) examine the possibility that a continuously overvalued exchange rate may reduce the “equilibrium” growth rate, a 
possibility that may be relevant to the recent trajectory of the Brazilian economy. 
47 It also has to be mentioned that the present paper restricted its purview to strictly economic issues, but it is evident from the 
recent crises in South America that the determinants of the trajectory observed during the commodity boom as well as of its 
limits should be sought for in the interpenetration of economic and sociopolitical dynamics. Such interdisciplinary research 
seems indeed to be crucial. 

!

14 

A  final  question  regards  the  lessons  suggested  by  the  interpretation  provided  for  the  recent 
 
Brazilian  trajectory.  They  indicate  that  there  is  no  simple  way  to  combine  high  growth  and  falling 
inequality. The limits of the recent brief attempt to do so point to inherent difficulties as well as to need to 
resort  to  more  structural  answers  to  high  inequality  (like  making  the  tax  system  more  progressive). 
Maintaining  high  levels  of  public  investment  in  selected  physical  and  social  infrastructure  that  is 
compatible with environment preservation could also prove to be an effective way to raise productivity 
and competitiveness and to attenuate distributive conflicts. The main lesson may be, however, that any 
policy  strategy  has  to  take  into  consideration  its  potentially  cumulative  impacts  on  the  productive 
structure,  if  it  aims  at  sustaining  growth  in  peripheral  countries  that  tend  to  be  subject  to  foreign 
constraints. 
REFERENCES 
ABELES, Martín, AMARANTE, Verónica, VEGA, Daniel (2014). “The earnings share  of total income in Latin America, 1990-2010.” 
Cepal Review, n. 114, pp. 29-49.  
ARAÚJO,  Eliane,  GALA,  Paulo  (2012).  “Economic  growth  regimes  in  Brazil:  empirical  evidence  and  policy  implications.”  Estudos 
Avançados, Vol. 26 (75), pp. 41-56. 
BACHA, Edmar, TAYLOR, Lance (1978). “Brazilian income distribution in the 1960s: ‘facts’, model results and the controversy.” Journal 
of Development Studies, Vol. 14 (3), pp. 271-297. 
BARBOSA-FILHO,  Nelson,  SOUZA,  José  Antônio  P.  de  (2010).  “A  inflexão  do  governo  Lula:  política  econômica,  crescimento  e 
distribuição de renda.” In: SADER, Emir, GARCIA, Marco Aurélio (Eds.). Brasil entre o Passado e o Futuro. São Paulo: Fundação 
Perseu Abramo / Boitempo, pp. 57-110.  
BARBOSA-FILHO, Nelson, TAYLOR, Lance (2006). “Distributive and demand cycles in the US economy: a structuralist Goodwin model.” 
Metroeconomica, Vol. 57 (3), pp. 389-411. 
BHADURI, Amit (2008). “On the dynamics of profit-led and wage-led growth.” Cambridge Journal of Economics, Vol. 32 (1), pp. 147-160. 
BHADURI, Amit, MARGLIN, Stephen (1990). “Unemployment and the real wage: the economic basis of contesting political ideologies.” 
Cambridge Journal of Economics, Vol. 14 (4), pp. 375-393.  
BLECKER, Robert (1989). “International competition, income distribution and economic growth.” Cambridge Journal of Economics, Vol. 
13 (3), pp. 395-412. 
BLECKER,  Robert  (2002).  “Distribution,  demand  and  growth  in  neo-Kaleckian  macro-models.”  In:  SETTERFIELD,  Mark  (Ed.).  The 
Economics of Demand-led Growth: challenging the supply-side vision of the long run. Northampton: Edward Elgar, pp. 129-152.! 
BONELLI, Regis (2016). “Uma medida de utilização de capacidade na economia brasileira, 1947-2016.” IBRE-FGV Séries Históricas. 
BRESSER-PEREIRA,  Luiz  Carlos  (2014).  A Construção Política do Brasil: sociedade, economia e Estado desde a independência.  São 
BRESSER-PEREIRA, Luiz Carlos, RUGITSKY, Fernando (2017). “Industrial policy and exchange rate skepticism.” Cambridge Journal of 
BRUNELLI, André (2015). “Demand for services rendered to families in Brazil in the 2000’s: an empirical analysis of consumer patterns 
CAMPELLO, Tereza, NERI, Marcelo (Eds.) (2013). Programa Bolsa Família: uma década de inclusão e cidadania. Brasília: IPEA. 
CARVALHAES, Flavio, BARBOSA, Rogerio, SOUZA, Pedro Herculano de, RIBEIRO, Carlos Antônio (2014). “Os impactos da geração 
de emprego sobre as desigualdades de renda: uma análise da década de 2000.” Revista Brasileira de Ciências Sociais, Vol. 29 (85), pp. 
79-98. 
CARVALHO, Laura, REZAI, Armon (2016). “Personal income inequality and aggregate demand.” Cambridge Journal of Economics, Vol. 
40 (2), pp. 491-505.! 
CARVALHO, Laura, RUGITSKY, Fernando (2015). “Growth and distribution in Brazil in the 21st century: revisiting the wage-led versus 
profit-led debate.” Department of Economics FEA/USP Working Paper Series, n. 2015-25. 
CARVALHO, Sandro de, SANTOS, Cláudio Hamilton dos, ALMEIDA, Vinícius de, JOEL, Yannick, PAIVA, Karine, CALDAS, Luíza 
(2016). “O consumo das famílias no Brasil entre 2000 e 2013: uma análise estrutural a partir de dados do sistema de contas nacionais e 
da pesquisa de orçamentos familiares.” IPEA Texto para Discussão, n. 2209. 
CONSIDERA,  Cláudio,  PESSÔA,  Samuel  (2013).  “A  distribuição  funcional  da  renda  no  Brasil  no  período  1959-2009.”  Pesquisa  e 
Planejamento Econômico, Vol. 43 (3), pp. 479-511. 
CORRÊA, Vanessa, SANTOS, Cláudio Hamilton dos (2013). “Modelo de crescimento brasileiro e mudança estrutural: avanços e limites.” 
In: CORRÊA, Vanessa (Ed.). Padrão de Acumulação e Desenvolvimento Brasileiro. São Paulo: Fundação Perseu Abramo, pp. 19-55. 
DE JANVRY, Alain, SADOULET, Elisabeth (1983). “Social articulation as a condition for equitable growth.” Journal of Development 
Economics, Vol. 13 (3), pp. 275-303. 
DIAS, Barbara, RUIZ, Ana (2016). “A relação entre a composição setorial da renda e sua distribuição funcional: o caso brasileiro no período 
recente.” Blucher Engineering Proceedings, Vol. 3 (4), pp. 104-124. 
DOS SANTOS, Paulo (2012). “A cause for policy concern: the expansion of household credit in middle-income economies.” International 
Review of Applied Economics, Vol. 27 (3), pp. 316-338. 
DUTT, Amitava (1984). “Stagnation, income distribution and monopoly power.” Cambridge Journal of Economics, Vol. 8 (1), pp. 25-40. 
(1990). Growth, distribution, and uneven development. Cambridge, Mass.: Cambridge University Press. 
 
FERNANDES,  Reynaldo,  MENEZES-FILHO,  Naercio  (2012).  “Educação,  salários  e  alocação  de  trabalhadores  entre  tarefas:  teoria  e 
evidências para o Brasil.” Pesquisa e Planejamento Econômico, Vol. 42 (3), pp. 311-328. 
FERRARI, Marcos, FREITAS, Fabio, BARBOSA FILHO, Nelson (2013). “A taxa de câmbio real e a restrição externa: uma proposta de 
releitura com elasticidades endógenas.” Revista de Economia Política, Vol. 33 (1), pp. 60-81. 
FURTADO, Celso (1965). “Development and stagnation in Latin America: a structuralist approach.” Studies in Comparative International 
Development, Vol. 1 (11), pp. 159-175. 
GOBETTI, Sergio, ORAIR, Rodrigo (2015). “Flexibilização fiscal: novas evidências e desafios.” IPEA Texto para Discussão, n. 2132. 

Paulo: Editora 34. 
Economics, forthcoming. 
and social expansion.” Banco Central do Brasil Working Paper Series, n. 381. 

!

15 

neo-Kaleckiano pelo método VAR.” Paper presented at the 44th Brazilian National Meeting of Economics (ANPEC). 
Maurice Dobb. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 54-58. 

Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico.” World Development, Vol. 44, pp. 129-141. 
Radical Political Economics, Vol. 42 (4), pp. 485-504. 
n. 113, pp. 57-73. 

economy, politics, and society under the worker-president. New York: Palgrave MacMillan, pp. 151-165. 
Brasil.” Revista de Economia Política, Vol. 36 (1), pp. 29-45. 
445-456. 

with an update on Africa.” World Development, Vol. 63, pp. 11-32. 
2015. 
Texto para Discussão, n. 2170. 
income tax data and household surveys.” Ciência e Saúde Coletiva, Vol. 20 (4), pp. 971-986.! 
Base nas matrizes de absorção de investimento (MAIs).” Unpublished PhD Dissertation, IE/UFRJ, Rio de Janeiro. 

GONÇALVES, Julia Burle (2016). “Distribuição de renda e demanda agregada no Brasil (1995-2015): uma análise de extensões ao modelo 
GOODWIN, Richard (1967). “A growth cycle.” In: FEINSTEIN, C. (Ed.). Socialism, Capitalism and Economic Growth: essays presented to 
HAAVELMO, Trygve (1945). “Multiplier effects of a balanced budget.” Econometrica, Vol. 13 (4), pp. 311-318. 
HALL,  Michael  (2009).  “The  labor  policies  of  the  Lula  government.”  In:  LOVE,  Joseph,  BAER,  Werner  (Eds.).  Brazil  under  Lula: 
KERSTENETZKY, Celia (2016). “Consumo social e crescimento redistributivo: notas para se pensar um modelo de crescimento para o 
KRUGMAN, Paul, TAYLOR, Lance (1978). “ Contractionary effects of devaluation.” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 8 (3), pp. 
LANGONI, Carlos (1973/2005). Distribuição da Renda e Desenvolvimento Econômico do Brasil. 3rd. Ed. Rio de Janeiro: FGV. 
LAVINAS, Lena (2013). “21st century welfare.” New Left Review, n. 84, pp. 5-40. 
LAVOIE, Marc (2014). Post-Keynesian Economics: new foundations. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. 
LUSTIG, Nora, LOPEZ-CALVA, Luis, ORTIZ-JUAREZ, Eduardo (2013). “Declining inequality in Latin America in the 2000s: the cases of 
MARQUETTI, Adalmir, MALDONADO FILHO, Eduardo, LAUTERT, Vladimir (2010). “The profit rate in Brazil, 1953-2003.” Review of 
MARQUETTI, Adalmir, PORSSE, Melody (2014). “Patterns of technical progress in the Brazilian economy, 1952-2008.” CEPAL Review, 
MCCOMBIE, John, THIRLWALL, Anthony (2004). Essays on Balance of Payments Constrained Growth. New York: Routledge. 
MCMILLAN, Margaret, RODRIK, Dani, VERDUZCO-GALLO, Íñigo (2014). “Globalization, structural change, and productivity growth, 
MEDEIROS,  Carlos  Aguiar  de  (2015).  Inserção Externa, Crescimento e Padrões de Consumo na Economia Brasileira.  Brasília:  IPEA, 
MEDEIROS, Marcelo, SOUZA, Pedro (2016). “A estabilidade da desigualdade no Brasil entre 2006 e 2012: resultados adicionais.” IPEA 
MEDEIROS, Marcelo, SOUZA, Pedro, CASTRO, Fábio (2015). “The stability of income inequality in Brazil, 2006-2012: an estimate using 
MIGUEZ, Thiago (2016). “Evolução da formação bruta de capital fixo na economia brasileira 2000-2013: uma análise multissetorial com 
MYRDAL Gunnar (1957). Economic Theory and Under-Developed Regions. London: University Paperbacks. 
NIKIFOROS,  Michalis,  FOLEY,  Duncan  (2012).  “Distribution  and  capacity  utilization:  conceptual  issues  and  empirical  evidence.” 
Metroeconomica, Vol. 63 (1), pp. 200-229. 
ORAIR, Rodrigo (2015a). “Desoneração em alta com rigidez da carga tributária: o que explica o paradoxo do decênio 2005-2014?” IPEA 
Texto para Discussão, n. 2117. 
(2015b).  “Notas  sobre  a  trajetória  do  investimento  público  no  Brasil.”  In:  SQUEFF,  Gabriel  (Ed.).  Dinâmica  Macrossetorial 
 
Brasileira. Brasília: IPEA, pp. 115-130. 
(2016). “Investimento público no Brasil: trajetória e relações com o regime fiscal.” IPEA Texto para Discussão, n. 2215. 
 
ORAIR,  Rodrigo,  SIQUEIRA,  Fernando,  GOBETTI,  Sergio  (2016).  “Política  fiscal  e  ciclo  econômico:  uma  análise  baseada  em 
multiplicadores do gasto público.” XXI Prêmio Tesouro Nacional. 
OREIRO,  José  Luis,  ARAÚJO,  Eliane  (2013).  “Exchange  rate  misalignment,  capital  accumulation  and  income  distribution:  theory  and 
evidence from the case of Brazil.” Panoeconomicus, Vol. 60 (3), pp. 381-396. 
PALLEY, Thomas (2013). “A neo-Kaleckian-Goodwin model of capitalist economic growth: monopoly power, managerial pay and labor 
market conflict.” Cambridge Journal of Economics, v. 38 (6), pp. 1355-1372.  
(2014). “The middle class in macroeconomics and growth theory: a three-class neo-Kaleckian-Goodwin model.” Cambridge Journal of 
Economics, Vol. 39 (1), pp. 221-243. 
PALMA, José Gabriel (2012). “Was Brazil’s recent growth acceleration the world’s most overrated boom?” Cambridge Working Papers in 
Economics, n. 1248. 
PAULA, Luiz Fernando de, MODENESI, André, PIRES, Manoel (2015). “The tale of the contagion of two crises and policy responses in 
Brazil: a case of (Keynesian) policy coordination?” Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, Vol. 37 (3), p. 408-435.  
PAULI, Rafael, NAKABASHI, Luciano, SAMPAIO, Armando (2012). “Mudança estrutural e mercado de trabalho no Brasil.” Revista de 
Economia Política, Vol. 32 (3), pp. 459-478. 
PECORA, Alexandre, MENEZES-FILHO, Naercio (2014). “O papel da oferta e da demanda por qualificação na evolução do diferencial de 
salários por nível educacional no Brasil.” Estudos Econômicos, Vol. 44 (2), pp. 205-240. 
PIRES, Manoel (2014). “Política fiscal e ciclos econômicos no Brasil.” Economia Aplicada, Vol. 18 (1), pp. 69-90. 
RAZMI, Arslan (2007). “The contractionary short-run effects of nominal devaluation in developing countries: some neglected nuances.” 
RODRIK, Dani (2016). “Premature deindustrialization.” Journal of Economic Growth, Vol. 21 (1), pp. 1-33. 
ROWTHORN, Robert (1981). “Demand, real wages and economic growth.” Thames Papers in Political Economy, pp. 1-39. 
RUGITSKY, Fernando (2013). “Degree of monopoly and class struggle: political aspects of Kalecki’s pricing and distribution theory.” 
Review of Keynesian Economics, Vol. 1 (4), pp. 447-464. 
(2015). “Do ensaio desenvolvimentista à austeridade: uma leitura kaleckiana.” In: BELLUZZO, Luiz Gonzaga, BASTOS, Pedro Paulo 
Z.  (Eds.).  Austeridade para quem? Balanço e perspectivas do governo Dilma Rousseff.  São  Paulo:  Carta  Maior  /  Friedrich  Ebert 
Stiftung, pp. 131-137. 
(2016). “Growth, distribution, and sectoral heterogeneity: reading the Kaleckians in Latin America.” EconomiA, Vol. 17 (3), pp. 265-
278. 

International Review of Applied Economics, Vol. 21 (5), pp. 577-602. 

!

16 

SANTOS, Cláudio Hamilton dos (2013). “Notas sobre as dinâmicas relacionadas do consumo das famílias, da formação bruta de capital fixo 
e das finanças públicas brasileiras no período 2004-2012.” In: CORRÊA, Vanessa (Ed.). Padrão de Acumulação e Desenvolvimento 
Brasileiro. São Paulo: Fundação Perseu Abramo, pp. 183-241. 
SANTOS, Cláudio Hamilton dos, CIEPLINSKI, André, PIMENTEL, Débora, BHERING, Gustavo (2015). “Por que a elasticidade-câmbio 
das importações é baixa no Brasil? Evidências a partir da desagregação das importações por categorias de uso.” IPEA Texto para 
Discussão, n. 2046. 
SANTOS,  Cláudio  Hamilton  dos,  AMITRANO,  Claudio,  PIRES,  Manoel,  CARVALHO,  Sandro  de,  FERREIRA,  Ennio,  ESTEVES, 
Fernando Henrique, YANNICK, Kolai, LIMA, Lucikelly (2016a). “A natureza da inflação de serviços no Brasil: 1999-2014.” IPEA 
Texto para Discussão, n. 2169. 
SANTOS,  Cláudio  Hamilton  dos,  MODENESI,  André,  SQUEFF,  Gabriel,  VASCONCELOS,  Lucas,  MORA,  Monica,  FERNANDES, 
Thais, MORAES, Thiago, SUMMA, Ricardo, BRAGA, Julia (2016b). “Revisitando a dinâmica trimestral do investimento no Brasil: 
1996-2012”. Revista de Economia Política, Vol. 36 (1), pp. 190-213. 
SCHETTINI,  Bernardo,  SANTOS,  Cláudio  Hamilton  dos,  AMITRANO,  Cláudio,  SQUEFF,  Gabriel,  RIBEIRO,  Márcio,  GOUVÊA, 
Raphael,  ORAIR,  Rodrigo,  MARTINEZ,  Thiago  (2012).  “Novas  evidências  empíricas  sobre  a  dinâmica  trimestral  do  consumo 
agregado das famílias brasileiras no período 1995-2009.” Economia e Sociedade, Vol. 21 (3), pp. 607-641. 
SCHETTINI, Bernardo, SQUEFF, Gabriel, GOUVÊA, Raphael (2012). “Estimativas da função exportações brasileiras agregadas com dados 
das Contas Nacionais Trimestrais, 1995-2009.” Economia Aplicada, Vol. 16 (1), pp. 167-196 
SERRANO, Franklin, SUMMA, Ricardo (2012). “Macroeconomic policy, growth and income distribution in the Brazilian Economy in the 
2000s.” Investigación Económica, Vol. 71 (282), p. 55-92. 
(2016). “Aggregate demand and the slowdown of Brazilian economic growth in 2011-2014.” Nova Economia, Vol. 25 (n. especial), 
pp. 803-833. 
SINGER, André (2015). “Cutucando onças com varas curtas: o ensaio desenvolvimentista no primeiro mandato de Dilma Rousseff (2011-
2014).” Novos Estudos, n. 102, pp. 43-71. 
SKOTT, Peter (2012). “Theoretical and empirical shortcomings of the Kaleckian investment function.” Metroeconomica, Vol. 63 (1), pp. 
109-138. 
(2016). “Weaknesses of ‘wage-led growth’.” UMass Amherst Economics Department Working Paper Series, 2016-08. 
SOARES, Sergei (2015). “A queda na heterogeneidade estrutural explica a queda da desigualdade! dos rendimentos do trabalho? Uma análise 
preliminar!.” In: INFANTE, Ricardo, MUSSI, Carlos, ODDO, Mauro (Eds.).  Por um Desenvolvimento Inclusivo: o caso do Brasil. 
Santiago: Cepal, pp. 285-300. 
SOARES, Sergei, SÁTYRO, Natália (2009). “O Programa Bolsa Família: desenho institucional, impactos e possibilidades futuras.” IPEA 
Texto para Discussão, n. 1424. 
SQUEFF, Gabriel (2012). “Desindustrialização: luzes e sombras no debate brasileiro.” IPEA Texto para Discussão, n. 1747. 
STEINDL, Josef (1952/1976). Maturity and Stagnation in American Capitalism. New York: Monthly Review Press. 
TAVARES, Maria da Conceição, SERRA, José (1971/1976). “Além da estagnação.” In: TAVARES, Maria da Conceição. Da Substituição 
TAYLOR, Lance (1983). Structuralist Macroeconomics: applicable models for the Third World. New York: Basic Books. 

de Importações ao Capitalismo Financeiro: ensaios sobre economia brasileira. 5th. Ed. Rio de Janeiro: Zahar, pp. 155-207. 
(1985). “A stagnationist model of economic growth.” Cambridge Journal of Economics, Vol. 9 (4), pp. 383-403. 
(1989). “Demand composition, income distribution, and growth.” In: FEIWEL, George (Ed.). Joan Robinson and Modern Economic 
Theory. London: Macmillan Press, pp. 623-637. 
(1990). “Real and money wages, output and inflation in the semi-industrialized world.” Economica, Vol. 57 (227), pp. 329-353. 
(2004).  Reconstructing  Macroeconomics:  structuralist  proposals  and  critiques  of  the  mainstream.  Cambridge,  Mass.:  Harvard 
University Press. 
(2010). Maynard’s Revenge: the collapse of free market macroeconomics. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
Vol. 90 (2), pp. 197-218. 
Nazionale del Lavoro Quarterly Review, Vol. 32 (128), pp. 45-53. 

TAYLOR, Lance, BACHA, Edmar (1976). “The unequalizing spiral: a first growth model for Belindia.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 
THIRLWALL, Anthony (1979). “The balance of payments constraint as an explanation of international growth rate differences.” Banca 
(2011). “Balance of payments constrained growth models: history and overview.” PSL Quarterly Review, Vol. 64 (259), pp. 307-351. 
TOLIPAN,  Ricardo,  TINELLI,  Arthur  Carlos  (Eds.)  (1975).  A  Controvérsia  sobre  Distribuição  de  Renda  e  Desenvolvimento.  Rio  de 
TOMIO, Bruno (2016). “Understanding the Brazilian demand regime: a Kaleckian approach.” Institute for International Political Economy 
WELLS, John (1977). “The diffusion of durables in Brazil and its implications for recent controversies concerning Brazilian development.” 
 

Janeiro: Zahar. 
Berlin Working Paper, n. 73/2016. 
Cambridge Journal of Economics, Vol. 1 (3), pp. 259-279. 

 

!

17 

APPENDIX 1: FIGURES 
 

Figure 2: Demand and Distribution in Brazil (2000-2014) [yearly]
0.580
0.570
0.560
0.550
0.540
0.530
0.520
0.510

2000

P
D
G

 
f
o
 
e
r
a
h
S
 
r
o
b
a
L

0.920

0.930

0.940

0.960

2004
Capacity Utilization

0.950

2012

Sources: IBGE [Labor Share] and Bonelli (2016) [Capacity Utilization] 
Figure 3: Demand and distribution in Brazil 

!!!!

!!
!∗’!
!∗!

!"!

!"! !!

(!)!

2008

0.970

0.980

!"′!
!"!
!"’!
!"! !!

!∗! !∗′!
(!)!

Figure 4: Inequality in Brazil, 1976-2014 [PNAD/IBGE, yearly]
0.660
0.640
0.620
0.600
0.580
0.560
0.540
0.520
0.500

6
7
9
1

7
7
9
1

8
7
9
1

9
7
9
1

1
8
9
1

2
8
9
1

3
8
9
1

4
8
9
1

5
8
9
1

6
8
9
1

7
8
9
1

8
8
9
1

9
8
9
1

0
9
9
1

2
9
9
1

3
9
9
1

5
9
9
1

6
9
9
1

7
9
9
1

8
9
9
1

9
9
9
1

1
0
0
2

2
0
0
2

3
0
0
2

4
0
0
2

5
0
0
2

6
0
0
2

7
0
0
2

8
0
0
2

9
0
0
2

1
1
0
2

2
1
0
2

3
1
0
2

4
1
0
2

35
30
25
20
15
10

Gini Coefﬁcient

Ratio of the income of the top 10 percent and the bottom 40 percent [right axis]

!

18 

 

 

 

Figure 5: Inequality in Brazil, 2002-2016 [PME/IBGE, monthly]

4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2

3
0

9
0

3
0

9
0

3
0

9
0

3
0

9
0

3
0

9
0

3
0

9
0

3
0

9
0

3
0

9
0

3
0

9
0

3
0

9
0

3
0

9
0

3
0

9
0

3
0

9
0

3
0

9
0

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

2
0
0
2

2
0
0
2

3
0
0
2

3
0
0
2

4
0
0
2

4
0
0
2

5
0
0
2

5
0
0
2

6
0
0
2

6
0
0
2

7
0
0
2

7
0
0
2

8
0
0
2

8
0
0
2

9
0
0
2

9
0
0
2

0
1
0
2

0
1
0
2

1
1
0
2

1
1
0
2

2
1
0
2

2
1
0
2

3
1
0
2

3
1
0
2

4
1
0
2

4
1
0
2

5
1
0
2

5
1
0
2

Average Wage / Minimum Wage

12 per. Mov. Avg. (Average Wage / Minimum Wage)

Figure 6: Household Borrowing in Brazil, 1988-2010
[BCB, monthly, percent of GDP]
20
15
10
5
0

8
8
-
n
u
J

9
8
-
b
e
F

9
8
-
t
c
O

0
9
-
n
u
J

1
9
-
b
e
F

1
9
-
t
c
O

2
9
-
n
u
J

3
9
-
b
e
F

3
9
-
t
c
O

4
9
-
n
u
J

5
9
-
b
e
F

5
9
-
t
c
O

6
9
-
n
u
J

7
9
-
b
e
F

7
9
-
t
c
O

8
9
-
n
u
J

9
9
-
b
e
F

9
9
-
t
c
O

0
0
-
n
u
J

1
0
-
b
e
F

1
0
-
t
c
O

2
0
-
n
u
J

3
0
-
b
e
F

3
0
-
t
c
O

4
0
-
n
u
J

5
0
-
b
e
F

5
0
-
t
c
O

6
0
-
n
u
J

7
0
-
b
e
F

7
0
-
t
c
O

8
0
-
n
u
J

9
0
-
b
e
F

9
0
-
t
c
O

Total Credit Operations to Individuals (% of GDP)

Total Credit Operations (% of GDP) [right axis]

Figure 7: Investment in Brazil, 1995-2015 [yearly, share of GDP]

25

20

15

1995199619971998199920002001200220032004200520062007200820092010 20112012201320142015

Gross Fixed Capital Formation (Public and Private)

Public Investment

 

 

 

50
40
30
20
10
0

6
5
4
3
2

Figure 8: Demand and distribution in Brazil 

Figure 9: Cumulative Structural Transformation 

!

!!!!
!∗’!!∗′’!
!∗!

 

!

!"′!
!"!
!"!!"′′!!"’!
!!

!"′′’!
!∗! !∗′!

!∗′′!

 

19 

!

 

Reversal 
2012-2015 

Boom 

2004-2011 

Commodity 

Debt Crises 
1980-1989 

Neoliberalism 
1990-2003 

 
 
APPENDIX 2: TABLES 
 
Table 1: Real GDP Growth Rates in Selected South American Countries [yearly 
average] 
  
  
Argentina 
Bolivia 
Brazil 
Ecuador 
Uruguay 
Venezuela 
  
Selected South American 
countries* 
World 
Sources: World Bank (Argentina), IBGE (Brazil) and IMF (other countries and world data) 
* Unweighted average of the rates of growth of the six countries above 
Table 2: Real Growth Rates of Investment [yearly average] 
  
  
All Governments (city, state 
and federal) [A] 
State Enterprises [B] 

-0.73 
-0.24 
3.02 
2.37 
1.24 
0.20 
  
0.98 
3.15 

2.71 
3.52 
1.88 
2.65 
1.48 
1.11 
  
2.23 
3.13 

6.21 
4.60 
4.43 
4.80 
5.94 
6.50 
  
5.41 
3.95 

Neoliberalism 
1990-2003 

Debt Crises 
1980-1989 

Commodity 

2004-2011 

Boom 

11.22 

11.24 

-6.21 

-0.07 

2.35 

1.43 

 

0.27 
5.56 
0.41 
3.54 
3.10 
-0.79 

  
2.02 
2.97 

-3.50 

-5.77 

Reversal 
2012-2015 

Public Investment [A+B] 

  

-3.00 

  

-0.48 

  

10.90 

  

-4.87 

  

-3.00 

  
  

7.97 

0.49 

0.42 

Boom 

Commodity 

Gross Fixed Capital Formation 
Source: Orair (2016) 
Table 3: Growth acceleration and reversal in Brazil (2004-2016) [rates of change] 
Fast Reversal 
2015 
2014 
-4.9  
-5.7  
-30.4  
-2.0  
-3.4  
-11.0  
 
-2.0  

-3.3  
Household Debt* 
-4.9  
Public Investment 
-5.6  
Terms of Trade 
  
 
Capacity Utilization 
-2.2  
Sources: BCB, Orair (2016), Funcex, Bonelli (2016) 
* Excluding mortgage loans, as a share of disposable income (data available only from 2005) 

2011 
4.1  
-12.6  
7.9  
 
-0.2  

2013 
-2.7  
7.0  
-2.1  
 
-1.3  

2012 
-0.1  
5.9  
-5.8  
 
-0.3  

10.4  
10.9  
4.3  
 
0.5  

Reversal 
2012-2015 

Slow Reversal 

2004-2011 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 

 
-5.0  

 

 

 

 

  

2016 
-9.1  
  
3.1  
  
-3.8  

 

!

 

!

20 

 

!

