CORRELATING MARX AND THE EARLY MARGINALISTS: A 

SPECULATIVE REALIST READING 

Emmanoel de Oliveira Boff 

Prof. Adjunto de História do Pensamento Econômico - UFF 

Abstract:  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

The article aims to show that, despite all the differences crystallized in the history of
 
 
economic thought (section 2), marginalists and Marx share a common philosophical
problematic in modern philosophy -- that of correlationism. In other words, they have
 
to solve the problem of how to correlate subject and object (section 3). If our analysis is
 
 
convincing, the differences we identified in section 2 can be explained by the fact that
they start from different poles of the correlationist circle: Marx begins with the
 
objective commodity and the marginalists with the subjective marginal utility (section
 
4).  

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Introduction:  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
There was a period at the end of the nineteenth century – roughly between 1870
and 1890 – when one can say that the economic thought both of Marx and the first
 
marginalists were at the margins of what could be considered the mainstream economic
 
thought of the time. Both in Britain and in Germany, Karl Marx and the first
 
 
marginalists – W. S. Jevons, Carl Menger and Léon Walras – did not partake either of
 
the millian or the german historical traditions in economic thought, which were the most
important of the time . It is not imprecise to say that it was only around 1890 that,
 
 
through Alfred Marshall’s influence, marginalist ideas came to slowly conquer the
mainstream of economics, leaving Marx and most of his followers at the margins of the
 
mainstream until now.  

   
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
The fact that both Marx and the first marginalists stood at the side of the
mainstream at that time does not make their ideas similar in any degree, at least in
 
 
appearance. Quite the contrary, in fact: since the publication of ​Das Kapital and the first
 
 
books by the marginalists there has been a huge amount of academic work devoted to
 
pointing the many ​differences ​between them. It is not uncommon to portray these
 
differences as fundamental at an ontological level, so as to prevent any major dialogue
 
between these traditions. However, Marx and the marginalists were contemporaries and
 
experienced – from different perspectives, of course – the same sort of political and
 
economic events that swept Western Europe in the second half of the nineteenth century
3
. In other words, they had both academic and practical interests in political economy
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 ​The french school of the engineers of the ​École de Mines​and the italian tradition of civil happiness are
 
 
also important, but are not part of our account, since their impact in modern economics is limited.  
2 T​he books are Walras’s ​Élements​; Jevons’s ​Theory of Political Economy and Menger’s ​Grundsätze​, all
 
 
 
 
published between 1871 and 1874. There were forerunners like Gossen and von Thünen in the 1850´s and
(and even the engineers of the ​École de Mines ​before), but they did not have the impact the
1860´s
 
 
writers of the 1870´s had.  
3 ​Marx, Walras, Jevons and Menger were all born in the first decades of the nineteenth century and died in
 
 
 
 
the last decades of the the twentieth century or the beginning of the twentieth (Menger is the younger of
 
them -- he was born in 1840 and died in 1921).. They all took part in public debates, wrote in newspapers
 
or worked for the government.  

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

and were well-informed about what was going on in Western Europe in terms of politics
 
 
and economics. Most of Marx’s mature intellectual life was lived in London, where the
Reading Room of the British Museum is testimony to the long hours he spent studying
 
British economic thought. Despite the fact that Marx himself never really engaged with
 
or addressed the marginalists, the discussions among these traditions appeared already
 
 
in the 1880s, with the jevonian criticism of ​Das Kapital by Phillip Wicksteed. In the
 
 
1890’s, the famous article by Böhm-Bawerk on the closing of Marx’s system continued
 
the discussion, followed by a reply by Hilferding at the beginning of the twentieth
 
century.  

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

The mapping of the many differences between the marginalists and the Marxian
 
tradition is a well-known enterprise, and cataloguing these dissimilarities would add
 
 
little to both Marxian and marginalist scholarship. However, the hypothesis that both
 
 
Marx and the marginalists might have some common basic ontological similarity seems
an almost unexplored venture. So, this article has as objective to show that there is
 
 
 
indeed a similar ​essential component in both Marx and the first marginalists . More
 
specifically, this article will put forth the proposition that the theories of value of both
 
Marx and the marginalists share one common essential characteristic: they are each
 
based on a specific correlation between humans as (economic) subjects and the
 
objective commodities these subjects produce, consume, buy and sell -- and which
 
comprise the objective economy​.  

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

4
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
In a way,
 

 
 
 
then,
 

The idea that the correlation between humans and world is ​the privileged site for
 
 
philosophical thinking in modern philosophy since Kant has been recently raised by
 
5
this paper tries to work out the
speculative realist philosophers.
 
 
conundrums faced by modern European philosophy since the first decades of the 17th
 
century as it privileges human subject (and his or her reason and senses) as the
 
6
privileged site for obtaining knowledge about an objective world lying outside them.
 
This article will
then deploy, as a methodological device, a modified concept of
 
 
correlationism ​(Meillassoux 2006) to investigate if it is possible to find a common
 
 
 
ground between Marx and the marginalists. What we intend to show is that Marx and
the early marginalists start from different sides of the ​correlationist circle​. 
 

 
To carry out the objective of this paper, we will break it into five sections,
including this introduction and a conclusion. The second section will briefly point out
 
the many stylized differences that ​appear in the works of Marx and the marginalists.
 
The third section will go from appearance to essence, explaining the conundrums of the
 
relation between subject and object in modernity and the correlationist circle identified
 
 
 
the second one,
by Quentin Meillassoux in 2006. The fourth section will revisit
rereading the differences in Marx and the marginalists in light of correlationism,
 
 
 
demonstrating how their different takes on the correlationist circle impact their apparent
 
differences. A fifth and last section concludes the paper.  

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4 ​In regard to Marx and Menger, however, some comparisons regarding the substantialist character of
 
 
 
their theories has been studied (Feijó 2013; Hong 2000).  
5 ​This philosophical movement began in 2007 in London and aimed at reviving realism in continental
 
 
thought, criticizing the idealism of post-Kantian philosophy. More on this on section 3 of the paper.  
 
6 Economists associated with post-modernism like McCloskey, Jack Amariglio and Don Lavoie all
 
criticized this distinction between subject and object before. However, none of them did it with an explicit
 
realist stance as speculative realists do.  

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2. What appears in Marx and the marginalists: differences 

 

 

 

 

 

 

As we said in the Introduction, since the 1880’s a debate between the Marxian
 
 
 
and marginalist traditions has appeared, showing that they apparently had different
 
takes on political and economic issues. As time went by in the twentieth century,
 
 
scholars could pinpoint with more clarity the differences between their works.  

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

From a historical and social point of view, one can say that the Marxian and the
 
marginalist lines of research crystallized certain differences that empirically appear in
 
their texts. That is, groups of researchers sift through the vast textual material associated
 
 
with both Marx and the marginalists so as to sort out and present clearer, more stylized
differences between these traditions for future investigations. Of course, this historical
 
and social process of crystallization of differences can be studied with many degrees of
 
 
precision: one can study a very specific difference between Marx’s or the marginalist’s
theories (e.g., the notion of capital that appears in chapter 4 of the first volume of ​Das
 
Kapital compared to the “true conception of capital” put forth by Böhm-Bawerk in the
 
chapter 4 of his ​Positive Theory of Capital​) or one can study their differences within a
 
 
broader framework. The latter approach is the more adequate for this paper – only
 
within a broader framework can we try to find a possible common essence which
 
tentatively explains the multiplicity of differences we find between these authors.
 
Therefore, we are not studying any ​specific idea or proposition of the theories of Marx
 
 
 
or the marginalists; rather, we are trying to present the differences between them in a
 
stylized way, as these differences became clearer in time with the development of these
 
traditions.  

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
The table below presents some of these differences in a schematic way. Needless
 
to say, there are many more differences that could be stressed, depending on the interest
of the researcher. Besides that, these differences can be further refined in any direction
 
 
necessary for a more detailed study of any aspect of the relationship between Marx and
the marginalists. Our point in making this table is to show in an organized the many
 
crystallized differences that appeared in time in these different traditions.   

   
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 1: Some schematic differences between Marx and the marginalist

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

traditions of economic thought 

 

Marx 

Marginalists 

 

 

 
as
 

essence

1. Theory of labor-value (abstract
 
 
producing
 
 
as
producing
 
exchange
 

labor
value/concrete
 
appearance
 
use-values
 
values). 

 
labor
 

and
 

 

 

 

 

2. Emphasis on production and
 
 
(despite
the
 
 
process
of
 
as
 
a moving,
 
 
 
totality,
social
 
exchange
and
 
 

reproduction
considering
 
production
 
ongoing
 
involving
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

1.Theory of marginal utility (even though
 
 
in different guises between the first
 
marginalists). Ideally it should be capable
of
explaining how exchange values
 
 
appear in markets satisfying the needs (or
 
 
desires) of economic agents.  

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

on

exchange
 
 

2.Emphasis
 
and
 
 
consumption (production and distribution
can be understood starting from the theory
 
 
of marginal utility), which begins from
 
individual behavior.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

distribution) 

3. Historical,
 

 

 

 

 

 

processual
 
 

 
time
based first, on the evolution of
 
 
different modes of production
 
 
(primitive, slavery, asian etc.),
and secondly, on “reproduction
 
schemes” of production and
 
circulation of goods.  

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4. Economic categories and laws
 
to
 
are historical and subject
 
changes
of
the mode
 
 
 
production where they are used.  

in
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

5. Socialized,
 
relational
 
individuals always belong to a
 
 
 
 
social class
(the conflict of
 
 
historically
 
formed
social
 
 
classes
stressed); markets
is
 
 
 
 
where
 
capitalist
relations of
exploitation take place are not
 
 
“natural”, but historical. 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7. The

 
and

two main

 
6. Capitalist mode of production
 
and
 
historical
 
(CMP)
 
is
 
 
conflitct
by
 
characterized
 
between
social
 
 
classes: workers and capitalists;
 
 
absence of explicit violence is
 
 
 
 
maintained by state coercion
 
(objectively)
alienation
 
 
(subjectively).  
​critique
 
 

 
political
economy should work in three
 
 
correlated ways: 1. as a critique
of
of
 
 
economics; 2. as an analysis of
 
the workings of tendency laws
 
 
in actual capitalist economies;
 
of
and
 
 
pratico-theoretical method of
 
analysis for workers to help
 
 
overcome capitalism.   

 
 
theories

current
 

 
3.
 

sort

a
 

as
 

of

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8. There are tendency laws that
 
characterize the CMP; CMP
 
may disappear in the future by
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

3.Newtonian, mechanical time (for Jevons
 
and Walras); subjective, processual time
 
(for Menger and the Austrian tradition);
 
 
cycles are also studied by Jevons in a
sunspot theory (Walras and Menger only
 
hint at the problem of cycles).  

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.Economic laws of pure economics are
 
general and universal – they do not
 
change with time (though in applied or
 
 
social economics they might).  

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

the individual
 

5.In pure economics,
 
is
 
seen as an atom of pleasure and pain
 
 
 
(Jevons); s/he is moved by “natural force”
of desire (Walras); s/he has needs that can
 
 
be ordered according to their marginal
utility (Menger); “natural” environment of
 
 
the economic agent in pure economics is
the market; when perfect, the market does
 
 
not allow for exploitation.  

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

relations
 
economies
 
 

in
 
class
6.Harmonious
 
 
 
contemporary market
are
 
 
 
attainable with the help of government
(note that the first marginalists usually do
 
not talk about “mode of production” and
 
emphasize the possibility of harmony
 
their
between
 
 
inevitable conflict – which, however, is
 
not ruled out).  

 
rather
 
 

 
than
 

classes

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

7.Political Economy as a science can and
 
should separate political and ethical
 
considerations from economic ones – it
 
should drop the “political” and be a
 
proper science called “economics” (see
 
 
Jevons, for example).  

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8.The supposed economic laws derived
 
from the principle of marginal utility are
 
not confined to capitalism; there is not
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

means of a revolution (unless
 
 
impeded
countervailing,
 
 
conservative forces). 

 
by

 

 

for

in
 
 
internal
 
tendencies
 
 
economic
existing market
systems;
 
economies can be reformed so as to mend
 
failures they might have.  

revolutions
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

We believe these differences are pretty much established among historians of
 
 
economic thought – so they should be by and large uncontroversial. As we said before,
the point in elaborating this non-exhaustive (even didactic) table is to summarize some
 
of the ​main differences between the Marxian and marginalist traditions. In section 4 we
 
 
will come back to this table to see how it changes once we identify Marx and the
 
 
marginalists as poles of different modes of correlating humans subjects and the
objective world. All differences are important, but we believe that numbers 1, 2 and 3
 
 
can be considered central, for they condition most of other differences one might find.
 
Let us elaborate a bit further these first three differences.  

 
   
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
   
 

 
 
 
 

Difference number one can be considered of great significance, at least as far as
 
we can gather from what appears in the texts of our authors: while Marx is affiliated
 
 
 
with a historical, Hegel-tinged version of the labor-theory of value initially developed
by English political economists, the marginalists insist on detaching themselves from
 
this theory, emphasizing the subjective character of value in the form of marginal
 
utility. One can say that, ​from their own point of view​, that is a fundamental, ontological
 
difference: Marx begins ​Das Kapital with the investigation of the commodity, which is,
 
 
in principle, a material ​object​. A consequent Marxian analysis should therefore start
 
 
with how these material objects – commodities -- are produced by means of labour, and
 
 
are then distributed and exchanged in a historically-specific mode of production.
Because their study begins with material ​objects​, researchers of Marxian extraction can
 
claim to engage in ​objective research. Because they claim that it is possible to identify,
 
 
in principle, the historical tendencies (and countertendencies) operating in different
 
modes of production (primitive, asiatic, bourgeois etc.), they can claim to be scientific.
 
In other words, they produce knowledge which is objective and whose changes can be
 
 
 
coherently explained throughout history, even if ​post festum​. 
 

 
The marginalists, on the other hand, mostly present in the first chapters of their
main books doctrines (​Lehre​) or theories of how human subjects experience objects and
 
 7
perform actions which satisfy needs, desires, or cause pleasures and pains in them.
Their strategy seems to be the reverse of that of Marx: whereas Marx begins his study
 
of the CMP with an object (the commodity) which is produced by a human subject (the
 
worker) by means of capital (which is also a commodity made by human labor), the
 
marginalists begin with the pleasure/pain/needs/desires of human subjects. These
 
pleasure/pain/needs/desires of human subjects can, in turn, be satisfied by means of
 
 
scarce objects, be they commodities or not. This is how the marginalists try to build a
 
science of economics which is truly general and universal: their strategy is to veer away
 
from whatever historical specificity different economies might have, since real
 

   
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

7 ​We should add that there are many differences between Jevons, Menger and Walras -- Jaffé’s 1976
 
 
paper shows them in more detail. However, because we are adopting a philosophical (and not simply
 
economic or even epistemological) perspective on them, these differences can be accomodated in our
 
 
argument.  

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

economies change in time. However, ​all humans at ​all times experience needs, desires,
 
pleasures and pains. This means that, according to the marginalists’ point of view, a
 
 
 
possible universal science of economics might be built – that is, as long as they can find
adequate proxies for assessing these subjective pains, pleasures, needs and/or desires in
 
 
an objective way.  

 
   

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

   
It is noteworthy that Marx and the marginalists are tackling the same problem –
 
the relation between economic objects and human subjects -- in an inverted way: the
 
 
former begins with commodities (which can be understood as objects in a proper
traditional philosophical – that is, general and universal -- way), while the latter begin
 
with feelings and the capacity of rational cost-benefit calculations which can be
 
universally attributed to human subjects. In the next section we will investigate in more
 
detail this interplay between the subjective and objective poles in the theories of Marx
 
 
and the marginalists. For now, it is enough to show how this initial difference makes
 
 
their approaches to the study of the economy different in appearance.  

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

In fact, if for Marx the origin of value in modern capitalist economies lies in
 
 
 
it makes sense to emphasize the production (and
abstract, general human labor,
 
 
 
reproduction) of commodities and social relations in the CMP. It is specifically in this
 
 
mode of production that general human labor gets incarnated in commodities – and it is
 
 
also in the “secret laboratory” of capitalist production that the exploitation of labor
 
power by capital occurs. It is in production that workers are subtracted not only from
 
their physical power, but also from their subjectivity – which fuels the alienated and
 
ever-growing production of commodities. Of course, because Marx thinks in terms of
 
 
this essential (in Marx’s conception) moment of
an interrelated, social
 
production must function together with the concrete exchange of labor power for wages
 
 
(and of wages for subsistence goods) in the market, so that capital can actually actualize
 
 
profits, reproducing the whole system. 

 
totality,
 

   
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
8
 

The marginalists, on the other hand, can be said to emphasize the study of
 
exchange and consumption. If people have different initial endowments of goods and
 
 
different tastes, value appears when people with different needs or desires and initial
endowments trade different goods and consume them. Production comes as a
 
 
consequence of a certain type of exchange, because it is only a matter of how people
allocate their time between labor (roughly understood as unpleasant activities) and
 
leisure. Production can be also seen as the activity of producing higher order goods –
 
 
means of production -- in Menger’s parlance. In either case, productive activity happens
 
 
 
as a matter of individual decisions between what is more or less necessary, pleasurable
 
or painful. From this individualistic point of view,
is possible to build whole
 
 
economies which deal not only with exchange but also production and distribution. This
 
 
 
means that we could also say that the marginalists can think of the economy as a
 
 
 
totality, albeit a different totality than the one envisaged by Marx. The marginalists’
emphasis does not fall upon historically constituted (and tense) class relations, but is
 
built upon a supposedly natural order that would emerge from individuals’ behavior
 
 
within a market economy.  

 
it
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

As we can see, Marx and the early marginalists seem to fall squarely into
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8 ​This is a simplification of the theory Jevons presents in chapter 5 of this book “Theory of Political
 
 
Economy”. This simplification does not change our argument.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

   
 

different sides of two main lines of research of modern economics – the production line
 
and the exchange line (Baranzini and Scazzieri 1986). This also leads them to very
 
different conceptions of time as well. Following O’Driscoll and Rizzo (1996, chapter 4),
 
a newtonian conception of time -- as that adopted by Jevons and Walras -- involves
 
 
homogeneity (which makes all moments in time identical), mathematical continuity
 
 
(which means that time is perfectly divisible) and causal inertness (all changes must be
set in advance in the initial conditions of the economic system). This is different from
 
the Mengerian conception of time: for him, “the idea of causality is (...) inseparable
 
 
from the idea of time. A process of change involves a beginning and a becoming, and
these are only conceivable as processes in time” (2007 [1871], p. 67). Mengerian time is
 
 
 
subjective, which means that
it cannot be seen as homogeneous, continuous and
 
 
 
causally inert. Each economic agent would possibly experience time in a different way,
 
 
being prone to biases, errors and ignorance in their ongoing evaluation of economic
 
 
variables. This means that, as time goes by, agents might change their course of action.  

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

   

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
Though Marx could in principle agree with Menger’s dynamic, processual
notion of time, he would most likely chastise him for not paying attention to the
 
objective nature of time in different modes of production. It is not a matter of denying
 
the existence of subjective time, but of understanding how it turns up when different
 
productive forces align with different relations of production in a political order
 
 
producing an ideology that, only then, constrains the experience of time in individuals.
Menger, for his turn, might agree that different conceptions of time emerge from
 
different social contexts, but would probably leave this sort of research for historians,
 
not for ​wirtschaftswissenschaftler -- economic scientists. Once again, one can see how
 
the subjective versus objective notions of time play out in Marx and at least one central
 
early marginalist.  

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

From this short analysis of the first items in our table, one can derive most of the
 
other differences between Marx and the early marginalists: starting from the changing
 
material conditions of production and reproduction of socioeconomic life, Marx would
 
 
 
say that a series of equally changing juridical, economic and political
institutions and
 
concepts would emerge in order to organize and control social relations. In the
 
 
particular case of capitalism, as its forces of production develop, they clash both with
 
 
 
the type of old feudal social relations that sustained them and with the whole
assemblage of political,
juridical and supposedly scientific economic concepts and
 
 
institutions that supported old social relations.  

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

There is no other role for the true social scientist than to identify the underlying
 
new historical tendential forces that drive the overcoming of the old social relations ​and
 
 
to criticize the inadequate juridical, political and economic categories which
 
ideologically curb the development of these new forces of production. At the same time,
 
 
the social scientist should provide workers with theoretical-practical methods of
analysis so as to take them out of their subjectively alienated situation and help them get
 
through to a new, freer and less alienated society. As we can see, beginning from an
 
objective analysis of a commodity-churning society, one is led to understand the
 
alienated subjectivity which is part and parcel with it.  

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The marginalists begin their explanation of economic phenomena the other way
 
 
around: starting from some basic characteristics of human subjectivity -- pleasures,
 
pains, desires -- one is led to explain how a market order is possible (at least ideally, in
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
   
 

pure economics). In a simplified way, beginning from marginal utilities, one should be
 
able to explain how relative prices are formed first in an ideal, perfect market. What a
 
 
 
marxian could see as a distorted (or downright false) abstraction, is just the beginning of
analysis for the early marginalists: they would of course recognize that individuals are
 
socially embedded; their point is just that this is not what the ​science of economics
 
should study. So, their long journey to explain how social, political and juridical forces
 
 
shape individual behavior would forcefully go through other social sciences (sciences of
 
history, for Menger; the science of the evolution of social relations, for Jevons; applied
 
and social economics for Walras).  

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

However, their positions is that, first, we must begin with general and universal
 
human characteristics, so we could find categories of analysis which would also
 
 
 
encompass general and universal phenomena. It is this search for universality which the
marginalists hoped would give them the label of proper scientists. Only after that, we
 
could slowly show how the “coarse clay of the bulk humankind” (as Adam Smith would
 
have it) is modified and crystallized in different historical modes of production -- in
 
particular, in capitalism. From the perspective we are adopting here, this means that,
 
from a given set of human subjective characteristics one could first understand how an
 
ideal market should work. In order to reach objective markets, however, one should pay
 
 
attention to how these subjective characteristics are molded historically in different
social settings. This might give us the way to understand how real markets operate,
 
influenced by all sorts of social institutions and using different economic, political and
 
juridical categories when analyzed from a practical point of view.  

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

One tradition of economic thought starts with the human subject and then tries to
 
 
the other inverts the order of
 

 
reach the phenomena of the objective economy;
 
investigation. What does this mean from the point of view of modern philosophy?  

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3. Correlationism and Speculative Realism - a brief Introduction 

 

 

 

 

 

If so far our argument sounds strange -- we purported to point out some basic
 
 
essential characteristics common to Marx and the early marginalists and presented
 
nothing but apparently stark oppositions -- it is because we did not yet detail the
 
 
philosophical and methodological position we are adopting.  

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
What we now call the speculative realist “movement” -- it is imprecise to call it
 
a movement since the group disbanded in the following years after only two meetings --
 
 
 
began in April, 2007, in a conference at Goldsmiths College, in London. A group of
 
 
four young philosophers -- Graham Harman (then at the American University of Cairo,
in Egypt), Ray Brassier (University of Lebanon), Iain Hamilton Grant (University of
 
West England, in Bristol) and Quentin Meillassoux (École Nationale Supérieure, in
 
 
Paris) got together in order to discuss the deadlocks of post-kantian philosophy. Despite
 
their many differences and the fact that each author can be associated with different
lines of philosophical inquiry (Object-oriented philosophy, speculative materialism,
 
neovitalism etc.), they partake of some common premises.  

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

First,
 

they share a cohort of
 
 

 
influences which identify problems in the
foundation of modern metaphysics and try to propose different perspectives and
 
 
 
solutions to it: Deleuze, Whitehead, Heidegger and Latour are among their favorites.
Second, and more precisely, they all opened fire on two characteristics of modern
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

continental philosophy: its idealism and the kantian ​interdit on our possibility of getting
 
 
to objectively know things-in-themselves (as isolated from human reason and senses).
 
 
For our purposes, it is the second characteristic that is interesting -- we will try to show
that both Marx and the marginalists take part,
in the modern
 
 
predicament involving the limitation of the human knowledge about the real world. 

 
 
in different ways,
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Up until now we have been using the terms “subject” and “object” quite loosely.
 
This section is meant to clarify the philosophical meaning of these terms and try to
 
apply them to our object of study.  

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3.1 Subject and Object in Modern Philosophy 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
One can say that modern philosophy commences at the beginning of 17th
century with a general problem that stems from the decadence of scholasticism and the
 
 
rise of the modern and mathematical science of Galileo and Kepler. The question of the
 
fundament of a world which is not seen as created by God but as having internal, natural
 
laws of motion which could be mathematically described is of utmost importance. This
 
 
importance is inseparable of the social legitimacy of the new sciences as more than just
a new technique or fiction capable of explaining natural phenomena in a different --
 
 
perhaps more efficient -- but not more fundamental way than traditional scholastic
 
philosophy (Stengers 2000).  

   
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

In Western Europe, with God coming out of the picture, dogmatic rationalists
 
 
and empiricists tried to ground this new science in human reason and senses. As is well
known, the debate between the extent to which our knowledge is dependent on our
 
senses or on innate ideas was all the rage during the 17th and 18th centuries. The
 
cartesian ​ego cogito might be the ​fundamentum inconcussum on which the evidence of
 
 
 
the senses might be analysed, synthesized and ordered in a machine-like system, but at
 
the cost of depending on a God which guarantees that no evil genius is deceiving us into
 
believing in a machine-like world that does not in fact exist. On the other side of the
 
English Channel, the situation was not any better: millenar categories of aristotelian
 
tradition had their meaning altered or even discarded: this is the case of the category of
 
“matter” for Bishop Berkeley (who adopted a radical idealism, defending the idea that
 
being is being perceived by the senses), of “cause” for Hume (as an internal sense that
 
identifies constant conjunction of events) and of “substance” with Locke (as a general
 
substratum for qualities of objects).  

 
 
 

 
 
 

   

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

To cut a long story short, the modern revolution in the sciences and philosophy
 
 
risked either leading us into solipsism (this is the case of Descartes or Berkeley) or to
 
reducing the world to what
logic and
 
 
mathematics (Hume or Locke).  

is empirically observable by the senses,
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 

Though not definitely solved, this situation found a partial solution neither in the
 
Continent nor in the British Islands, but in East Prussia: Immanuel Kant’s ​Critique of
 
 
Pure Reason​(1787 [1781]) aimed to show that, even though the human mind could not
 
 
know the world in itself, God, the soul or a transcendent realm, it could legitimately lay
claim to knowing the world ​as composed of objective beings​. By ​objectivity​, we follow
 
Carneiro Leão (2002) in describing it as the result of a self-correcting research
 
procedure which unveils beings of and in the world as universal, functional and
 
systematic -- in other words, as objective. Note that it is not necessary (though it be
 

 
   
 
 

   
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

desirable) to mathematize entities. What is central is to understand entities as functional
 
parts of a system. Of course, the operation of this system must be universalizable (that
 
is, independent of contexts) in order to be objective.  

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
   

 
 
the cosmological
 
 
 

Some examples may help clarify what we mean in the aforementioned
 
 
paragraph:
investigations which were carried out since the 16th
 
century could show just that: we have planets (parts) which form a machine-like system
(a solar system, for example) and whose movements could be universally understood by
 
means of mathematical equations. The contractualist tradition of law also explicitly
 
began to see individuals (or “parts”) no longer as belonging to a religious community​,
 
but as moved by passions and who could form a commonwealth (or a system) if well
 
governed. The idea of the scientific laboratory (and of controlled spaces with scientists
 
who try to find universal characteristics of minerals, plants, animals) takes their modern
 
 
shape in the 17th and 18th centuries across Western Europe. The idea that the economy
could also be studied as a system formed of functional parts (such as social classes,
 
firms, workers, governments etc.) which have universal characteristics would follow
 
suit from the revolution in the sciences of the early 17th century .  9

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

The main point for Kant, however, is not about the results of modern science
 
(which he really thinks are sound): how is it possible that we arrive at all this
 
 
 
undoubtedly objective knowledge? What are the conditions that limit and thwart the
human understanding in search for this knowledge? In other words, how is it possible
 
to correctly categorize the manifold of sense data that arrive at our senses (that is, to
 
 
 
filter the external data received so as to actually ​construct objective, true knowledge and
 
 
not just imaginative fictions)? In order to found and complement the advance of the
objective discoveries of modern sciences, Kant
the
 
 
transcendental. ​With a view to guaranteeing that we do not fall prey to any radical
 
 
idealism of the Berkeleyan type or the idea that all we passively experience are “bundles
 
of sensations” (as in the humean tradition), Kant is keen on showing the operations of
 
 
 
the twelve categories of pure understanding which lead us to the possibility of an
 
objective experience of the world. The transcendental is exactly this field within which
 
human reason can legitimately judge, regulate and unify the concepts and propositions
 
created by the active labor of our understanding.  

 
invented the concept of
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
Because it is going to be important to the argument in the next section, it is
important to stress that the transcendental subject (limited only by the proper pure
 
functioning of reason and the categories of understanding) is ​not the empirical subject.
 
 
The latter is full of passions, social and economic influences that would later be studied
 
by empirical psychology and sociology (and were formerly studied by moral and
political philosophy). This observation is relevant because the form that correlationism
 
 
will assume in Marx and the early marginalists will be related to the possibility of
access human reason has to the objective facts of the world. This is why post-Kantian
 
philosophy is sometimes called ​philosophy of access​. As we will presently see,
 
sociology and empirical psychology (and later in the 20th century neurobiology) will
 
investigate the hurdles closing the access our reason has to the objective facts of the
 
world. 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Meillassoux’s point, however,

 

 

 

is that
 

 

 

the ​correlation Kant builds between
 

 

 

 

9 ​Montchrestian ​Traicté de Economie Politique​ was first published in 1615.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

objective facts of the world and the operation of reason in a transcendental subject
 
makes every objective truth we find in the world a truth ​for our human reason​. It is
 
 
 
important to stress this point and separate Kant from a Berkeleyan idealism (which he
 
 
explicitly condemns): he definitely believes there is a world in itself; his point is that the
 
things we effectively (i.e, objectively) know in this world do not exhaust it: only if we
 
 
were not the limited creatures we are could we attain the knowledge of the world as it is
 
 
in itself.  

   
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

This is then the correlationist circle we hinted at in the Introduction of the paper:
 
 
it must already be given to a subject. As
in order to arrive at an objective X,
 
 
 
 
Meillassoux (2008) puts it: “No X without givenness of X, and no theory about X
without a positing of X. (...) ‘X is’ means: ‘X is the correlate of thinking’ in a Cartesian
 
 
sense.” 

 
   

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Although Meillassoux did not specify the forms correlationism could assume in
 
philosophical discourse, we follow Bryant (2015) in believing that “correlationism
 
 
probably comes in a variety of forms, and is therefore not restricted to theories focussed
on the relation between mind and being”. We also assume this can be true for both Marx
 
and the early marginalists.  

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4. Correlationism in Marx and the early marginalists 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
As modern thinkers, both Marx and the early marginalists have a craving for
reaching scientific (i.e, objective) knowledge of the modern economy and society. If the
 
 
hypothesis raised in this paper makes sense, they are both part of the same intellectual
 
milieu which tried to get rid of the problems associated with correlationism. This makes
 
sense, because for all authors studied here, economics was just part of their interests.
 
Philosophical, epistemological and methodological subjects played an important part in
 
all their researches. If we confine ourselves to a notion of economics as application of
 
constrained optimization methods or as “the science of choice”, we are sure to miss the
 
point of the role of economics in ​all our authors’ systems of thought. Despite the
 
marginalists’ emphasis on separating economic from other social sciences, it should not
 
follow from this fact that they thought that pure economics was the only important
 
enterprise to pursue. In other words, one should always keep in mind that the economic
 
theories developed by our authors are all tinted with more philosophical overtones.  

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Let’s then try to find some evidence that Marx and the marginalists are both
 

 
caught in the correlationist circle identified in Table 1 in section 2.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.1 Marx: from objective commodities to alienated subjects 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

The first and arguably most important difference is between the theories of value
 
of Marx and the early marginalists. Detaching himself from his English predecessors,
 
 
Marx’s theory of labor can be interpreted as a socio-historical, Hegelian variation of
 
previous theories. Value would be a historical form posited in capitalism and which
 
would be overthrown as the CMP is overcome (Prado 2013). Because it begins with the
 
existence of ​produced commodities​, we can understand the emphasis given by Marx to
 
 
production (and not exchange) in his analysis. Our point here, however, is to show that,
 
for Marx, “there is no value without givenness of value; no theory of value without
 
positing value”. Of course, we will have to adopt here a modified version of
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

correlationism, since Marx is definitely not interested in positing a Cartesian or Kantian
 
subject as the ground of his theory of value.  

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

If ​Das Kapital begins with the atom of value of capitalist societies -- the
 
 
 
commodity and exchange value -- this should be our given, our posited object of study.
 
 
It will be easy to show that, for Marx,
this object “pre-sup-poses” (that is, that
 
 
 
 
previously posits under) a given subject -- not, as we just said, a Cartesian or Kantian
 
one -- but a subject who brings this object to existence and, at the same time, is socially
 
 
limited in objectively knowing this process of production. This should show the
 
correlationist circle operating in Marx. If Marx really overcomes the philosophy of his
time, it is mainly by the original use he makes of concepts (praxis, the social, fetishism,
 
ideology) with the intention to close the circle. Let’s detail how.  

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

   

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

First, Marx remarks, right at the beginning of ​Das Kapital​, that it is general
 
human labor -- “productive expense of brain, muscles, nerves, human hands” -- which
 
 
lies behind the concrete labor of a tailor or a weaver. It is by means of this concrete
 
work that value gets crystallized in commodities such as a suit or a piece of fabric. If it
 
 
 
were just a matter of
incorporating a given quantity of joules of energy into
commodities, then the problem of relating (abstract) value to exchange value could be
 
 
solved, in principle: there should be a matrix of transformation of joules of (subjective
 
human) energy spent in the production of commodities into measurable (objective)
 
prices (= exchange values). However, the problem is not that simple for three reasons:
 
in the first place, we are sure to find difficulties measuring the energy expended by
 
human brain and nerves. Secondly, we have known since at least Smith, that it is the
 
 
capacity to cooperate, dividing the labor, which creates wealth. That is, the quantity and
efficiency of energy expenditure in joules is invariably related to the extent to which
 
 
people are able to cooperate. These first two reasons make it difficult for the human
 
the production of
mind to capture the objectivity of
 
commodities in capitalist societies, since there is no straightforward proxy to objectivize
 
intellectual labor and social cooperation. Finally, the division of labor is positively
 
related to the extent to which machines are used in production (something Marx tried to
 
 
cope with by means of the concept of organic composition of capital). The correlationist
 
circle between objective commodity production and the subjective conditions that allow
 
it is not closed.  

 
 
the actual conditions of
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

   

 
 
 

   
 

Points 3 (concept of time), 4 (categories of political economy) and 5 (concept of
 
individual) of our Table 1 can be understood as necessary ingredients to create a
 
 
scientific science of society -- as it was Marx’s and Engels’ explicit intention. At a more
 
fundamental level notwithstanding, these points also help to bridge the gap between the
posited abstract human labor and the objective commodities with their exchange values.
 
The historical time of modes of production can show us, first, how changes in the mode
 
 
of production of ancient societies took us from “proto-value” to abstract labor as the
source of “value” in capitalist societies (Prado 2013). Once we have reached the
 
capitalist stage, we should also understand how the categories of political economy
 
(capital, labor, interest, profit, wages etc.) emerged from the conjunction of forces and
 
 
relations of the CMP (this is point 4 in our Table 1). At the same time, once we are in
 
capitalism, we have to understand how v​alue disguised as capital becomes a universal
 
 
mediator between the production of goods capable of maintaining and reproducing
human societies and the satisfaction of human needs​. Note how capital can mediate
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

subjective needs and objective production of commodities, and how this can only be
 
 
understood in a historically situated mode of production. The analysis of the production
of capital (Book I) and its actualization and reproduction by the operations of buying
 
and selling in markets is then studied (Book II).  

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
As a cooperative, social individual who produces value both with his or her
the process by which workers can properly comprehend the
hands and brains,
 
functioning of the system in which they are the central parts is blocked. As we saw in
 
 
 
the previous paragraph, it is blocked both by the fact that mid-to-late 19th century
categories of political economy emphasize the individual (and not his or her social
 
relations) and there is no simple way to objectivize intellectual and physical social
 
labor. As a consequence, the return from the objectivity of commodity to the conscience
 
 
of the worker is stymied by the ideological categories of the supposed “science” of
 
political economy. As a consequence, the worker is not only alienated from the relations
she or he effectively has with others, but also with the products he or she turns out and,
 
finally, with him or her own self.  

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

   

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
   
 
 

Points 6 (class conflict), 7 (social science as critique) and 8 (tendency laws and
 
 
revolution) can be understood as deadlocks that obstruct workers’
 
transparent
 
comprehension of their objective condition as producers of commodities. Class conflict
 
 
 
exists, as is well known, because the existence of capital as a universal mediator implies
that some labor power is actually stolen in the process between the production of
 
use-values and their consumption. In between production and consumption capitalism
 
uses the market mechanism to transform values into exchange-values so as to create a
 
 
surplus, and it is in this hidden process that exploitation occurs. ​The objective of a
 
 
critique of political economy should then be to clarify to the worker’s conscience the
 
objective social nature of the process of capitalist production, so that they could fight it
 
 
 
and do away with capital as a mediator between what workers produce and what they
consume.​The tendency laws that govern the CMP point to a revolution in the future,
 
and this should only happen when workers’ consciences can transparently see the
 
objective exploitation they are a victim of. When this time arrives, no counter forces
 
should be able to stop the revolutionary process.  

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.2 The marginalists: from subjective utility to objective relative prices  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
If the problem Marx faces is returning from the objective production of
commodities to the conscience of an alienated subject, the problem the marginalists face
 
is exactly to opposite: how, positing the particularities of the human mind as foundation,
 
 
we could arrive at objective relative prices and quantities of goods produced and
exchanged. No value of good X without the givenness of marginal utility of X, and no
 
theory of the value of good X without positing X’s marginal utility. For X to have
 
 
it must correlate to a given marginal utility. Again, in order to solve their
value,
 
 
 
 
problems, the marginalists will use a set of concepts wholly different from those of
Marx. One of their intentions, however, can be said to be the same: to close the
 
correlationist circle, which means to explain how (subjective) mind and (objective)
 
economic world co-constitute each other.  

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

In order to understand the marginalists’ position, it is important not to describe it
 
 
 
in a caricatural way. Of course, Jevons and Walras would find it useful if we could just
measure actual marginal utilities in people’s minds and verify that the ratio of marginal
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

utilities between any two goods is equivalent to their relative prices or quantities. The
 
 
same can be said of Marx: if we could just objectively measure the abstract labor that
 
goes into the production of each commodity. One problem that pestered the first
marginalists (with the exception of Menger) is to bridge the gap between the objective
 
prices and quantities they could see in markets and the possibility of evaluating the
 
 
corresponding mental states of economic agents. Their interest in consumption and
 
exchange also comes from the fact that they begin their investigation with the impact
external goods (which are not necessarily commodities) have on people’s mental states.
 
Within this perspective, to exchange means to get closer to some good and distant
 
 
oneself from another good, so as to alter one’s state of mind. To produce something can
be understood as a special exchange between the good “time” and the utility one can
 
acquire from productively spending this time.  

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
If, as we say in point 3 of our Table, Jevons and Walras chose a notion of
mechanical time (and models associated with mid-19th century physics) it is because
 
 
 
they wanted to simplify their approach first, so that they could have a clear grasp of
 
(what they imagined to be) the economic problem. If we only take heed of the pure
 
aspect of their theories,
their ambitions to link unobservable marginal utilities to
 
 
observable prices may sound ridiculous.  

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
Yet, as we pointed out in Table 1, their pure theories are only part of their
researches, and their ambitions went well beyond pure economics and into philosophy
 
of science and epistemology: Jolink (1996) has pointed out how Walras’s general
 
 
equilibrium theory should be understood as scientific ​and normative scheme , all
 
 
within an evolutionist, not mechanical framework; Jevons, as we put it in section 2,
 
found it necessary to study the evolution of social relations in relation to concrete
 
economic factors (which also points to a non-mechanical notion of time); and Menger’s
 
famous ​Streit with Schmoller did not stop him from considering the study of economic
 
 
history beside pure economics in his 1883 book on the methodology of the social
 
sciences. These are the reasons we suggest
the marginalists’ project in pure
 
 
 
economics consisted first in finding universal (or at least prevalent) characteristics of
 
 
human subjectivity which could be understood by means of universal categories. Only
 
then could we try to understand how we, in practice, arrive at concrete price relations.  

 
that
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

   

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

10

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

This is the reason for the apparent contradiction between defining the agent in
 
pure economics as an atom of pleasure and pain (this is point 5 in Table 1) and, at the
 
 11
same time, recognize that individuals have class interests, as Jevons does, for example .
 
Yet, this apparent paradox is just a matter of different subfields of economics: one more
 
general (and supposedly scientific field) tell us the final (or equilibrium) state resulting
from a set of external goods to be allocated among individuals who are like “pleasure
 
 
machines”. The other (more applied field) would deal with how concrete institutions
(like firms or governments) affect the supply and demand of specific external objects
 
that could give utility to individuals . It could also study the influence of social
 

   
 

 
 
 
 

 
12

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

10 This is known as the “Walras’s Paradox” (Walker 1984).  
11 ​In his “State in Relation to Labor” (1866). The same can be said of Walras’s attempt to bridge
 
 
 
 
 
“individualism” and “collectivism”, and Menger’s qualification of the “dogma of self-interest” and the
 
necessity of study other motivations in human behavior in 1883.  
12 For example, Jevons studied the effect of nationalization of railways in Russia and Great Britain, as
 
 
 
well as the benefits of the nationalization of postal services; Walras studied the effects of the
 
nationalization of all land as a matter of distributive justice. It must be noted that Walras’s notion of
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

relations on the amount of utility people get in their exchanges -- this was the case of
 
 
Marshall and his disciple Pigou, for example. As one can see, the marginalists’ analyses
do not immediately link subjective marginal utilities to objective prices or quantities
 
exchanged -- it is necessary a long detour into more applied areas in order to find how,
 
exactly, marginal utilities could relate to prices and quantities in real markets. The
 
 
marginalists’ correlationist circle can only be closed when empirical psychology and
sociology are factored into the problem (as we said in section 3): then we will actually
 
 
know how concrete external objects produce pleasure or pain on people’s minds.  

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

The problem Marx sees as one of consciousness and transparency of social
 
 
relations can be translated as one of how the individual’s psychology and social
 
relations can alter his level of utility for the marginalists. For Marx (as for Hegel), the
 
 
passage of historical time could expand the limits of human consciousness so as to
 
 
possibly clear away ideological and fetishistic symptoms of our capitalist society. The
importance of ​historical time is central in Marx and Hegel in that it is through time that
 
they imagine the correlationist circle between subject and object could be closed. For
 
 
the marginalists, on the other hand, the transparency to be attained is different: one finds
oneself between the maximum utility one can get given scarce resources and limitations
 
of psychological and institutional (one may say sociological) factors. One can thus say
 
that Kant’s problem of human finitude finds different (but analogous) guises in Marx
 
and the early marginalists.  

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

Points 6 (harmonious class relations and government), 7 (separation of
 
 
economics from politics and ethics) and 8 (universality of economic laws and
 
reformism) follow from what we just said in the previous paragraph. Having the pure
 
transparency and equality of
competitive market as a benchmark -- because total
 
conditions of agents are presupposed by it -- marginalists could, in principle, explore the
 
role of government and the institutional setting in increasing or decreasing the utility of
 
 
different segments of society. So, contrary to what one is used to hearing,
the
 
 
marginalists were not pure ​laissez-faire proponents, but were pathbreakers in the study
 
 
 
 
of how the government could tinker with markets so as to improve their efficiency
is
(Medema 2009). Even if social unrest
 
 
 
is then possible to reform markets and
controllable by government discretion. It
 
 
institutions in order to get closer to the ideal of the maximum utility provided by what
 
 
we now call the perfectly competitive market.  

 
 
inevitable in a class society,
 

 
is not
 
 

it
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
   

   
 

 
This marks another difference with the tradition initiated by Marx: whereas it is
 
possible for a marginalist to be a socialist (and Walras identified himself as a “scientific
 
 
 
 
they were reformers rather than revolutionaries. This practical political
socialist”),
 
 
debate may seem out of touch with the whole philosophical argument we are
 
 
developing. It is not so, though: because Marx believes he identified the tendency laws
 
of capitalism, he can identify the ideological parts of economic theories and the
 
obstacles that capital throws in the path towards socialism. One of these obstacles is
 
exactly the idea that the State should mediate class conflicts and pacify social tensions.
 
 
As Araújo (2014) stresses, the way to communism should also abolish the State. It is
possible to say that because Marx can envisage a society of free, self-organizing and
 
 
conscious men living together without the mediation of capital.  

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

justice is not the same as the old welfare economics of England.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

The marginalists, for their turn, have their own ideal of a free, self-organizing
 
and sensuous men living together in the ideal of pure competitive market. Because they
 
have no specific concept of “emancipated man”, they ask themselves not how conscious
 
men could live transparently together. They instead try to contrive institutions that allow
 
people to increase their utilities so as to get closer to the ideal of the perfect market. In
 
 
Marx’s correlationist circle the passage of time bridges the gap between the conscious
subject and his or her material conditions of living, eliminating capital and, with it,
 
ideology, alienation and the State. In the marginalists’ correlationist circle the passage
 
 
of time would bridge the gap between the ideal market and the maximization of
 
people’s utility, eliminating institutions which block the functioning of the market.
Looking from this perspective, both Marx and the marginalists could be said to share
 
also a linear conception of time: it is expected that, with the passage of time and the
 
evolution of mankind, subject and object could be transparent to each other.   

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5. Concluding Remarks  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

We tried to show that, despite all the differences crystallized in the history of
 
 
economic thought (section 2), marginalists and Marx share a common philosophical
problematic in modern philosophy -- that of correlationism. In other words, they have
 
 
to solve the problem of how to correlate subject and object (section 3). If our analysis is
 
convincing, the differences we identified in section 2 can be explained by the fact that
they start from different poles of the correlationist circle: Marx begins with the
 
objective commodity and the marginalists with the subjective marginal utility (section
 
 
4). The fact that they use different concepts and have different policy prescriptions can
be in part attributed to the way they travel the correlationist circle: if you begin with the
 
subjective side, you will have to mobilize concepts and procedures that allow you to
 
correlate marginal utilities with relative prices -- F. Y. Edgeworth’s attempt to build an
 
 
hedonometer must be seen within this attempt. 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 

On the other hand, if you start with the objective commodity in the capitalist
 
system, you have to explain how ideological factors and alienation bar the conscious
 
 
 
apprehension of the workings of this system. For both Marx and marginalists we can
say that sociological and psychological factors stand in the way of the access of the
 
human mind to the objective phenomena of the economic world -- be they relative
 
prices or commodity production.  

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

The reader may guess that a whole slew of debates in the history of economic
 
 
 
thought might be fruitfully analyzed from the perspective proposed herein: for example,
Marx’s problem of transformation can be seen as the counterpart of the marginalists
 
 
attempt to correlate marginal utilities and prices, the difference being that marxists try
 
 
to correlate abstract human labor crystallized in commodities with their objective prices.
 
Going beyond the marginalists, one can also point to the problem of uncertainty as
 
 
presenting exactly the difficulty in closing the correlationist circle: for example, when
Robert Lucas equates the subjective probabilities in the heads of agents with objective
 
 
probabilities of events in the world in a world of risk, he is trying, in our terminology, to
close the correlationist circle between subject and object. However, he can only do that
 
 
to the extent that this risk is not knightian uncertainty (McCann 2003). Here is another
possibility to study a debate in the history of economic thought from a speculative
 
realist perspective.  

 
   
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

the

 
   
 

if our
 
 

approach is
 

However,
 
 

reader may wonder
 
 

just another
 
all-encompassing interpretation of the relation between Marx and the marginalists. Are
 
 
we, in other words, just proposing a more friendly interpretation of the relation between
 
Marx and the early marginalists? Well,
in times of post-truth politics, growing
 
 
intolerance and crippled dialogues, we found it useful
 
to try to show, from a
 
 
philosophical perspective, that even very different schools of economic thought partake
 
 
 
 
 
of the same modern philosophical problematic. It
is not a question of finding a
 
middle-ground between Marx and the marginalists (they are right here and he’s wrong
 
 
 
there and vice-versa), but of calling attention to the very foundation of modern thought
 
 
and how it impacts economic thought. According to our argument, if we look at the
dilemmas of the relation between subject and object in modern thought, we can perhaps
 
see the differences in schools of economic thought -- which were born as part of modern
 
 
intellectual culture --  in a more  productive and open way.  

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6. References: 
ARAÚJO, P. H. F. ​Marx, Capital, Estado e Política: Notas​. Anais do 42o Encontro da
 
 
 
ANPEC. Natal- RN, 2014.  
BARANZINI, M. and SCAZZIERI, R. ​Foundations of Economics. New York: Basil
 
Blackwell, 1986.  
BRYANT, L. ​Correlationism​. In: ENNIS, P. J. and GRATTON, P. ​The Meillassoux
 
Dictionary.​ Edinburgh: Edinbrugh University Press, 2014.  
FEIJÓ, R. L. C. ​Teorias Essencialistas e o Problema da Transformação de Valor em
 
 
Preços: os casos de Marx e Menger.​ Revista Economia, 14 (1), pp. 473-95, 2013.  
HONG, H. ​Marx and Menger on Value: As many similarities as differences.​ Cambridge 
Journal of Economics, 24 (1), pp. 87-105, 2000.  
JAFFÉ. W. ​Menger, Jevons and Walras De-Homogeneized. Economic Inquiry. Volume
 
 
14, Issue 4. December 1976 
JEVONS, W. S. ​The Theory of Political Economy​. Available at:  
http://www.econlib.org/library/YPDBooks/Jevons/jvnPE.html​. Access in 12.03.2017.
 
 
___________. ​The State in Relation to Labour.​ Available at:  
https://archive.org/details/stateinrelationt015806mbp​. Access in 12.03.2017.  
JOLINK, A. ​The Evolutionist Economics of Léon Walras.​ London: Routledge, 1996.  
KANT,
http://strangebeautiful.com/other-texts/kant-first-critique-cambridge.pdf​. Access
 
12.03.2017.  

Available

Reason.
 

Critique

at:
 
in
 

Pure
 

of

I.
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

K.

MARX,
 
https://www.marxists.org/portugues/marx/1867/ocapital-v1/​. Access in 12.03.2017.  
MEDEMA, S. ​The Hesitant Hand: Taming Self-Interest in the History of Economic
 

Available
 

Capital,

Vol

at:

​O
 

I.
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ideas. ​Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2009.  
MEILLASSOUX, Q. ​After Finitude: An Essay on the Necessity of Contingency​. New
 
 
York and London: Continuum Books, 2008 [2006].  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

​Time

Without
 

Becoming.
 

_______________.
at:
https://speculativeheresy.files.wordpress.com/2008/07/3729-time_without_becoming.pd
f​. Access in 12.03.2017.  
MENGER, C. ​Principles of Economics.​ Available at:  
https://mises.org/sites/default/files/Principles%20of%20Economics_5.pdf​. Access
 
12.03.2017.  

Available
 

 

in
 

 

 

 

 

 

I​nvestigations into the Method of
 
 
Available

 
the Social Sciences, especially
 
MENGER, C.
 
Economics.
at:
 
 
https://mises.org/sites/default/files/Investigations%20into%20the%20Method%20of%2
0the%20Social%20Sciences_5.pdf​. Access in 12.03.2017. 
PRADO, E. Da Posição e Deposição Histórica do Valor. Revista do NIEP-Marx. Vol.
 
1. , n. 1, 2013.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

I.
 

​The Invention of Modern Sciences. Minneapolis: University of
 

STENGERS,
 
Minnesota Press, 2000.  
WALKER, D. A. ​Is Walras’s Theory of General Equilibrium a Normative Scheme?
 
History of Political Economy, 1984, pp. 445-469.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

​Compêndio dos Elementos de Economia Política Pura. Available at:
WALRAS, L.
http://home.ufam.edu.br/andersonlfc/Cole%C3%A7%C3%A3o%20-%20Os%20Econo
mistas/L%25C3%25A9on_Walras_-_Comp%25C3%25AAndio_dos_elementos_de_Ec
onomia_Pol%25C3%25ADtica_Pura_(Os_Econoistas).pdf​. Access in 12.03.2017.  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

