PREFERENCES OF THE CENTRAL BANK OF BRAZIL UNDER THE INFLATION TARGETING REGIME: 

ESTIMATION USING A DSGE MODEL FOR A SMALL OPEN ECONOMY  

 

Andreza Aparecida Palmaa 
Marcelo SavinoPortugalb 

 
 
 Resumo: O objetivo principal deste trabalho é estimar as preferências do Banco Central do Brasil no 
período  pós  metas  de  inflação  (janeiro  2000  a  junho  de  2011),  usando  um  modelo  DSGE  com 
fundamentos microeconômicos para uma pequena economia aberta, tomando como base especialmente 
o  trabalho  de  Kam,  Lees  e  Liu  (2009).  O  modelo  utilizado  neste  trabalho  considera  que  o  Banco 
Central minimiza uma função perda, levando em consideração o desvio da inflação em relação a meta, 
a  estabilização  do produto,  a  suavização  da  taxa  de  juros e,  distintamente  dos  trabalhos  anteriores, a 
taxa de câmbio. Os resultados permitem afirmar que a maior preocupação da autoridade monetária no 
período foi com a estabilização da inflação, seguida pela suavização da taxa de juros, estabilização do 
produto e, por último, a estabilização da taxa de câmbio.  
Palavras-chave:  política  monetária,  preferências  do  Banco  Central  do  Brasil,  estimação  bayesiana, 
DSGE.  
JEL: C11, E12, E52, E61 
 
 
Abstract: The main objective of this paper is to estimate the preferences of the Central Bank of 
Brazil after the inflation targeting regime (January 2000 to June 2011), using a DSGE model with 
microeconomic foundations for a small open economy, based especially on the work of Kam, Lees 
and  Liu  (2009).  The  model  used  in  this  study  considers  that  the  Central  Bank  minimizes  a  loss 
function,  taking  into  account  the  deviation  of  inflation  from  its  target,  output  stabilization,  the 
interest rate smoothing and, unlike the previous works, the exchange rate. The results allow us to 
affirm  that  the  major  concern  of  the  monetary  authority  in  the  period  was  the  stabilization  of 
inflation,  followed  by  interest  rate  smoothing,  output  stabilization  and,  finally,  exchange  rate 
stabilization. 
Keywords: Monetary policy, Central Bank preferences, Bayesian estimation, DSGE.  
JEL codes: C11, E12, E52, E6. 
 
 
Submetido para área ANPEC 4 - Macroeconomia, Economia Monetária e Finanças 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________________________________________________________________ 
aAssistant Professor ofEconomics at Universidade Federal de São Carlos (UFSCAR) 
Email: drepalma@gmail.com 
Phonenumber: 55-15-3031-4247 
b
Professor  of  Economics  at  both  Graduate  Program  in  Business  Administration  (PPGA)  and  Graduate  Program  in 
Economics (PPGE) at Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS).  
Email: msp@ufrgs.br 
 

 

1. Introduction and Justification for the Study 
 
 
One  of  the  major  developments  in  macroeconomics  in  the  past  few  decades  has  been 
theadoptionof the intertemporal utility maximization paradigmand its implementation in dynamic 
stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models, which are  currently the  predominant approach to 
macroeconomic  analysis,  not  only  among 
scholars,  butincreasingly  among  Central 
Banksworldwide.   
 
In DSGE models, economic agents (consumers andfirms) are treated as optimizing agents. 
Thus,  families  maximizeutilityconditional  on  some  given  budget  constraint  and  firms 
maximizetheir  profits  with  the  applicable  constraints.  However,  the  Central  Bank’s  behavior  is 
often  described  asa  special  case,  i.e.,  by  a  monetary  policy  rule-  the  Taylor  rule.  Unlike  other 
agents, mostly through DSGE models, the Central Bankdoes not solveits optimization problem.  
The  Taylor  rule,the  standard  tool  for  assessing  the  behavior  of  Central  Banks,  empirically 
describes  the  monetary  authority’s  response  to  macroeconomic  variables.  Although  it  was 
proposed  from  a  purely  empirical  perspective,  the  Taylor  rule  has  a  theoretical  basis,  being  the 
solution to a restricted optimization problem, where the Central Bank minimizes a quadratic loss 
function.1This  way,  the  coefficients  estimatedin  a  reaction  function  are  rather  complex 
combinationsof  preference  parameters  (coefficients  of  the  objective  function)  of  the  monetary 
authority and structural parameters of the model. Therefore, the coefficients found in the reaction 
function  are  reduced-form  estimatesand  do  not  describe  the  structural  characteristics  of  the 
monetary  policy,  and  are  then  not  useful  for  assessing  issuesconcerned  with  the  process  of 
monetary policyformulation.  
 
The  aim  of  the  present  paper  is  to  symmetricallydeal  with  the  monetary  authority  in  a 
DSGE model, i.e., to assume that the Central Bank is also an optimizing agent and minimizes its 
loss  function  conditional  on  economic  constraintsand,  based  on  this  problem,  to  estimate  the 
monetary  authority’s  preferences.  Few  works  used  a  similar  approach  to  the  international  case. 
Ilbas (2010b) and Ilbas (2010a) estimate FED’s preferencesand the preferences for the euro zone, 
respectively,  following  the  model  proposed  by  Smets  and  Wouters  (2003),  under  commitment. 
Kam, Lees and Liu (2009), on the other hand, estimate the central bank preferencesfor three of the 
major  small  open  economies  that  operate  under  the  inflation  targeting  regime:  Australia, 
Canadaand New Zealand. The authors use a quadratic loss function and the model put forward by 
Monacelli (2005) as a constraint on the optimization problem, taking into account the discretionary 
case.In the Central Bank’s loss function, the following variables are used as arguments: deviation 
of inflation, of output, interest rate smoothing, and exchange rate. Remo and Vasícek (2009) do the 
same  for  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Czech  Republic,  but  they  use  commitment  instead.  In  the  loss 
function, the authors do not regard the exchange rate as argument.  
 
Getting  to  know  the  Central  Bank’s  preferences  is  of  utmost  importance.  Many  inflation 
episodes, for instance, may arise from the monetary authority’s attempt to stabilize outputabove its 
natural rate. Moreover, the heavier the relative weight of output on the loss function, the larger the 
inflationary  bias  towards  the  economy.  According  to  Castelnuovo  and  Surico  (2003,  p.  336), 
knowing  the  monetary  policy  preferences  allows  assessingits  performance  in  a  more  accurate 
fashion, since it is possible to know whether the obtained result is that which was actuallysought 
by  the  Central  Bank  or  whether  it  represents  just  a  random  gain  from  favorable  macroeconomic 
conditions.  
 
In  Brazil,  Aragon  and  Portugal  (2009)  were  the  first  authors  to  investigate  the  monetary 
authority’s  preferences.  In  a  calibration  exercise  of  the  loss  function,  the  authors,  using  a 
backward-looking model, choose preference parameter values that minimize the deviationbetween 
the simulated optimal path and the actual path of the Selic rate. Given that in a calibration exercise, 
inference would not be possible, the optimal structure is employed to estimate preferences through 
the  maximum  likelihood  method.The  results  indicate  that  the  Central  Bank  of  Brazil  places  a 

                                                 
1Proposed by Svensson (1996). 

heavier weighton the inflation rateand that the concern with interest rate smoothing isdeeper than 
with  the  output  gap.  Nevertheless,  it  should  be noted  that  in  the  maximum  likelihood  estimation 
exercise the loss function parameterswere not significant. This fact, as pointed out by the authors, 
might have occurred owing to the small sample size.  
 
Palma  and  Portugal  (2011)  used  a  standard  new-Keynesian  modelwith  forward-looking 
expectations  proposed  by  Givens  (2010)  to  estimate  the  monetary  authority’s  preferences  in 
Brazilduring  the  inflation  targeting  regime,  taking  into  account  a  closed  economy.2Assuming 
rational expectations, it is necessary tomake a key distinction about how agents’ expectations are 
dealt with in the optimization problem, i.e., by telling commitment and discretion apart. The main 
differencebetween these two possibilities lies in how agents’ expectations aretreated in the Central 
Bank’s optimization problem. Equilibrium in both cases takes the form of a state-space model that 
can  be  estimated  by  maximum  likelihood  using  the  Kalman  filter.  The  results  show  that  the 
monetary  authority  places  a  heavier  weight  on  inflation  stabilization,  followed  by  interest  rate 
smoothingand by output stabilization. In addition, the results obtained by the authors indicate that 
a discretionary policyis more consistentwith the data available for the analyzed period.  
The present paper does innovate, offering a one-of-a-kind study for the Brazilian case, by using a 
DSGE model, which is more consistent with the optimization and rational expectations approach. 
 
The  utilization  of  forward-looking  expectationshighlights  the  central  role  of  expectations 
formation,  especially  under  the  inflation  targeting  regime,  underscoring  the  importance  of  future 
events for the present time. Furthermore, the use of Bayesian methods in the estimation process is 
quite attractive due to theshort duration of the sample period. 
 
The  aim  of  the  present  paperis  to  use  the  Bayesian  approach  to  estimate  the  monetary 
authority’s preferencesbased on a DSGE model, where all structural equations result from optimal 
decisionsmade by private agents  and policymakers in a discretionary  context.3The intention is to 
contribute  to  improving  the  insight  into  monetary  policy  conduct  in  Brazil  under  the  inflation 
targeting  regime,managing  to  remedy  some  shortcomings  seen  in  previous  works  on  the  same 
topic. The Bayesian approach is quite attractive for this case, given that the sample for the inflation 
targeting regime is somewhat small.  
 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the methodology 
used, with a brief description of DSGE models and their estimation by Bayesian methods. Section 
3  outlines  the  theoretical  model  used  in  the  present  paper,  which  is  based  chiefly  on  Kam,  Lees 
and  Liu  (2009).  Section  4  presents  the  data  and  the  selection  of  priors,  as  well  as  the  results. 
Section 5 concludes. 
 
2. Method 
 
2.1. DSGE Models 
 
 
In  the  1960s  and  1970s,  the  large-scale  macroeconomic  models  (systems  of  equations) 
arose as an attractive tool for policymakers and economists. However, these models were harshly 
criticizedon  the  grounds  of  their  empirical,  and  mainly  theoretical,  foundations,  since  they  were 
especiallysubject to Lucas (1976) critique, according to which, changes in economic policymodify 
agents’ expectationsand, in turn,alter the parameters of economic models. The implications for the 
systems of equations models arecatastrophic, as these models are believed to beof little value.  
 
As an alternative, Kydland and Prescott (1982) proposed the first model that used a DSGE 
approach, or thereal business cycle (RBC)approach tomacroeconomic modeling. Nonetheless, total 
price flexibility was considered at first, implying thatmonetary authority’s actionsdo notinfluence 

                                                 
2  The  authors  tried  to  minimize  this  constraint  by  using  a  monetary  conditions  index  (MCI)  as  monetary  policy 
instrument,  which  is  a  weighted  average  between  the  interest  rate  and  the  exchange  rate,  in  lieu  of  interest  rates. 
However, the results did not vary significantly.  
3A discretionary environment was chosen, a priori, considering the results obtained by Palma and Portugal (2011). 

real variables. Because of that, these models were initially unattractive for Central Banks and other 
organizations. 
 
With the advent of nominal and real rigidities in the 1990s, besides imperfect competition 
in DSGE models, they eventually proved to be veryuseful in capturing important characteristics of 
macroeconomic time series, unlike their predecessor (the RBC models proposed by Kydland and 
Prescott). Aside from that, improvements in quantitative methods werekey toarousing the interest 
in  these  models.    Since  then,  these  models  have  been  constantly  improved  and,  currently, 
DSGEmodels  are  the  standard  tool  for  macroeconometricanalysis,  and  can  be  used  for  several 
purposes,such  as  estimation,  prediction,  comparison  of  models,  identification  of  shocksand 
analysis  of  economic  policies.  The  addition  of  expectations  to  these  models  renders  them 
lessvulnerable to Lucas critique than conventional models, where expectations are not used orare 
used in a limited way. 
 DSGE  models  are  open  to  many  criticisms,  though.  One  of  their  limitations  is  that  they 
 
develop  strong  hypotheses  about  the  agents’  rationality.  In  addition,  the  heterogeneity  of 
individuals is not taken into proper consideration.  
 
In Brazil, improvements in DSGE models are particularly interesting given the adoption of 
the  inflation  targeting  regime.  Monetary  policy  is  not  randomly  implemented  and  the  Central 
Bankneeds a vast array of modelsand toolsto support its decisions, and DSGE models have taken 
onan increasingly important role. 
 
2.2. Estimation of DSGE models4 
 
 
The estimation of DSGE models poses several challenges, since their parameters are highly 
nonlinear.   Initially, these models were solved by calibration, a technique that basically consists in 
setting  parameter  values  based  on  some  prior  knowledge.  For  formal  estimation,  one  of  the  first 
approaches  was 
includes  endogenous  and 
expectational  variables,  found  in  the  relationships  defined  by  the  model.  However,  this  strategy 
was not so robust in that it may be necessary to use quite big samples to have useful inferences. 
 
the  numerous  criticisms,  Bayesian  methods  have  become  quite 
popularand are particularly suitable for the estimation of the modelscontemplated herein. Simply 
put,  Bayesian  statistic  can  be  considered  a  mix  of  calibration  and  the  maximum  likelihood 
principle.  Uncertainty,  as  well  as  previous  knowledge  about  the  model  and  its  parameters,  is 
described by prior probabilities. Comparison with the data via the likelihood function leads to the 
revision of these probabilities, yielding the posterior probabilities.  
 
 
which can be written in the following general matrix form: 

A  DSGE  model  is  basically  a  nonlinear  system  of  equations  in  expectational  differences, 

the  generalized  method  of  moments,  which 

Notwithstanding 

 

 

 

 
where 

 ܧ௧ሾ݂ఏሺݕ௧ାଵ,ݕ௧,ݕ௧ିଵ,ߝ௧,ߝ௧ାଵሻሿ=0 
εt~ i.i.d. (0, ߗఌ)is a random vectorof size r × 1 of structural shocks 
 ܧ௧ሺߝ௧ାଵሻ=0 
ܧ௧ሺߝ௧ାଵߝ௧ାଵᇱ

ሻ=Ωக 

(2.1) 

 

yt = vector of endogenous variables 
 
 
As observed above, the model is stochastic, forward-looking and nonlinear. Regardless of 
the estimation method, it is necessary to solve this model first andto obtain its reduced form. To do 
that,  a  linear  approximation  to  the  model  is  performed  at  first  and,  through  methods  for  the 

                                                 
4 This section is widely based on Adjemian (2007). 

 

 

 

 

(2.2) 

solution  of  rational  expectations  models,  a  solution  is  found  to  the  linear  system,  expressed  in 
terms  of  deviations  from  the  steady  state.  Some  of  the  solution  methods  frequently  usedare: 
Blanchard and Kahn, Sims, Klein, undetermined coefficients, among others.5 
 
Assuming  there  is  a  unique  stable  and  invariant  solution,  it  is  given  by  an  equation  in 
nonlinear stochastic differences, where the endogenous variables are written as a function of their 
previous levels and of the contemporaneous structural shocks: 

then  have 

to  be  used.  The  Dynare  software  uses  a 

 
 
approximation  methods 

In general, it is not possible to obtain a closed solution to the model, and (local or global) 
local 

 ݕ௧=݃ఏሺݕ௧ିଵ,ߝ௧ሻ 
݃ఏis a set of policy functions. 
approximationaround  the  deterministic  steady  state  (ݕതሺߠሻ),  i.e.,  the  model  is  linearized 
aroundݕതሺߠሻ, such that݂ఏሺݕത,ݕത,ݕത,0,0ሻ=0andݕ∗=݃ఏሺݕ∗,0ሻ.  
 ܧ௧ሾ݂ఏሺ݃ఏሺ݃ሺݕ௧ିଵ,ߝ௧ሻ,ߝ௧ାଵሻ,݃ఏሺݕ௧ିଵ,ߝ௧ሻ,ݕ௧ିଵ,ߝ௧ାଵ,ߝ௧ሻሿ=0 

 
Each  equation  in  (2.1)  can  then  be  approximated  by  the  expected  value  of  a  Taylor 
 
expansion  of  its  logarithm  around  the  steady  state  (log-linearization).  The  equations  in  (2.1)  and 
(2.2)  can  be  approximated,using  the  following  system  (variables  with  acaretover  them  stand  for 
percentage deviations of the original variablesfrom their steady state): 

Substituting (2.2) into (2.1) forytand yt+1: 

(2.3) 

 
 

 

 
where 

 ܧ௧൛݂௬ାଵݕො௧ାଵ+݂௬ݕො௧+݂௬ିଵݕො௧ିଵ+݂ఌାଵߝ௧ାଵ+݂ఌߝ௧ൟ=0 
ݕො௧=݃௬ିଵݕො௧ିଵ+݃ఌߝ௧ 
݂௬ାଵ= ௗ௙ഇௗ௬೟శభ݂௬=ௗ௙ഇௗ௬೟݂௬ିଵ= ௗ௙ഇௗ௬೟షభ݂ఌାଵ= ௗ௙ഇௗఌ೟శభ݂ఌ= ௗ௙ഇௗఌ೟  
݃௬ିଵ= ௗ௚ഇௗ௬೟షభ  (feedback matrix6)    ݃ఌ= ௗ௙ഇௗఌ೟   (feedforward matrix7) 

 
 

 

 

 

(2.4) 
(2.5) 

 
 
The  model  in  its  linearized  form  can  be  solved  with  the  help  of  the  Dynare  software  in 
order  to  obtain  its  representation  in  its  reduced  state-space  form.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  a  series  of 
complex  algebraic  procedures  is  needed.8After  finding  the  solution  to  the  model  in  terms  of  its 
policy functions, one can write it in state-space form: 

 ݕ௧∗=ܨݕො௧+ܩݑ௧ 
ݕො௧=ܦݕො௧ିଵ+ܩߝ௧ 

 
 

measurement equation 
state equation 

 
Maximum  likelihood  estimation  requires  thatthe  likelihood  function  be  constructed  and 
 
assessed  based  on  the  structural  parameters.This  is  complicated  when  the  model  includes 
unobservable state variables. In this case, the Kalman filter, for instance, allows making inferences 
about  the  unobservable  state  vectorand  assessing  the  joint  likelihood  function  of  observable 
endogenous  variables,  yielding  consistent  and  asymptotically  normal  estimatesfor  the  parameters 
of interest. 

                                                 
5 See details in Dejong and Dave (2007). 
6 It represents the impact of endogenous variables on forward-looking variables. 
7 It represents the impact of shocks on forward-looking variables. 
8 For a detailed description of these procedures, see Klein (2000) and Sims (2002). 

 
If  the  DSGE  model  isstochastically  singular  (more  observable  variables  than  random 
shocks),  maximum  likelihood  estimation  often  fails.  When  that  occurs,  two  strategies  can  be 
considered: i) using at most as many observable variables as the number of structural shocks; ii) 
adding error terms in the state-space observation equation. 
 
Nevertheless,  empirical  experience  has  demonstrated  that  it  is  too  difficult  to  estimate  a 
model  by  the  maximum  likelihood  method.  Usually,  the  function  is  flat  in  certain  directions, 
giving rise to important identification problems. The solution came from Bayesian methods, where 
the identification problem is not a limiting factor. 
The  Bayesian  statistic  basically  consists  intreatingthe  parameters  as  random  variables.  In 
 
the case of structural models, the use of Bayesian methods is a lot more attractive, since there is an 
interpretation for the parameters that are being estimated,facilitating the selection of priors.  
 
The  specification  of  priors  for  the  parametersbegins  with  the  selection  of  the  functional 
form that is more suitable for the distribution. For example, one can use the possible interval for 
the  parameter  values  as  reference.  Thus,  the  inverse  gamma  distribution  is  used  for  parameters 
with only positive values, the beta distribution is reserved forparameterswith values between 0 and 
1  and  normal  distribution  is  used  for  unrestricted  parameter  values.  The  use  ofnon-informative 
priors (uniform distribution) is also possible. 
With the likelihood function and the specification of priors, it is possible to estimate the posterior 
distributions,  which  represent  the  probabilities  associated  with  different  parameter  valuesafter 
observation of the data.  Basically, the posteriorsare  updates of beliefs, represented by the priors, 
based  on  additional  information  provided  by  variables  in  the  sample.  The  determination  of 
posteriors basically consists of the application of the widely known Bayes’ Theorem: 
 

݌ሺߠ|ݕ∗ሻ∝	݌ሺݕ∗|ߠሻ݌ሺߠሻ=ܭሺߠ|ݕ∗ሻ 

݌ሺߠ|ݕ∗ሻ=݌ሺߠ,ݕ∗ሻ
݌ሺݕ∗|ߠሻ = likelihood function 
݌ሺߠሻ = informative priors 
݌ሺݕ∗ሻ = marginal density function of the sample. 
Given  that݌ሺݕ∗ሻdoes  not  rely  on  the  vector  of  parameters,  it  can  be  treated  as  a  constantand  the 
whereܭሺߠ|ݕ∗ሻis  known  as  the  posteriorkernel  and  is  proportional  to  the  posteriordeterminedby 
factor݌ሺݕ∗ሻ. 
Markov  chain  with  state  spaces  in  parametric  spaceߠ,  which  is  easy  to  simulate  and  whose 
After  defining  a  transition  kernel, ݍሺߠ,ߚሻ,  of  the  priordistribution,  use  it  to  produce 
i)  Begin with a valueߠሺ଴ሻand stage index j = 0; 
ii)  Generate a point ߚfrom the transition kernel 
iii) Updateߠሺ௝ሻintoߚ=ߠሺ௝ାଵሻwith probability given by p = ݉݅݊൜1ฬ ௣ሺఉሻ௤൫ఏሺೕሻ,ఉ൯
௣൫ఏሺೕሻ൯௤൫ఉ,ఏሺೕሻ൯ൠ 
iv) Keepߠሺ௝ሻwith probability 1-p 

equilibrium  distributionis  given  exactly  by  the  posterior  distribution.  The  Metropolis-Hastings 
algorithm is one of the possibilities in this case.This algorithm is used herein and is summarized in 
what follows. 
 
candidates: 

 
The  determination  of  posteriors  includes  the  calculation  of  quite  nontrivial  integrals  and 
computationally  intensive  numerical  methods  are  needed.  TheMarkov  Chain  Monte  Carlo 
(MCMC)  methods  allow  for  this  calculation.  The  basic  idea  of  this  method  is  to  construct  a 

݌ሺݕ∗ሻ =݌ሺݕ∗|ߠሻ݌ሺߠሻ
݌ሺݕ∗ሻ

v)  Repeat the procedure aboveuntil a stationary distribution is obtained. 
 

posteriorcan be written as 

where: 

 

 
Note that the computational cost of the implementation of DSGE models is relatively low. 
Using the Dynare software, the relevant issue focuses on the interpretation of results rather than on 
their mechanics. 
 
3. Theoretical Model 
 
 
 
The model used herein is based on the framework developed byGali and Monacelli (2005), 
Monacelli (2005) and Justiniano and Preston (2010), which has been widely used for the analysis 
of  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  by  the  central  banks  of  small  open  economies(Australia,  New 
Zealand,  Canada,  Czech  Republic,  Brazil,  etc.).  In  the  original  model,  monetary  policy  is 
described by  an empirical Taylor rule. FollowingIlbas  (2010a, 2010b),and mainlyKam,  Lees  and 
Liu  (2009),  this  hypothesis  will  be  abandoned  and  we  will  assume  that  the  monetary  authority 
optimizes  a  quadratic  loss  function  in  a  discretionary  fashion,in  accordance  with  the  results 
obtained by Palma and Portugal (2011). This implies that the monetary authority reoptimizes the 
loss functionin each period, taking the agents’ expectations as given.9 
 
The  aggregate  demand  and  supply  curvesare  derived  from  the  agents’  optimization 
problem (families and  firms, respectively) with forward-looking  expectations. The source of real 
rigidityis the consumption habit persistence and that of the nominal rigidity is the indexation to the 
previous  inflation,  as  well  as  the  hypothesis  of  monopolistic  competitionwith  sticky  prices  for 
domestic  and  importing  firms.  Moreover,  one  should  consider  the  imperfectexchange  rate  pass-
through.10Finally, we add the Central Bank’s optimization problem instead of the Taylor rules to 
describe  the  behavior  of  the  monetary  policy.  The  model  is  therefore  made  up  of  four  agents: 
families, domestic firms, importing firms and the monetary authority.  
 
3.1.Families 
 
 

݅∈ሺ0,1ሻ. The overall population equals one. The utility function is given by: 
ܷሺܥ௧,ܪ௧,ܰ௧ሻ= ሺ஼೟ିு೟ሻభష഑
where	ܥ௧	is  a  goods  consumption  index, ܪ௧  represents  external  habit  formation,  given  byan 
autoregressive  process  of  order  1,  with  parameter  h,andܰ௧are  the  working  hours.  The  inverse 
elasticity of intertemporal substitution is given by parameterߪ>0, and the inverse of the elasticity 
of labor supplyis given by߮>0.	 
The  goods  consumption  index, ܥ௧,  is  a  combination  of  a  continuum  of  domestic  goods, 
ܥு,௧ሺ݅ሻand of imported goods, ܥி,௧ሺ݆ሻ, given by the CES function: 
ആషభആ ቉ആషభആ ,   
ആషభആ +ߙభആܥி,௧
ܥ௧=ቈሺ1−ߙሻభ೙ܥு,௧
ቃ ഄഄషభand 
ܥு,௧=ቂ׬ ܥு,௧ሺ݅ሻഄషభഄ ݀݅

In the model, there exists a continuum of identical familiesthat live infinitely, indexed by 

ଵିఙ −ே೟భశക
ଵାఝ  

where 

ଵ଴	

(3.2) 

(3.1) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                 
9
Note that the inflation targeting regime is an instrument that increases transparency, communication and coherence of 
the  monetary policy, not necessarily consisting of a conventional strict commitment system (Bernanke and Mishkin, 
1997).  In  fact,  this  regime  is  compatiblewith  the  discretionary  behavior  of  the  monetary  policy.  According  to 
Mendonça  (2001),  owing  to  the  transparency  of  the  inflation  targeting  regime,  it  is  possible  to  use  discretionary 
policies without loss of credibility of the monetary authority.  
10For  further  reading  on  this  topic,  see,  for  instance,  Goldfajn  and  Werlang  (2000).In  short,  with  the  imperfect 
exchange rate pass-through, importers do not immediately adjust the domestic price of importsin response to exchange 
ratefluctuations.  

቉ ഄഄషభ 

ଵ
଴	

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

The  elasticity  of  substitution  between  domestic  and  imported  goods  is  given  byparameter 

Solving  the  optimization  problem  of  the  families  (utility  maximization  given  the  budget 

 
constraint), we obtain the following optimal demand functions: 

ܥி,௧=ቈන ܥி,௧ሺ݆ሻഄషభഄ ݆݀
ߟ>0,  and  the  elasticity  of  substitution  across  goods  withineach  category11  (domestic  and 
imported goods) is given byߝ>0. 
ܥு,௧=ሺ1−ߙሻቀ௉ಹ,೟௉೟ቁିఎܥ௧ 
ܥி,௧=ߙቀ௉ಷ,೟௉೟ቁିఎܥ௧ 
where	ܲு,௧andܲி,௧are  the  aggregate  price  levels  for  the  domestic  economy  and  for  the  foreign 
ቁ భభషഄ   
ܲு,௧=ቀ׬ ܲு,௧ሺ݅ሻଵିఌ݀݅
ቁ భభషഄ   
ܲி,௧=ቀ׬ ܲி,௧ሺ݆ሻଵିఌ݆݀
consumption index, ܥ௧: 
ܲ௧=ൣሺ1−ߙሻܲு,௧ଵିఎ+ߙܲி,௧ଵିఎ൧ భభషആ 

The  consumer  price  indexis  obtained  by  substituting  the  demand  functions  in  the 

economy, given respectively by: 
 

ଵ଴
ଵ଴

(3.6) 

(3.7) 

(3.5) 

(3.3) 

(3.4) 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
3.2. Firms 
 
3.2.1 Domestic goods firms 
 
 

 

Firms are monopolistically competitive, which introduces nominal rigidity in the model. In 

Domestic  goods  operate  with  a  linear  production  function  given  byܻு,௧ሺ݅ሻ=߳௔,௧ܰ௧ሺ݅ሻ, 
where߳௔,௧is an exogenous domestic technology shock, which follows an AR(1) process, ܻு,௧ሺ݅ሻis 
the production of the ithfirm, ܰ௧ሺ݅ሻis the amount of hired labor.  
each period, a fractionߠு∈ሾ0,1ሿof the firms does not reoptimize their prices. Instead, these firms 
݉ܽݔ௉ಹ,೟ሺ௜ሻॱ௧ࢣ

change  their  prices  by  indexing  them  to  the  previous  inflation.  The  optimizing  firms,  however, 
solve their optimization problem, which is given by:  

௉ಹ,೟షభ ൰ఋಹ−ܲு,௧ା௦ܯܥு,௧ା௦	݁ఌಹ,೟శೞ቉

ஶ௦ୀ଴

 

 

 
Subject to the constrained demand of theith firm: 
 

ܳ௧,௧ା௦ߠு௦ܻு,௧ା௦ሺ݅ሻቈܲு,௧ሺ݅ሻ൬௉ಹ,೟శೞషభ
௉ಹ,೟షభ ൰ఋಹ቉ିఌ൫ܥு,௧ା௦+ܥு,௧ା௦
∗

൯ 

௉ಹ,೟శೞ൬௉ಹ,೟శೞషభ

ܻு,௧ା௦ሺ݅ሻ=ቈ௉ಹ,೟ሺ௜ሻ
Parameterߝ>1	is  the  elasticity  of  substitution  between  produced  goods  andܯܥு,௧is  the  real 

marginal cost at time t, given by: 

(3.8) 

 

 

 

                                                 
11 Note that within each category (domestic and imported goods), there aredifferent products.  

ܯܥு,௧= ܹ௧
߳௔,௧ܲு,௧ 

The structural shock to the marginal cost is given by߳ு,௧~݅.݅.݀.ሺ0,ߪுሻandߜு∈	ሾ0,1ሿis the 

The  log-linearized  first-order  conditions  of  this  problemgive  rise  to  the  Phillips  curve  for 

 
 
level of inflation inertia. 
 
domestic inflation, given by: 

 
where 

 ߨு,௧ିߜுߨு,௧ିଵ=ߚ൫ॱ௧ߨு,௧ାଵ−ߜுߨு,௧൯+ߣு൫݉ܿு,௧+߳ு,௧൯ 
ߣு=ሺ1−ߚߠுሻሺ1−ߠுሻ

݉ܿு,௧=߮ݕ௧−ሺ1+߮ሻ߳௔,௧+ߙݏ௧+ ߪ1−ℎሺݕ௧∗−ℎݕ௧ିଵ∗

ߠு

 

 

(3.9) 

ሻ+ݍ௧+߳௖,௧ 

 
 
3.2.2. Importing firms 
 
 
The basic idea is the same as for domestic firms and thus this section will be quite short. 
The model considers the monopolistic competition between importers and price setting à la Calvo. 
Furthermore,  a  gap  is  assumed  between  the  price  of  imported  goods  denominated  in  domestic 
currency  and  the  domestic  price  of  imported  goods,  which  can  be  explained  by  the  fact  that 
importing firms purchase imported goods at globally competitive prices. However, in the domestic 
economy,  these  firms  are  monopolistically  competitive,  redistributing  these  goods.  This  gap  is 
given in log-linear terms by: 

 ߰ி,௧=݁௧+݌௧∗−݌ி,௧  

 

 

 

 

 

(3.10) 

 
The solution to the optimization problem of importing firms (as in the previous section) leads to 
the Phillips curve for imported goods inflation, given by: 

where 

 ߨி,௧=ߚ൫ॱ௧ߨி,௧ାଵ−ߜிߨி,௧൯+ߜிߨி,௧ିଵ+ߣி൫߰ி,௧+߳ி,௧൯ 
ߣி= ሺଵିఉఏಷሻሺଵିఏಷሻ

 e ߰ி,௧=݉ܿி,௧. 

ఏಷ

(3.11) 

 
3.3. Terms of trade, real exchange rate and equilibrium 
 
In  equilibrium,  domestic  output  is  equal  to  the  total  domestic  demand  (domestic  and  foreign 
demand) for produced goods, which in log-linear terms yields: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Performing the necessary substitutions, we get: 

ݕ௧=ܿு,௧+ܿு,௧∗  
 ݕ௧=ሺ2−ߙሻߙߟݏ௧+ሺ1−ߙሻܿ௧+ߙߟ߰ி,௧+ߙݕ௧∗ 
(ݍ௧) and the gap in the law of one price (߰ி,௧), given by:12 

 
 

 

 

(3.12) 

(3.13) 

It is also possible to derive a relationship between terms of trade (ݏ௧), the real exchange rate 

                                                 
12 For further details on the derivation of this relationship, see Kam, Lees and Liu (2009). 

ݍ௧=߰ி,௧−ሺ1−ߙሻݏ௧ 

 

 

 

 

(3.14) 

 

 

 

(3.15) 

 
In what follows, we present the linearized version of the model, equation for equation.13 
 
3.4. The log-linearized model 
 
 
The  equations  for  the  log-linearized  model(i.e.,  the  log-linear  approximation  to  the  first-
order  conditions  and  the  constraints  that  describethe  equilibrium  of  the  economy)  are  presented 
below. Detailed information on how to obtain these equationscan be found in Kam, Lees and Liu 
(2009). Note that terms of trade shocks, technology shocks, and real interest rate parity shocksare, 
for simplicity, treated as exogenous stochastic processes.   
 
Consumption Euler equation 

 
Domestic goods inflation 

 
 
Imported goods inflation: 

ܿ௧−ℎܿ௧ିଵ=ܧ௧ሺܿ௧ାଵ−ℎܿ௧ሻ−ଵି௛ఙ ሺݎ௧−ܧ௧ߨ௧ାଵሻ   
ߨு,௧=ߚܧ௧൫ߨு,௧ାଵ−ߜுߨு,௧൯+ߜுߨு,௧ିଵ+ߣுቂ߮ݕ௧−ሺ1+߮ሻ߳௔,௧+ߙݏ௧+ ߪ1−ℎሺܿ௧−ℎܿ௧ିଵሻቃ
ߨி,௧=ߚܧ௧൫ߨி,௧ାଵ−ߜிߨி,௧൯+ߜிߨி,௧ିଵ+ߣிሾݍ௧−ሺ1−ߙሻݏ௧ሿ+ߣி߳ி,௧   
ܧ௧ሺݍ௧ାଵ−ݍ௧ሻ=ሺݎ௧−ܧ௧ߨ௧ାଵሻ−ሺݎ௧∗−ܧ௧ߨ௧ାଵ∗
ݏ௧−ݏ௧ିଵ=ߨி,௧−ߨு,௧+߳௦,௧ 
ݕ௧=ሺ1−ߙሻܿ௧+ߙߟݍ௧+ߙߟݏ௧+ߙݕ௧∗ 
ߨ௧=ሺ1−ߙሻߨு,௧+ߙߨி,௧ 

 
Goods market equilibrium condition  

 
Real interest rate parity condition  

 
Terms of trade equation (identity) 

 
General inflation: 

+ߣு߳ு,௧ 

ሻ+߳௤,௧ 

(3.18) 

(3.20) 

(3.21) 

(3.17) 

(3.16) 

(3.19) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The  exogenous  stochastic  processes for the terms of trade shocks, technology shocks and 

 
 
real interest rate parity shocks are written as: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 ߳௝,௧=ߩ௝߳௝,௧ିଵ+ߥ௝,௧   
with ߩ௝∈ሺ0,1ሻandߥ௝~݅.݅.݀.൫0,ߪ௝ଶ൯, for j = s, a, q.  
ߪ௥∗ቍ൭ߥగ∗,௧ߥ௬∗,௧ߥ௥∗,௧൱ 
0
ܿଷ൱ቌߨ௧ିଵ∗ݕ௧ିଵ∗ݎ௧ିଵ∗ ቍ+ቌߪగ∗
ቌߨ௧∗ݕ௧∗ݎ௧∗ቍ=൭ܽଵ
0
0
0
0
0
0
ܾଶ
0
0
0
where൭ߥగ∗,௧ߥ௬∗,௧ߥ௥∗,௧൱~ܰሺ0,ܫଷሻ. 

0
ߪ௬∗
0

                                                 
13 The description of parameters is given in tables 2 and 3. 

 

 

 

 

 

(3.22) 

(3.23) 

 
3.5. Monetary Authority: Central Bank Preferences 
 
 
Optimal monetary policy, which makes a distinctionbetween the model presented aboveand 
that proposed byGali and Monacelli (2005), will be outlinedin what follows.The intertemporal loss 
function of a period of the Central Bank is given by:14 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

(3.24) 

As can be seen above, the weight allocated to the inflation target is normalizedat unityand, 

the financial stability or for considering the inertial behavior of the policy instrument.In addition, 

 ܮሺߨ෤௧,ݕ௧,ݍ௧,ݎ௧−ݎ௧ିଵሻ= ଵଶൣߨ෤௧ଶ+ߤ௬ݕ௧ଶ+ߤ௤ݍ௧ଶ+ߤ௥ሺݎ௧−ݎ௧ିଵ+ߝ௧௥ሻଶ൧ 
therefore, the weights of the other variables(ߤ௬,ߤ௤,ߤ௥∈ሾ0,∞ሻሻwill be regarded asrelative to that 
function,Δݎ௧= ሺݎ௧−ݎ௧ିଵሻ, is justifiable by the fact that the monetary authority also worries about 
we allow for a shock to this variable, given byߝ௧௥~ܰሺ0,ߪ௥ଶ), which allows capturing the imperfect 

of the inflation target. As the inflation target is fixed in time, it will be normalized at zero, since all 
variables  in  the  model  are  expressed  as  deviations  from  their  mean.  The  last  term  of  the  loss 

ability of the Central Bankto control the nominal interest rate. The inclusion of the exchange rate 
in  the  Central  Bank’s  loss  functionallows  us  to  answer  whether  this  variable  is  taken  into 
consideration in the monetary authority’s optimization problem.  
 
The  monetary  authority’s  goal  is  to  minimize  the  loss  function,  subject  to  structural 
economic  equations(3.15)-(3.23),  underdiscretion.  The  solution  to  the  problem  is  found  using 
thealgorithm  proposed  by  Dennis  (2004).  In  sum,  the  concept  of  Markov  perfect  equilibrium  is 
used,  where  the  Central  Banknowadays  (i.e.,  its  contemporaneous  decisions)  is  considered  a 
Stackelberg  leader  and  the  private  agents  and  the  future  Central  Bank’s  actions  are  regarded  as 
Stackelberg followers. 
 
4. Estimation and Results  
 
4.1. Data and selection ofprior distributions 
 
 
The model presented above will be estimated by Bayesian methods, as described in section 
2.  The data used are log-linearized quarterly series of the following variables, for the period after 
the inflation targeting regime(January 2000 – June 2011),totaling 46 observations: 
 

Imported goods inflationdenominated in domestic currency, ߨி,௧; 
Real domestic exchange rate: R$/US$ (Ptax sale value at the end of the period) , ݍ௧; 
Final household consumption, ܿ௧; 
Terms of trade - FUNCEX (exportsand imports),ݏ௧; 
Real domestic GDP – seasonally adjusted index, ݕ௧; 
Domestic inflation: IPCA index, ߨ௧; 
Nominal interest rate: annualized Selic rate, ݎ௧; 
U.S. inflation, ߨ௧∗; 
U.S. output, ݕ௧∗; 
U.S. interest rate, ݎ௧∗. 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 
 
 
 

                                                 
14 This quadratic function combined with linear restrictions produces linear decision rules. Moreover, it may represent 
a second-order approximation to the utility function of the representative agent.  

 
The  series  will  be  expressed  as  deviations  from  the  sample  mean  and  are  available 
atwww.ipeadata.gov.br,on the website of the Central Bank of Brazil atwww.bcb.gov.br and on the 
website  of  IBGE  atwww.ibge.gov.br.  The  variables  were  seasonally  adjustedand  the  trend  was 
removed using the Hodrick-Prescott (HP) filter.  
 
Table  4.1  shows  the  prior  distributionof  the  parametersto  be  estimated.  The  selection  of 
priors  takes  into  account  mainly  the  interval  of  variation  of  each  parameter.  Conventionally,  we 
use the beta distributionfor parameters that areon the interval [0,1],the inverse gamma distribution 
for those on the interval [0, ∞)and the gamma distribution for the remaining cases. 
 
 
 
Parameter 

Table4.1. Prior Distribution of the Parameters 

Prior Distribution 

ߚ 
ߙ 
ℎ 
ߪ 
߶ 
ߟ 
ߜு 
ߜி 
ߠு 
ߠி 
ܽଵ 
ܾଶ 
ܿଷ 
ߩ௔ 
ߩ௤ 
ߩ௦ 
ߤ௤ 
ߤ௬ 
ߤ௥ 
ߪு 
ߪி 
ߪ௔ 
ߪ௤ 
ߪ௦ 
ߪగ∗ 
ߪ௬∗ 
ߪ௥∗ 

of 

substitution 

Definition 
Intertemporal discount rate 
Level  of  economic  openness  (share  of 
importsin domestic consumption) 
Habit persistence parameter 
Inverseof  the  elasticity  of  substitution 
(coefficient of relative risk aversion) 
Inverse of the elasticity of labor supply 
Elasticity 
betweendomestic and imported goods 
Backward-lookingparameter  of  the  price 
of domestic goods 
Backward-lookingparameter  of  the  price 
of imported goods 
Fraction  of  non-optimizing  producersin 
the domestic economy 
Fraction of non-optimizing importers. 
Parameter AR(1) of foreign inflation 
Parameter AR(1) of external output 
Parameter AR(1) of foreign interest rate 
Technological inertia 
Inertial effect of exchange rate shock 
Inertial effect of terms of trade shock 
Preference for exchange rate stabilization 
Preference for output stabilization 
Preference for interest ratesmoothing 
Standard  deviationof 
shock to the domestic economy 
Standard  deviation  of  the  “cost-push” 
shock to the foreign economy 
Standard  deviation  of  the  technology 
shock 
 

the  “cost-push” 

0.99* 
0.45* 

Beta (0.7, 0.1) 

Gamma (0.2, 0.2) 

Gamma (2, 0.35) 
Gamma (0.6, 0.25) 

Beta (0.7, 0.2) 

Beta (0.7, 0.2)  

Beta (0.5, 0.2) 

Beta (0.5, 0.2) 
Beta (0.5, 0.1) 
Beta (0.5, 0.1) 
Beta (0.5, 0.1) 
Beta (0.8, 0.1) 
Beta (0.8, 0.1) 
Beta (0.8, 0.1) 

Gamma (0.5, 0.09) 
Gamma (0.5, 0.09) 
Gamma (0.5, 0.09) 

Inverse gamma (0.15, 

2) 

Inverse gamma (0.15, 

2) 

Inverse gamma (0.15, 

2) 

Inverse gamma (0.15, 

2) 

Standard deviation of the terms of trade 

Inverse gamma (0.15, 

Standard  deviation  of 
inflation rate 
Standard deviation of the external output 

foreign 

the 

2) 

Inverse gamma (0.1, 2) 

Inverse gamma (0.15, 

2) 

Standard deviation of the foreign interest 

Inverse gamma (0.15, 

ߪ௥ 

rate  
Standard  deviation  of 
interest rate 

the  domestic 

Inverse gamma (0.15, 

2) 

2) 

Note:The mean and standard deviation of the distributions are respectively shown in brackets. 
* Denotes calibrated parameters. 
 
 
4.2. Results 
 
The model was estimated with Matlab, using Bayesian techniques through the Metropolis-
 
Hastings algorithm andthe Kalman filter,15as described in section 2. The results are shown in Table 
4.1.  
 
Table 4.1.Model estimated under discretion 
Parameter 

Posterior Mean 

95%CI 

Standard 
deviation 

ℎ 
ߪ 
߶ 
ߟ 
ߜு 
ߜி 
ߠு 
ߠி 
ܽଵ 
ܾଶ 
ܿଷ 
ߩ௔ 
ߩ௤ 
ߩ௦ 
ߤ௤ 
ߤ௬ 
ߤ௥ 
ߪு 
ߪி 
ߪ௔ 
ߪ௤ 
ߪ௦ 
ߪగ∗ 
ߪ௬∗ 
ߪ௥∗ 
ߪ௥ 

 

0.89 
1.09 
1.71 
0.13 

Consumers 

[0.87; 0.90] 
[1.08; 1.10] 
[1.62; 1.80] 
[0.09; 0.18] 

Firms and Exogenous Processes  

0.31 
0.07 
0.66 
0.87 
0.88 
0.83 
1.04 
0.77 
0.45 
0.85 

[0.31; 0.32] 
[0.06; 0.08] 
[0.64; 0.69] 
[0.82; 0.92] 
[0.86; 0.89] 
[0.78; 0.89] 
[1.02; 1.07] 
[0.76; 0.78] 
[0.45; 0.48] 
[0.83; 0.87] 

Monetary Policy 

0.01 
0.01 
0.05 
0.03 

0.00 
0.01 
0.02 
0.03 
0.01 
0.03 
0.02 
0.00 
0.01 
0.01 

0.19 
0.51 
0.63 

[0.17; 0.21] 
[0.50; 0.51] 
[0.61; 0.64] 

0.01 
0.00 
0.01 

Absolute weights:  ߤగ=0.4292,    ߤ௤=0.0815, ߤ௬=0.2189,  ߤ௥=0.2704 

Standard deviations of shocks 

0.84 
3.67 
7.78 
2.64 
4.91 
0.80 
0.64 
0.51 
3.84 

[0.81; 0.87] 
[3.60; 3.71] 
[7.72; 7.82] 
[2.51; 2.79] 
[4.85; 4.97] 
[0.73; 0.87] 
[0.56; 0.71] 
[0.47; 0.54] 
[3.64; 3.98] 

0.02 
0.04 
0.03 
0.10 
0.04 
0.05 
0.04 
0.02 
0.12 

                                                 
15 We used the codes kindly granted by Timothy Kam as reference.  

 
For the sake of comparison of the results obtained for the preference parameters, we show 
the results of previous studies for Brazil and for other countries that adopt the inflation targeting 
regime, in tables 4.2 and 4.3, respectively.  
 
Table 4.2. Comparison with previous studies 
Preference 
parameters 

DSGE  - Bayesian 
methods (Discretion) 

Aragon and Portugal (2009) 
– Calibration + Maximum 
Likelihood 
(backward-looking model) 

Palma and Portugal 
(2011) –Kalman filter + 
Maximum Likelihood 
(Discretion) 

2000 to 2007 

2000-1 to 2010-4 

2000-1 to 2011-4 

0.727 
0.073 

0.2 

------- 

0.8264 
0.0083 
0.1653 
------- 

0.4292 
0.2189 
0.2704 
0.0815 

 
 
Table 4.3. Comparison with the internationalliterature: “Small Inflation Targeters” 
Preference 
parameters 

New Zealand 

Australia  

Canada 

1990-1 to 2005-3 

0.4953 
0.0778 
0.4235 
0.0035 

0.4931 
0.2032 
0.3013 
0.0025 

0.4697 
0.1282 
0.3992 
0.0028 

 

ߤగ 
ߤ௬ 
ߤ௥ 
ߤ௤ 

ߤగ 
ߤ௬ 
ߤ௥ 
ߤ௤ 

Source:Built based on the results obtained by Kam, Lees and Liu (2009) 
 
 
As shown by the results above, the Central Bankattaches greater valueto the stabilization of 
 
inflation  around  its  target(reference  value,  with  weight  equal  to  1),  followed  by  interest  rate 
smoothing(0.63),  by  output  stabilization(0.51)and,  finally,  by  exchange  rate  stabilization(0.19). 
The absolute weights are shown in table 4.1. Table 4.2 makes a comparison with previous results 
found in the literature. The order of parameter values does not change from one study to the other, 
but the magnitude is quite different.This is not a surprising result because we use a DSGE model, 
unlike other studies, which were conventional econometric models. In addition, the model used in 
this  paper  takes  into  account  a  small  open  economy,  contrary  to  the  previous  studies.  Palma 
andPortugal (2011) used a closed economy model and Aragon and Portugal (2009) employed only 
a random walk to describe the exchange rate behavior.  
 
The  results  obtained  herein  show  that  the  monetary  authority  attaches  great  weightto 
inflation stabilization, but a lower weight than those observed earlier. Moreover, note that there is 
a  very  deep  concern  with  interest  rate  smoothing,  with  similar  results  to  those  published  in  the 
international  literature.  Kam,  Lees  and  Liu  (2009)found  similar  results  for  other  “small  open 
economies”  that  adopt  the  inflation  targeting  regime:  Australia,  Canadaand  New  Zealand.  Also 
noteworthyis  the  fact  that  the  weight  given  to  output  stabilizationis  significantly  heavier  than 
thatattached  in  previous  studies.  This  can  be  accounted  for  by  the  larger  sample  size  used.  In 
recent times, the Central Bank has  apparentlygiven a larger weight to output gap, which may be 
helping to increase the weight of this variable in the loss function. 
 
Conversely, the positive weight for the exchange rate smoothing parametercan be seen as 
an attempt toreduce the volatility of inflation in the short run, i.e., the weight of exchange in the 
reaction functionis indirectly associated with inflation control. 
The habit formation parameter, estimated at 0.89, shows the relevance of habit formationto 
 
Brazil. Silveira  (2008)  reports values for the  first-order habit persistence  between 0.55 and 0.81. 
Silva and Portugal (2010) obtain a value of 0.9562, and a value of 0.74 for the SAMBA model for 
Brazil.    According  to  Cavalcanti  and  Vereda  (2011,  p.  16),  there  are  few  references  about 

persistence  values  for  Brazil,  since  most  recent  works  do  not  take  this  characteristic  into 
consideration.Nonetheless, the value found herein is consistent with the recent literature.  
 
The intertemporal elasticity of substitution in consumption (estimated at 0.92, σ = 1.09) is 
relatively higher than the values reported in the  literature. Silveira (2008) found a value of 0.48, 
and concluded that the aggregate demand responds to changes in the real interest rate, representing 
the conventional and effective monetary policy transmission mechanism in the Brazilian economy. 
Silva  and  Portugal  (2010)  also  find  lower  values  for  the  elasticity  of  substitution(1.2234,  which 
implies  an  elasticity  of  0.8174).  On  the  other  hand,  the  SAMBA  model  estimates  this  parameter 
at0.77 (σ = 1.30).  The result indicates thatthe tendency towards smoothing consumption in Brazil 
is  quite  strongand  larger  than  in  the  euro  zone  (Silva  and  Portugal,  2010).  As  stated  by  Silveira 
(2008,  p.  350),  due  to  the  large  variability  of  the  results,  it  is  not  possible  to  draw  a  definitive 
conclusion  for  this  parameter.  Specifically  in  our  case,  the  posterior  distribution  is  not  very 
different from the prior one, probably indicatingpoor identification of this parameter.16 
 

The  elasticity  of  labor  supplywas  estimatedat  0.58  (߶  =  1.71).  Silveira  (2008)  found  a 
relatively larger value, 0.77 (߶ = 1.30), as well as Gouvea et al. (2011), whoobtained 0.338 for this 
this value should be lower, as the one found herein. Silva and Portugal (2010)obtained a value of߶  

parameter  (which  implies  an  elasticity  of  2.96).  Yet,  as  suggested  by  the  international  literature, 

= 1.8128 (elasticity of 0.55), quite close to the one estimated in this paper. This parameter can be 
interpreted  asthe  percentage  change  in  labor  supply  given  by  a  percentage  change  in  real  wage. 
The low value obtained here compared to other studies could refer to the specificity of rigidity in 
the Brazilian labor market.  
 
The elasticity of substitution between domestic and imported goods was estimated at0.13, 
which indicates poor chances of substitution among these goods. The estimates for price stickiness 
parameters  (Calvo)  are  consistent  with  the  referenced  literature.  For  the  Brazilian  economy,  this 
elasticity was estimated at 0.66 and for the U.S. economy,at 0.87. The estimates for the backward-
looking  components  of  the  Phillips  curve  were  extremely  low.  The  persistence  parameters  of 
exogenous  processes  are  very  high  and  most  of  themmatch  those  estimates  described  in  the 
literature.  
 
5. Conclusion 
 
 
The major aim of this paper was to estimate the Central Bank preferences using a DSGE 
model for a small open  economy, based  chiefly  on the work of Kam,  Lees and  Liu (2009). This 
topic has been investigated only recently for the Brazilian caseand, to the best of our knowledge, 
only  two  studies  estimated  the  preferences  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Brazil:  Aragon  and  Portugal 
(2009)  and  Palma  and  Portugal  (2011).  The  present  study  innovatesin  relation  to  both  by 
considering  a  DSGE  model  and  extending  the  work  of  Palma  and  Portugal  (2011),  for  a  small 
open  economy.  Additionally,  the  use  of  the  exchange  rate  variable  in  the  Central  Bank’s  loss 
function isa noveltyfor the Brazilian case.  
 
The  model  was  estimated  using  quarterly  data  (in  order  to  minimize  measurement  errors 
and  the  number  of  lags  in  the  model)  in  the  period  that  followed  the  inflation  targeting 
regime(January  2000  to  June  2011).Most  of  the  results  obtained  for  the  structural  economic 
parameters  are  consistent  with  the  main  previous  studies  that  use  DSGE  models  to  assess  issues 
related to the Brazilian economy.  
 
As  to  the  preference  parameters,  it  is  possible  to  assert  that  the  Central  Bank  attaches 
heavier  weight  to  the  stabilization  of  inflation  around  its  target,  but  that  it  is  also  interested  in 
interest rate smoothing, output stabilization and exchange rate stabilization, in this strict order. 
The study sought to improve the estimation of Central Bank preferences. To achieve that, a DSGE 
model with microeconomic foundations for  a small open economy was used, consistent with the 
optimization and rational expectations approaches.Unlike most DSGE models, and an innovation 

                                                 
16 As pointed out by Castro et al. (2011), the identification of this parameter is often cumbersome.  

for the Brazilian case, the monetary authority was regarded also as an optimizing agent. Contrary 
to other agents (families and firms, for example), in most of the studies using DSGE models, the 
Central  Bank  does  not  solve  its  optimization  problem,  and  its  behavior  is  described  through  the 
Taylor rule.  
 
Some  extensions  to  this  study  can  and  should  be  conducted  in  the  future  in  order  to 
improve and shed further light upon this important topic. One of them consists in including some 
elements of the SAMBA model, notably an equation for the inflation targetthat best describes the 
behavior of the Brazilian economy. In addition, as Palma and Portugal (2011) did, a version of the 
commitment  model  could  be  estimatedso  as  to  check  which  of  the  two  cases  (commitments  × 
discretion) best suits the Brazilian case.  
 

REFERENCES 

 

Adjemian, 
http://www.dynare.org/stepan/dynare/slides/BayesianEstimation.pdf.  

(2007)  Bayesian 

estimation 

S. 

of  DSGE  models.  Available 

at: 

Aragon,  E.  K.;  Portugal,  M.  S.  (2009)  Central  Bank  Preferences  and  Monetary  Rules  under  the 
Inflation Targeting Regime in Brazil.Brazilian Review of Econometrics, 29( 1). 

Bernanke,  B;  Mishkin,  F.  (1997)  Inflation 
policy?Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11(2). 

targeting:  a  new  framework  for  monetary 

Calvo,  G.A.  (1983)  Staggered  prices  in  a  utility-maximizing  framework.  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics. 12, 383-398. 

Canova, F. (2007)Methods for applied macroeconomic research. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton 
University Press. 

Castelnuevo,  E.;  Surico,P.  (2003)What  does  monetary  policy  reveal  about  a  Central  Bank’s 
Preferences? Economic Notes, 32 (3), 335-359. 

Castro,  M.R.;  Gouvea,  S.N.;  Minella,  A.;  Santos,  R.C.;  Souza-Sobrinho,  N.F.  (2011)  SAMBA: 
Stochastic Analytical Model with a Bayesian Approach. Encontro Brasileiro de Econometria.  

Cavalcanti,  M.A.F.H.;  Vereda,  L.  (2011)  Propriedades  dinâmicas  de  um  modelo  DSGE  com 
parametrizações alternativas para o Brasil. IPEA. Texto para Discussão 1588, março 2011. 

De  Jong,  D.N.;  Dave,C.(2007)  StructuralMacroeconometrics.  Princeton,  New  Jersey:  Princeton 
University Press. 

Dennis,  R.  (2004)  Inferring  policy  objectives  from  economic  outcomes.Oxford  Bulletin  of 
Economics and Statistics, 66 (S1), 735-764. 

Dennis,  R.  (2005)  Inflation  targeting  under  commitment  and  discretion.  Economic  Review, 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 1-13. 

Dennis,  R.  (2006)  The  policy  preferences  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve.  Journal  of  Applied 
Econometrics, 21 (1),55- 77. 

Gali,  J.;  Monacelli,  T.  (2005)  Monetary  policy  and  Exchange  rate  volatility  in  a  small  open 
economy. Review of Economic Studies, 72, 707-734. 

Givens,  G. 
Discretion.Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, forthcoming. 

(2010).  Estimating  Central  Bank  Preferences  under  Commitment  and 

Goldfajn,  I.;  Werlang,  S.  R.C.  (2000)  The  pass-through  from  depreciation  to  inflation:  a  panel 
study. Banco Central do Brasil Working Paper Series n. 5, Brasília, 2000. 

Ilbas,  P.  (2010a)  Estimation  of  monetary  policy  preferences  in  a  forward-looking  model:  a 
Bayesian approach. International Journal of Central Banking, 6 (3), 169-209.  

Ilbas,  P.  (2010b)Revealing  the  preferences  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve.  Journal  of  Applied 
Econometrics, forthcoming. 

Justiniano,  A.;  Preston,  B.  (2010)  Monetary  policy  and  uncertainty  in  an  empirical  small  open 
economy model. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 25(1), 93-128. 

Kam, T; Lees, K.; Liu, P. (2009) Uncovering the hit-list for small inflation targeters: a Bayesian 
structural analysis.Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 41 (4), 583-618.  

Klein,  P. 
rationalexpectations model.Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 24 (10), 1405–1423. 

to  solve  a  multivariate 

the  generalized  Schur 

(2000)Using 

form 

linear 

Kydland,  F.;  Prescott,  E.  (1982)  Time  to  build  and  aggregate  fluctuations.Econometrica,  50,  
1345-70. 

Lucas, R.E. (1976) Econometric Policy Evaluation: a critique. In: Carnegie-Rochester Conference 
Series. The Phillips Curve.Amsterdam: North-Holland, p.19-46. 

Mendonça,  H.  (2001)  Mecanismos  de  transmissão  monetária  e  a  determinação  da  taxa  de  juros: 
uma aplicação da regra de Taylor ao caso brasileiro. Economia e Sociedade, 16, 65-81.  

Monacelli,  T.  (2005)  Monetary  Policy  in  a  Low  Pass-through  Environment,  Journal  ofMoney, 
Credit and Banking, 37, 1047-1066. 

Palma, A.A.; Portugal, M.S. (2011) Preferences of the Central Bank of Brazil under the inflation 
targeting regime: commitment vs. discretion. RevistaBrasileira de Economia, 65, 347-358. 

Remo,  A.;  Vasícek,  O.  (2009)  Estimate  of  the  Czech  National  Bank’s  Preferences  in  NOEM 
DSGE Model.BulletinoftheCzechEconometricSociety, 16 (26). 

Silva,  F.  S.;  Portugal,  M.  (2010)  O  impacto  de  choques  fiscais  na  economia  brasileira:  uma 
abordagem DSGE. XXXII Encontro Brasileiro de Econometria (SBE), Salvador-BA. 

Silveira,  M.  A.  C.  (2008)  Using  a  Bayesian  approach  to  estimate  and  compare  new  Keynesian 
DSGE models for the  Brazilian economy: the  role for  endogenous persistence.Revista  Brasileira 
de Economia, 62 (3), 333-357. 

Sims, C. A. (2002) Solving linear rational expectations models.Computational Economics,20, (1-
2), 1–20. 

Smets, F.; Wouters , R. (2003) An estimated dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model of the 
Euro Area. Journal of European Economic Association, 1 (5), 1123–1175. 

Svensson,  L.E.O.  (1996)  Inflation  forecast  targeting:  implementing  and  monitoring  inflation 
targets. Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research. Working Paper, 5797. 

 

