State power and capital: assessing Bob Jessop’s account of 
the transition to the Schumpeterian workfare post-national 
regime
Pedro Mendes Loureiro1

Abstract: We discuss the work of Bob Jessop, focusing on the transition he proposes to the contempo-
rary state form – the Schumpeterian workfare post-national regime (SWPR). After a brief presenta-
tion of the author’s account, we explore its main critiques and recent reformulations. We then consider 
whether Jessop’s narrative resorts to economic determinism, structuralism or functionalism, as some 
authors have indicated. We defend that while some traces of these might indeed be found, they can be 
sidestepped by approaching the emergence of the SWPR as part of an ongoing research agenda. We 
finally propose some changes to the latter, related to developing an explicitly evolutionary theoretical 
framework, to the space that post-Fordism comprehends and to the articulation between different sub-
types of post-Fordist social formations and accumulation strategies. A central point is not proposing 
competing regimes of accumulation for a single space, but rather a single regime that articulates the 
relevant forms of capital and is brought about by competing accumulation strategies.
Key words: Marxist state theory; contemporary political economy; strategic-relational approach; re-
gulation approach; Bob Jessop.

Resumo: Discute-se a obra de Bob Jessop, com foco na transição que o autor propõe para a forma 
estatal contemporânea – o Schumpeterian workfare post-national regime (SWPR). Após breve expo-
sição da narrativa proposta pelo autor, exploram-se suas principais críticas e reformulações recentes. 
Avalia-se, em seguida, em que medida Jessop resulta a reducionismo econômico, estruturalismo ou 
funcionalismo, como indicado por certos autores. Argumenta-se que embora haja traços dos mesmos, 
estes podem ser evitados ao se abordar a emergência do SWPR como parte de uma agenda de pesquisa 
em andamento. Propõem-se, finalmente, algumas mudanças a tal agenda, relacionadas a desenvolver 
um arcabouço evolucionário explícito para a coevolução institucional, ao espaço que o pós-fordismo 
compreende e à articulação entre diferentes subtipos de formações sociais e estratégias de acumulação. 
Um ponto central é a proposição de que não se veja regimes de acumulação a concorrer em um mesmo 
espaço, mas sim um único regime que articule as formas de capital relevantes e emerja do conflito de 
diferentes estratégias de acumulação.

Palavras-chave: teoria do Estado marxista; economia política contemporânea; abordagem estratégi-
co-relacional; teoria da regulação; Bob Jessop.

JEL: B51 (Current Heterodox Approaches: Socialist; Marxian; Sraffian); H70 (State and Local 
Government; Intergovernmental Relations: General); P16 (Capitalist Systems: Political Economy); 
Z13 (Cultural Economics; Economic Sociology; Economic Anthropology: Economic Sociology; 
Economic Anthropology; Social and Economic Stratification).

1  Economics Institute of the University of Campinas (IE/Unicamp). Email: lmpedro@gmail.com

1.  Introduction2
Bob Jessop, a well-known Marxist state theorist and political economist, has for long theorised 
about post-Fordism and its state. Along over three decades of research, he has offered a growingly com-
plex account of the emergence of contemporary political and economic forms, the fullest expression of 
which can be found in The future of the capitalist state (Jessop, 2002) and its thesis of an ongoing tran-
sition to what Jessop calls the Schumpeterian workfare post-national regime (SWPR) and the know-
ledge-based economy (KBE). We consider this to be a revealing and sophisticated account and a much
-welcome contribution to a contemporary critique of political economy, especially in its articulation of 
political and economic elements. With this in mind, we approach Jessop’s proposed transition as part of 
an evolving research agenda and suggest some modifications to the latter. In order to do so, after a very 
brief exposition of how the author explains the emergence of the SWPR we explore the main critiques 
of his account. We then analyse his more recent output, particularly after the onset of the global econo-
mic crisis, seeing how this has affected the matter at hand. Having done so, we assess his contribution 
and argue that, in spite of passages that can otherwise be construed, it can be read in a non-functiona-
list, non-structuralist and non-deterministic manner. We also suggest five shifts to the agenda, before 
offering some final remarks.
2.  Towards a Schumpeterian workfare post-national regime

Matters of space prohibit a fuller exposition of the transition to the SWPR, which will be presen-
ted very schematically so that we can deal at more lengths with its assessment3. Jessop’s argument goes 
that Fordism and its state form, the Keynesian welfare national state (KWNS), enter a joint crisis in the 
mid-seventies. Both economic and extra-economic factors, present in most spaces of Atlantic Fordism, 
played a part in this. The overriding developments, however, are related to the internationalisation of 
the economy and the society, which disarticulated the coherence of the ‘integral state’ and the ‘integral 
economy’. Particularly as wages came to be seen as international costs of production, instead of as do-
mestic source of effective demand, and as money growingly functioned as international currency, and not 
national money, the main crisis-management routines became ineffective. Demand-side interventions, 
operated through wages and national credit, became dysfunctional and led to a prolonged stagflation. 
There is thus a period of attempts at resolving the crisis by established means, which, as they had be-
come ineffectual, but escalate the situation. The former congruence between national societies, national 
states and national economies is no longer observed, which amounts to a deconstruction of the national 
economy as an object of regularisation and governance by the national state. Jessop indicates this as the 
end of the national spatiotemporal fix, accompanied by a ‘crisis of crisis-management’, employing Offe’s 
(1984) expression. As a result, the wide-ranging economic and social disorganisation that entails gra-
dually favours the development of discourses and strategies aiming at more profound transformations. 
There thus were, in the various spaces, processes that led to a deep reorganisation of the state form and 
the accumulation regime, which were determined by the hegemonic disputes and as the result of the 
conflict of different strategies. These processes unfolded in conjunctures whose strategic selectivities were 
given by each concrete crisis, in turn marked by more or less common factors – such as the internatio-
nalisation of the economy and the society – and by particular elements dictated by the history of each 
social formation. The new accumulation regime and state form jointly develop themselves, and are later 
indicated as the KBE and the SWPR. These political and economic forms, if they indeed come to be 
institutionalised, would be mutually complementary in the sense that their strategic selectivities reinforce 
each other’s, so that the accumulation of capital tends to be regularised and governed.
In substantive terms, Jessop presents four main tendencies of the substitution of the KWNS by the 
SWPR, represented by each term of the concepts. They are related to the participation of the state in the 
circuit of capital, in its more directly economic policies; to the state’s participation in the reproduction of 
2 The author would like to thank Mauricio Chalfin Coutinho, Lucas Morato Araújo and Aiko Ikemura Amaral for the 
valuable comments on earlier versions of this paper. The usual disclaimers apply.
3  We present this argument based on the following works (Jessop, 1993, 2000, 2002, 2006b, 2006c, 2006e).

1

labour power as a fictitious commodity, as regards its social policies; to the dominant scale of the state, if 
any; and to the prevailing mechanism for coordinating social relations. Respectively, they comprehend: 
i) a substitution of demand-side, Keynesian-oriented intervention to a supply-side, competitivenes-
s-enhancing and innovation-fostering Schumpeterian action; ii) a subordination of social to economic 
policy, with downwards pressure on the social wage and a change of focus from full employment to ‘full 
employability’, leading to more flexible labour relations and a transition from welfare to workfare; iii) 
a relativization of scale that entails a clear loss of primacy of the national one (even if it still important 
in many respects) without any other scale assuming dominance; and iv) a greater role of governance as 
a mechanism of correcting for market and state failures, accompanied by the state’s growing resort to 
metagovernance – which operates under the shadow of hierarchy.
3.  Recent debates: critiques of the transition to the SWPR

We now turn to the critiques of the presented narrative. Their central claim is that Jessop provides 
a narrative lacking in agency, which is either seen as a consequence of the author’s Marxist framework 
or of conducting an excessively abstract analysis. Philip Cerny (2006) reviews three pieces by Jessop and 
Neil Brenner (Brenner, 2004a; Brenner et al., 2003; Jessop, 2002) and, in spite of agreeing with seve-
ral substantive points the two authors advance, he provides a markedly different interpretation of them. 
For him, Jessop is only able to formally distance himself from economic determinism, as he ultimately 
explains political and social phenomena through economic developments. It would purportedly be the 
‘adoption of accumulation strategies that determines the direction of structural development and insti-
tutional change’ (Cerny, 2006, p. 688). This would in turn lead Jessop to consider that the remodelling 
and rescaling of the state is centrally caused by the transition from Fordism to post-Fordism and the 
KBE – with Cerny seeing the latter, even if implicitly, as a purely economic change. It would seem that 
the author understands that Jessop and Brenner present such a transition as a ‘cause without cause’, and, 
against this, suggests two hypotheses (Cerny, 2006, p. 691-692). Firstly, post-Fordist production tech-
niques and strategies could have become a more efficient set of routines due to the expansion of markets 
that occurred during the Fordist period. And, secondly, it could further be related to a political process 
that eventually led to the opening and internationalisation of financial markets, which decisively explains 
the emergence of post-Fordism4.
Cerny furthermore argues that the Marxist framework employed by Jessop and Brenner would, 
besides inevitably leading to economic determinism, add no value to their analyses. It is the case that all 
processes they study can be better approached by other traditions. Against the value-theoretical claim 
that only productive labour generates value, markets should be considered as sources of wealth in their 
own stead. And, even if they are not self-regulating, the Marxist endogenous market failure theories are 
reductionist and fail to recognise that the dynamism of capitalist societies is precisely due to competiti-
ve market behaviour(Cerny, 2006, p. 683-684). Moreover, when dealing in the extra-economic Jessop 
would deliver no theoretical or analytical novelties – metagovernance, for example, is seen as nothing 
more than the ‘longstanding adage in political philosophy that the main task of the state is to provide 
the general conditions for the stabilization and continued existence of the endogenous society itself’ 
(Cerny, 2006, p. 686). As regards the spatiality of accumulation, notwithstanding his remark that power-
ful insights have been offered in this terrain, Cerny argues that spatiotemporal fixes should not be seen 
as a structural imperative for regularising capital accumulation. A better view of the subject could be 
produced with transaction cost theory, which indicates that in an economy of highly mobile production 
factors and non-specific assets geographical dimensions lose weight. For all that,

it might be preferable simply to downgrade the structural imperative of Marxist-style capital accumulation 
and its relationship with spatio-temporal fixes in general and to upgrade the other variables Jessop and 
Brenner continually discuss but insufficiently privilege in theoretical terms (Cerny, 2006, p. 693).

4  ‘these changes did not result spontaneously from processes of production but from political decisions […] Embedded li-
beralism was originally a Fordist project that turned into a post-Fordist one because of the expansion of the scale of markets, 
especially financial markets. This process of market expansion did not take place by itself, but was the result of a now well 
researched political process of trade and financial market opening.’ (Cerny, 2006, p. 692, author’s emphasis).

2

the outcome [of the transformations of the state] will not be determined by the structural imperatives 
of capital accumulation, however co-constituted and realized through struggles. It will be the product 
of old-fashioned, more structurally open and politically fluid processes of conflict, competition and 
coalition-building (Cerny, 2006, p. 694).

Colin Hay (2004) also assesses Cerny’s and Jessop’s accounts of the current transformations of 
the state. He organises his critique around three main issues. The overriding one is that the authors have 
produced good descriptions of contemporary state forms, but their work reduces itself to merely that – 
descriptions. Insofar as one tries to read them in search for explanations behind the emergence of the 
SWPR or the Competition state (Cerny’s thesis), the end result would by force be a functionalist argu-
ment based on economic determinism. Which is to say, Hay considers that Cerny commits the errors 
of which he accuses Jessop. The second point, closely associated to the first, is that the highly abstract 
narrative employed entirely obscures social agency. Lastly, Hay raises the question of the SWPR being 
an excessively encompassing category, suggesting that it is better to study transition processes on a ca-
se-by-case basis.
According to Hay, it is not clear whether Jessop intends to merely offer a stylised description of the 
emergence of the SWPR, present the necessity or logic of such a transition or, yet, explain this process 
in its temporal and spatial specificity. This is in itself troublesome, as it may come to depict contingent 
results as historical necessities and, thereby, naturalise the former. On top of that, when Jessop effecti-
vely tries to explain how or why the SWPR came to be, his form-analysis would slip into functionalism 
as it reveals the functional complementarity between the state form and the accumulation regime. The 
SWPR would assert itself, if it comes to do so, for being the state form most compatible with post-
Fordism, for contributing towards the resolution of the crisis of Fordism. This can be divided into two 
different claims – one regarding the necessity of the functional adequacy between political and econo-
mic forms, another regarding the capacity of one sphere determining the other. On the one hand, Hay 
considers that there are no reasons to expect the development of such adequacy, as state regimes do not 
respond to economic crises themselves, but rather to dominant discourses of the latter – which is to say, 
to narrated, not real crises (Hay, 2004, p. 43). There are thus no mechanisms capable of bringing about 
this compatibility, which therefore stands as an undemonstrated necessity. This argument is indifferent 
to which sphere determines the other: there are no processes that mould economic forms so that they 
adjust to political ones or vice-versa, nor are there any forces that co-constitute the state and the eco-
nomy in a mutually compatible manner. But there is a second dimension to his critique, for Jessop would 
purportedly suggest that the economic dimension holds constant while dynamically shaping the state 
form so that it becomes functional to the accumulation of capital. Hay thus argues that if the SWPR 
effectively institutionalises itself ‘one must presume this to be a triumph of capitalism’s ability to conjure 
for itself optimal economic functionality out of the contingencies of political conflict and contestation’ 
(Hay, 2004, p. 48). Hence his denunciation of functionalism implicitly includes one of economic deter-
minism, with the political being reduced to an epiphenomenon of the economic. Varró (2010, p. 1268) 
has a similar interpretation, as she concludes that Jessop gives in the to the temptations of stretching a 
static analysis of the functional adequacy between systems to a dynamic account in which such functio-
nality becomes the explanatory principle of systemic evolution. The author furthermore argues that the 
concept of ecological dominance leads to determinism, as it allegedly establishes economic structures 
that inescapably define political phenomena.
Another issue Hay raises regards the abstraction of Jessop’s analyses, which leads to an apolitical 
account devoid of agency and insufficiently attentive to the diversity of the studied processes. Even if 
political elements are mentioned, they would be operative in more concrete levels that are not approa-
ched. Consequently, the thesis would offer nothing in the direction of contestation strategies, nor would 
it be able to shed light on the specific processes that brought about the SWPR – notwithstanding rich 
descriptions of the strategic terrain in which such strategies are played out. For Hay, ‘this is a product 
no doubt of the simple fact that the ethereal realms of abstraction at which the analysis is for the most 
part conducted are not densely populated with   clearly identifiable actors, strategic or otherwise’ (Hay, 
2004, p. 47). The transition to the current state form could be better seen, on the other hand, as the result 
3

of neoliberalisation processes occurring in response to supposed, fabricated or genuine crises of political 
regimes. This would have the advantages of eschewing functionalism, reintroducing agency, better dea-
ling with the temporality of the various processes and being more consistent with the idea that politics 
deals with the political construal of crises, and not directly with the latter. Varró (2010) leans towards a 
similar direction, even if it is not clear whether she interprets the lack of agency in Jessop’s narratives 
as a result of his general framework or of the level of abstraction employed. On the one hand, Jessop 
would implicitly adopt an ontological distinction between the economic and the political, equating the 
former with the space of structures and the latter to the space of agency – to the result that the politi-
cal would be unavoidably determined by economic factors (Varró, 2010, p. 1268-1269). On the other 
hand, however, she also suggests that more abstract analyses are not able to explain how and why the 
phenomena at hand occur, nor can they identify the agents responsible for them.
As far as the problems of abstraction go, it might also be the case that the schematic transition 
would illuminate none of the concrete processes to which it refers. Which is to say, given the wide variety 
of KWNSs and SWPRs, a single account of the transition from the ones to the others would, in the end, 
not be related to any. In other words, Hay is not convinced that the factors behind such transformations 
are indeed common to the various cases at hand, or even that they are all part of a single phenomenon 
(Hay, 2004, p. 45). Even if many states can be described as KWNSs or SWPRs, positing that they sys-
tematically evolved from the former to the latter, especially through a process with shared causes, is not 
seen as a fruitful interpretation. Moreover, the argument behind that would be circular. This is because, 
insofar as he presumes that there is a single transition occurring in the various KWNSs, Jessop postu-
lates that it is thus caused by a common group of mechanisms. In the end, the validity of the degree of 
abstraction employed, which depends on the processes sharing common causes, remains a presupposi-
tion that is circularly justified for it being easier to explain the various transitions by means of a single 
account. In order to avoid this, it would be necessary to further research the varieties of KWNSs and 
SWPRs and examine the (dis)similarities of their transitions, so as to identify how (allegedly) common 
mechanisms are overdetermined in concrete conjunctures and there arises (or not) a genealogical tree 
of  contemporary state forms.
Another result of this agent-free, functionalist narrative is that it cannot envision alternatives to 
the SWPR. As it is posited as the ‘best political shell’ of post-Fordism, how is one to look beyond it? 
There are no clear indications of which characteristics of the SWPR are necessary to avoid political and 
economic crises and which can be safely modified in a post-Fordist context, which hinders the practical 
struggle to transform the state. The same point is made by Bas van Heur (2010a, 2010b), which he as-
cribes to the exaggerated importance attached to capital as a social force. This leads to an understanding 
of state developments as sub-products of the needs of the economy. Open and political processes would 
thus be read according to a deeper imperative related to the necessity of guaranteeing the conditions 
of capital accumulation, pre-judging history in the direction of a pro-capitalist resolution5. The abstract 
character of the analyses would also be unable to determine the causality of the examined processes, for 
which one needs more empiric studies and historically precise approaches (van Heur, 2010a, p. 433, 
2010b, p. 453). Hence, Jessop’s theoretical corpus (more specifically, CPE) would neither inform concrete 
practices nor subsidise empirical studies.
It is worth mentioning that Hay is criticising Jessop’s account of the transition to the SWPR as 
presented in The future of the capitalist state (Jessop, 2002), for in other works he considers that the stra-
tegic-relational approach Jessop employs is able to escape structuralism, determinism and functionalism 
(Hay, 2006). Nevertheless, Hay does understand that the Jessop is pursuing a problematic research agen-
da that should be essential redirected, and not further developed via more concrete studies6.

5  It should be noted that Bonefeld (1987) had already issued a similar critique.
6  Marinetto (2004), on the other hand, considers that The future of the capitalist state initiates a productive research agenda, 
even if should be essentially taken for a set of hypotheses to be tested against more concrete studies.

4

4.  Post-crisis post-Fordism: some of Jessop’s recent remarks on the SWPR, the KBE and finance-
dominated accumulation

Particularly after the onset of the ongoing economic crisis, Jessop has returned to the transition 
to post-Fordism, the KBE and the SWPR in a rather different light. Even if he had stressed the hei-
ghtened importance of financial capital and its destabilising potential, the matter has acquired a more 
prominent role in his recent output. Related to this, Jessop now reads back into the preceding decades a 
conflict between two accumulation regimes, one centred on financial accumulation and the other on the 
KBE (the SPWR being compatible only to the latter). The role of the USA in the transition to post-
Fordism, an issue scarcely mentioned before, also receives some attention. Given the fairly recent cha-
racter of these contributions, many of which deal with an ever-changing crisis, the author’s arguments 
are not always very coherent or clear. It seems reasonable to suggest that they are more exploratory in 
nature, but as they – implicitly or not – review formerly held positions one might be able to assess the 
development of the research agenda through them.
As previously shown, Jessop considered that the hegemonic post-Fordist accumulation regime was 
the KBE, in and through which he also explored the articulation between financial and productive for-
ms of capital. In more recent texts, however, the author is less clear on this respect. In certain moments 
he indicates that the KBE competed with a finance-dominated regime, either in the same spaces or in 
closely interconnected ones (Jessop, 2013c; Jessop et al., 2013). In others, he suggests that the latter re-
gime became hegemonic after the crisis of Fordism, or even that the two asserted themselves in different 
spaces7. Nevertheless, Jessop has definitely redirected his thoughts towards considering that somehow a 
finance-based regime coexisted with the KBE, instead of exploring the articulation between the finan-
cial and knowledge-based moments of capital in a single accumulation regime.
With this change, some of the strongest crisis tendencies that were associated to post-Fordist so-
cial formations come to be rather circumscribed to the finance-dominated regime8. This may be seen 
by the fact that when dealing with the KBE in his post-crisis contributions, Jessop rarely mentions fi-
nancial capital, the dominance of which was behind most of the destabilising phenomena. In fact, this 
form of capital comes into play when neoliberalising tendencies interact with the KBE9. In this pro-
cess, the SWPR is also reviewed. It is indicated as the complementary form only of the KBE, and is 
described in a somewhat more stable and progressive light. Especially as regards its participation in the 
reproduction of labour power, the workfarist elements of this state form are inflexed towards guarante-
eing social security, as it is seen as compatible with ‘an innovation-led, flexicurity oriented, multi-scalar 
and governance-based mode of growth’ (Jessop, 2013c, p. 18, our emphasis). Another important issue 
is that the competition between the two regimes, instead of a clear dominance of either, increased the 
overall systemic instability, as it hindered the development of the extra-economic supports adequate to 
each one (Jessop, 2013c, p. 20).
It is worth exploring why the neoliberalising, finance-dominated strategy became hegemonic and 
continues to be so as the crisis unfolds (Jessop, 2010a, 2013c, 2013a, 2013b). One argument is that ne-
oliberalising reforms were carried out in most spaces, and even after a change of course they continue to 
exert strong influence in a path-dependent manner. Besides this, the weight of neoliberal USA and the 
position of the dollar as the international reserve currency, associated to the greater ecological dominance 
of the world market, indirectly allow the USA to export its problems and contradictions to other spaces, 
regimes and social formations (Jessop, 2010a, p. 33). This should not be understood, however, as there 
7  See, for example, the following quotes: ‘the crisis of the post-war mode of growth […] created the conditions for a neoli-
beral regime shift and a transition to a finance-dominated mode of growth’ (Jessop, 2013b, p. 241, excerpts in italics indi-
cate the author’s emphasis, those in bold our own) and ‘finance-dominated accumulation regimes […] emerged in a few but 
important economic spaces’ (Jessop, 2013b, p. 244).
8  These were the exaggerated emphasis on the abstract moments of capital, the dominance of financial capital and the in-
capacity of developing a stable spatiotemporal fix (Jessop, 2002, p. 104-113, 2006h, 2007, p. 178-197).
9  ‘While it [the KBE] tends to favour productive over money capital, it has sometimes been inflected in a neoliberal manner 
that highlights the role of market forces as the driving force behind innovation’ (Jessop, 2013c, p. 17). The contraposition of 
money and productive capital suggests that market forces would implicitly contain a stronger role for financial capital.

5

being a unilateral imposition of forces organised around the USA on the rest of the world. However 
much finance-dominated regimes might have emerged in but few spaces (Jessop, 2013b, p. 244), they 
are part of a strategy of a transnational power block (Jessop, 2013c, p. 16-17). In this vein, there are so-
cial formations on which neoliberalism was imposed, but by and large the latter is ‘the product of speci-
fic national and transnational class projects’ (Jessop, 2012a, p. 210, our emphasis ) that actively pursued 
neoliberal regime shifts. It can also be said that the bases for expanding and maintaining this model are 
located in the greater power of financial capital and on a wider dynamics of domination:

This regime gained increasing influence in the variegated world market through the disembedding of 
financial capital and the importance of neoliberalism as the driving force in world market integration 
[...] The continuing efforts to revive this model tell us something about the limits of the regulation 
approach in so far as it ignores the broader dynamics of class domination, the ability of those with power 
not to have to learn from their mistakes, and the growing turn to authoritarian statism and, indeed, 
repressive measures to maintain class power (Jessop, 2013c, p. 18).

5.  Reassessing the transition towards the Schumpeterian workfare post-national regime: notes 
for an open research agenda

We suggest that Jessop’s contribution can be better appreciated if seen as part of an agenda that to 
date remains largely to be done. Criticised and improved though it may be, and even if we might in fact 
occasionally come upon structuralist, functionalist or determinist elements, Jessop’s wider oeuvre does not 
authorise such an interpretation. With this in mind, we now explore the transition to the SWPR trying 
to bring out the potential of this approach, to indicate some issues we consider better dealt with from a 
change in perspective and to highlight the imprecise, ambiguous or insufficiently studied phenomena.
An overall assessment of the author’s interpretation lies in it being or not deterministic, structu-
ralist or functionalist. Firstly, it should be noted that, in contradistinction to Cerny’s (2006, p. 691-692) 
understanding, it is not the transition to post-Fordism that brings about the SWPR. Fordism and post-
Fordism are emergent categories only reproduced through the social relations on which they are founded, 
and only insofar as these relations are themselves reproduced by the relevant actors (Jessop, 1996). Thus, 
any idea of a crisis of Fordism must be based on the incapacity of reproducing its main forms (e.g., the 
wage norm); likewise, one can only speak of a post-Fordist accumulation regime or social formation to 
the extent that there is an ensemble of mutually supportive relations. It is thus the case that, quite clearly, 
‘the transition to post-Fordism and the KBE is itself a dependent variable’ (Cerny, 2006, p. 691), in the 
double sense that it can only be explained by the institutionalisation of a series of relations from which 
it emerges and that, as any other event, it is caused by multiple determinations that must be historically 
explained (Jessop, 1990, p. 12).
There is another reason why the transition to post-Fordism did not cause the SWPR – objects 
and modes of regulation, regimes of accumulation and modes of regulation are actually co-constituted 
(Jessop, 2006d, p. 365, 2006a, p. 300). Specific elements found in each of them may be prior to these 
forms, such as microelectronics and the privatisation of state services, but one can only consider that pos-
t-Fordism exists when these various objects – or, better, the relations between them – acquire a certain 
degree of structured coherence. This happens via a multifaceted process, with political as well as econo-
mic determinants, that alters the overall efficacy of every element (Jessop, 1990, p. 311). It should also 
be noted that modes of regulation, including state forms, are ‘chance discoveries’ (Fundsache) (Jessop, 
2006b, p. 84, 2006f, p. 238), the development of which does not follow a preordained process that leaves 
economic circuits unaltered. They rather come to be through attempts at reflexively moulding economic 
and political relations and imposing partial coherence on nascent structures (Jessop, 2006a, p. 316)10. In 
this vein, if economic factors were the amongst the main ones responsible for destructuring Fordism, 
they cannot be seen to have single-handedly structured even the post-Fordist regime of accumulation, 

10   Brenner’s (2003, 2004b) works are a good example of this process. The author highlights how urban governance mecha-
nisms underwent extensive changes during the crisis of Fordism and gradually fixed themselves around glocalising compe-
tition strategies, which actively participated in regularising accumulation along lines that came to be post-Fordist.

6

let alone other dimensions of post-Fordism. There is no inert economic dimension to summon benefi-
cial state forms, as Hay (2004, p. 48) suggests. In all effect, the reason why Jessop sees the SWPR as an 
inherently post-Fordist state runs rather the other way round: ‘The key mechanism in this case [is] the 
critical role of the state in securing the extra-economic conditions for capital accumulation and hence 
in shaping and guiding the forms that capital accumulation can take’ (Jessop, 2002, p. 268, our emphasis).
Seen in this light, it would thus seem that economic determinism is not to be found in the tran-
sition to the SWPR. The issue should not be so rapidly, dismissed, however, for we believe there in fact 
are some traces of it, as in the following quote:

The general and widespread nature of the changes involved in the tendential emergence of the SWPR 
suggests that the primary causes of this transition should be sought in general and widespread features 
of the postwar political economy since the 1970s and ‘80s (Jessop, 2002, p. 142).

Regardless of the term ‘political economy’ indicating a wider conception of the economic, there are 
some deterministic elements not easily dismissed here. Without denying this, we suggest that it can be 
sidestepped by referring to Jessop’s wider oeuvre according to the following interpretation. The author 
(Jessop, 1982, p. 211-220) proposes that a theory is adequate to the extent that it retroductively explains 
the contingent necessity of the phenomena at hand, at the degree of complexity and concreteness that it 
is formulated, while also being extensible to different levels of complexity and concreteness. In addition 
to this, the more abstract is a hypothesis, the greater will be the variation of the results compatible with 
it – it is underdetermined. It must be borne in mind that the SWPR is a very abstract concept since, for 
example, its participation in the reproduction of labour force is defined in terms of promoting flexibili-
ty and the (re)insertion of workers in the market, while varying between the extremes of ‘flexploitation’ 
and ‘flexicurity’ (Jessop, 2002, p. 156). Even Brenner (2009), which often works with Jessop, recognises 
that in many aspects the latter’s account of the rescaling of the state is rather preliminary. The SWPR 
is, in a nutshell, ‘the naturally necessary form of the capitalist type of state in a globalizing knowledge
-based economy’ (Jessop, 2002, p. 268). We suggest this means that the concept is defined at the degree 
of abstraction that allows it to encompass every necessary dimension of a state form compatible with 
post-Fordist social formations, and no more than this.
We propose the following interpretation. Retrospectively, one notices that there was an ongoing 
transition to post-Fordism and that there were no radical breaks with capitalism, but rather attempts 
to carry on with the integration of the social formations of Atlantic Fordism to the world market. In 
this scenario, political-economic factors are behind the emergence of the SWPR at a highly abstract 
plane, given two interconnected issues. Firstly, the growing integration of the economies and the higher 
mobility of capital are the main reasons why it was necessary to restructure Fordism and the KWNS. 
Secondly, the world market assumed greater weight as a mandatory reference of economic calculation 
and as a space of competition. Insofar as this subjects each individual capital and social formation to the 
lines of force given by the clash of all accumulation strategies, the compatibility with the capital relation 
growingly becomes a validation criterion for the various social forms. Increasing the interconnectedness 
of the world market was certainly not a historical necessity, but, once this condition is accepted, the eco-
logical dominance of the economy is heightened. This should not be taken to mean that global econo-
mic integration implies the adoption of a single ensemble of social forms, which would naturalise – and 
hence fetishize – one amongst many paradigms. What is at stake here is that there is greater pressure to 
develop competitiveness in face of the totality of capitals (a more restrictive condition than competing 
in national boundaries), however that may occur. The social formations are thus faced with more nu-
merous and more intense economic forces, many of which they cannot individually influence. The im-
pact of an eventual misalignment to global competitive conditions is thereby increased. One may thus 
conclude that there is a stronger necessity of developing a competitive economic structure, with higher 
penalties attached to failing to do so. In other words, the economic places greater adaptive pressures on 
social formations as a whole and is more capable of destabilising the various social dimensions. Which 
is to say, the ecological dominance of the economy increases.

7

We might then say that, for the various agents participating in the development of a new state 
form, certain economic elements – which would come to be part of the post-Fordist accumulation re-
gime – imposed themselves as structural conditions for a great part of their strategies11. In this sense, 
given the acceptance of the project of increasing global financial and productive integration, the economic in 
fact assumed greater ecological dominance. In this context, economic factors were actually able to mould 
important traits of the state forms being developed. This account suggests that, for this specific matter, 
competing in a growingly integrated world market and further increasing this integration were strate-
gies and objectives present in the various analysed spaces – and they decisively produce certain traits 
that, hypothetically, allow one indicate the tendential emergence of the SWPR in all of them. We thus 
suggest that Jessop tries to demonstrate the hypothesis that some very general aspects of the transition 
to the SWPR are given mainly by economic factors. The issue then becomes assessing to what extent 
does this inform more concrete approaches while not being rendered contradictory by them (Jessop, 
1982, p. 211-220).
We present two examples of this possible integration. Oosterlynck (2010) studies the transforma-
tion of the Belgian state and shows how a general scenario, given by the crisis of Fordism and the transi-
tion to post-Fordism, was overdetermined by factors specific to the case at hand. The author convincingly 
demonstrates the open-ended character of state rescaling processes, while also exploring the strategically 
selective terrain in which they operate. Of particular relevance here is how far-reaching events (such as 
the end of colonialism and the competitive challenge of post-Fordist production processes) interact with 
more specific ones (such as the linguistic basis for developing regional hegemonic projects), as well as 
how the end result in Belgium can be seen in the lines of an SWPR. Jessop (2006e) himself also pro-
vides an interesting case study. Comparing the English and German transition to conservative regimes 
in the mid-eighties, he concludes that greater similarities were observed in matters more influenced by 
international competition and in which post-Fordism was already more coherent, while in both cases a 
break with Fordist regulation (that had become ineffective) was necessary. On the other hand, the prior 
trajectory of both countries produced crises of different intensity and dimensions in each one, which fa-
voured varying responses as regards the extents of the transformations to be conducted. In this sense, we 
observe political and economic strategies in each formation that deal both with the inescapable scenario 
of the crisis of Fordism and the KWNS, under the risk of developing a ‘strategy that is inconsistent with 
long-run trends emerging from the clash of all strategies in the world economy’ (Jessop, 2006e, p. 149), 
and with each country’s political and economic particularities that overdetermine concrete struggles.
It thus seems possible to read Jessop in a manner that avoids the determinist elements that even-
tually arise. If The future of the capitalist state (Jessop, 2002) really is rather silent as regards the specific 
processes that brought about the transition to the SWPR, it is not an approach incompatible with, or 
in opposition to, more concrete ones. On the contrary, there is a research agenda, including works by 
Jessop and others12, which tries to reflexively integrate both. In order to correctly frame this agenda, a 
note on the relationship between abstraction, agency, the economic and the political seems necessary 
here. While the abstract analyses Jessop usually conducts do not tend to specify agency in the studied 
processes, one is thereby not necessarily in structuralist terrain. This is true as long as there effectively 
is space for it in more concrete dimensions – i.e., as long as the agents are not seen simply as Träger of 
the indicated relations, but are actually able to strategically reproduce or transform the latter (Jessop, 
1982, 1996). Hence, it is necessary to admit the underdetermination of these abstract explanations. On 
the other hand, this must not be confused with equating structures with the economic and agency with 
the political, as Varró (2010, p. 1268-1269) would have it, for two reasons. Firstly, for Jessop (1996) has 
11   ‘the “structural” moment in social relations is now seen to comprise those elements in a given temporal-spatial strate-
gic context which cannot be altered by a given agent (or set of agents) pursuing a given strategy during a given time period. 
The “conjunctural” moment in turn will comprise those elements in a given temporal-spatial strategic context which can be 
modified’ (Jessop, 1996, p. 124).
12   The following works can be considered to advance this research agenda, either by explicitly following in Jessop’s footsteps 
or, more frequently, by critically approaching his work and trying to progress on it (Brenner, 2003, 2004b, 2009; Goodwin 
et al., 2005; Jessop, 2006e, 2013d; Jessop et al., 2008; Jones, 2008; Oosterlynck, 2010; Wissen, 2009).

8

a relativized and dialectical approach to the duality of structure and agency. Political dimensions thus 
might be structural constraints for some actors and strategies, while, inversely, economic elements mi-
ght emerge as conjunctural opportunities for others. Secondly, the interrelations Jessop posits between 
the economic and the political completely disavow the conception of a self-sufficient economic sphere 
reproducing itself behind the backs of the agents and a voluntarist political dimension13. His concepts 
actually try to show how agency and structure are always present in the economic and the political, and 
how these dimensions continuously interact and are mutually implicated. As an example, hegemonic 
projects are not only conditioned by economic factors but also decisively influence the latter, while accu-
mulation strategies are an agential category dealing mainly with capital accumulation that nevertheless 
include political and discursive conditions of success (Jessop, 1983, 2003, 2006a). We thus suggest that 
it is a false dilemma asking whether the transition to post-Fordism and the SWPR was either politically 
or economically determined, as Cerny (2006) seems to put it. Inevitably, state transformations are effec-
ted through political processes; what is important is to investigate how political and economic factors, 
and the definition of a certain conjuncture, interacted over time to bring about the results observed. 
Accordingly, Jessop’s account points out that economic (but also political) factors made it necessary to 
break with the KWNS and, in the open restructuring process that then begins, the victorious strategies 
did not seek to detach themselves from the world market and the apparently more competitive nascent 
forms of economic organisation, but, rather, took these as desirable objectives – and, in time, they were 
able to gradually institutionalise, in a mutually implicated manner, what would come to be a post-For-
dist accumulation regime (the KBE) and state form (the SWPR).
Given the possibility of a non-determinist reading of Jessop, let us now observe how functionalism 
comes to bear on his analysis. It must first be noted that a crass kind of functionalism that proposes a 
perfect fit between the state form and the accumulation regime is not to be found. It is sufficient to in-
dicate that Jessop has long considered that the typical form of the capitalist state problematizes its ca-
pitalist function and that, in the specific case of the SWPR, he points out many enduring contradictions 
and insufficiencies, such as the incapacity of developing a stable spatiotemporal fix (Jessop, 2006g, p. 
294, 2006h, p. 341-344, 2002). Nevertheless, this is no proper demonstration of a lack of functionalism 
– proposing that the most functional forms will be selected because they are functional, however much 
precarious this maximum congruence may be, is still a functionalist interpretation.
It is clear that the SWPR is to some extent functional, for it has got the ‘basic structural features 
that are congruent with the globalizing, knowledge-based economy’ (Jessop, 2002, p. 268). We must 
then investigate how this congruence is seen to emerge, where it effectively does so. Two previous points 
should be established. First, in no moment does the author say that the SWPR will in fact institutio-
nalise itself. Functionality is thus not seen as a sufficient condition for the emergence of social forms. 
Second, this state form is an ideal-type, not a concrete description of ‘actually existing’ states; hence, we 
are dealing with an empirically-informed, theoretically-based mental experiment that seeks to identify 
certain complementary features of a regime of accumulation and a state form.
Bearing this in mind, it should be noted that in the theoretical framework employed some degree 
of adequacy between the political and the economic is necessary for social reproduction to take place. 
Given that accumulation depends on a set of relations only partially under the value form (Jessop, 1983, 
2001, 2002), insofar as the capital relation is reproduced some congruence between the state form and the 
accumulation regime must have been present. This escapes functionalism for two reasons. Firstly, because 
in no moment is it decreed that capital will be reproduced (and hence the necessary presence an orga-
nic state); and, secondly, for it does not require the most functional forms to be selected. In view of this, 
the somewhat trite observation that capitalism greatly expanded during the post-1980 period, marked 
as it might have been by higher instability, suggests the presence of a congruent state form – albeit with 
relevant contradictions and insufficiencies.
13   The idea is precisely to avoid what can deducted from a statement of Varró’s, in which the political is explicitly equated 
to all agential features of social reproduction and, implicitly, the economic is reduced to structures: ‘“re-politicising” also en-
tails that we leave room for agents who act within a field of multiple structures. The political in this sense comes to signify 
the potential for change that resides in all social relations” (Varró, 2010, p. 1273).

9

We might explore the issue employing the contributions of Cultural Political Economy (CPE), 
a still embryonic approach being developed mainly by Jessop and Ngai-Ling Sum. Although conside-
rations of space prohibit us from fully dealing with this recent methodological turn, it seems a relevant 
framework since one of its central concerns has been the interplay of semiotic and extra-semiotic fac-
tors in the evolution of institutions (Jessop, 2007, 2013b). Crises of a mode of development (such as 
Fordism) are considered to represent the incapacity of reproducing the capital relation according to for-
merly established norms, thus giving rise to a conjuncture of ‘profound cognitive, strategic, and practical 
disorientation by disrupting actors’ sedimented views of the world’ (Jessop, 2013b, p. 237). There then is 
space for developing myriad interpretations of the crisis and politicising solidly established issues. During 
this initial moment of unstructured complexity, semiotic factors are particularly efficacious in producing 
various interpretations. As one moves towards the selection and retention of these discourses to serve 
as bases for social action and the sedimentation of institutions, however, extra-semiotic factor tend to 
grow in relevance. This is a path-shaping process that occurs under the shadow of path-dependency, in 
which the strategies for interpreting, contesting and acting upon the crises are continuously subjected 
to semiotic and extra-semiotic factors, with variable weight. The plausibility and the potential for selec-
tion/retention of a certain discourse or strategy is also depend on how it resonates with the experience 
of relevant groups, how it deals with the media, its interaction with the selectivities of various public and 
private apparatuses and its capacity of convincing specific actors. In addition to this, each strategy is met 
with different structurally-inscribed selectivities – a crisis-management strategy organised around bailin-
g-out large enterprises and waiting for alleged trickling-down effects, for example, in principle needs to 
convince fewer (if important) actors than one based on popular contestation of the regime and workers’ 
self-organisation. As crisis-management and crisis-contestation unfolds, an ensemble of interpretations 
and practical responses might eventually give rise to a new situation of structured complexity, when, ex 
definitio, the crisis period will have ended and some congruence between the different social dimensions 
will be observed. Under the hypothesis of a continuation of capitalism, this involves restoring accumu-
lation as the chief principle of societalization and guaranteeing the compatibility of the state form and 
the accumulation regime. It should be highlighted that functionality is one amongst the many factors to 
influence the probability of a given discourse or strategy being selected and retained: 

Other things being equal, more resonant interpretations will get selected as the basis for action, whether 
this takes the form of restoration, piecemeal reform, or radical innovation. But other things are rarely 
equal. Power matters. Powerful narratives without powerful bases from which to implement them are 
less effective than more ‘arbitrary, rationalistic and willed’ accounts that are pursued consistently by the 
powerful through the exercise of power. Indeed, periods of crisis illustrate forcefully that power involves 
the capacity not to have to learn from one’s own mistakes (Jessop, 2013b, p. 241, author’s emphasis).

These observations clearly establish the possibility of a non-functionalist theoretical framework. 
What is at stake is that, to exit a period of crisis, minimally practical strategies must be pursued. While 
functionality does indeed affect their probability of being retained, many other issues are in place and 
there is no guarantee whatsoever that the most functional strategies will be selected. It should also be 
noted that if Hirsch (1977) has already taught us that the state does not respond directly to economic 
issues, but to their political repercussions, this should not be extended to indicate that there is no mu-
tually responsive interaction between economic and political variables eventually capable of finding a 
translation into the state form. Contrary to what Hay (2004, p. 43) seems to understand, it is hence 
possible to approach in non-structuralist-functionalist manners the process whereby the state form and 
the regime of accumulation (do not) become complementary to each other: the variation, selection and 
retention of discourses and strategies do indeed respond to extra-semiotic and economic variables. We 
suggest further exploring the issue under the light of the concepts of ecological dominance of the eco-
nomy, hegemonic project and accumulation strategy.
These notions are part of the ‘social fixes’ Jessop proposes. They try to bridge different social dimen-
sions, particularly the economic and the political. We do not have space here to present the following 
consideration at length, but we understand that Jessop gradually developed these various social fixes in 

10

response to critiques of politicism14, trying to avoid the latter by growingly exploring the imbrication of 
political and economic phenomena. We further understand that these various concepts are developed 
in a two-pronged process, in which the author successively acknowledges the underdetermination of a 
certain aspect of social formations and, simultaneously, proposes a middle-range strategic concept that 
explores how this dimension might contingently acquire substantive unity in and through social action. 
Jessop thus leans towards viewing social reproduction and accumulation as a priori ever more improbab-
le, while at the same time proposing to investigate how it is effectively secured. A cursory glance reveals 
that back in his first book Jessop (1982) recognised that the class unity of the state was not guaranteed, 
and thus proposed that hegemony could provide for it. The next year (Jessop, 1983), we find that the 
value and state forms are underdetermined, but can be substantiated through accumulation strategies 
and hegemonic projects. As the decade progresses (Jessop, 1990), the state apparatus itself is made de-
void of pre-given substantive unity – nevertheless, specific state projects can secure it. The author’s larger 
contact with the Regulation Approach (tentatively positioned in Jessop, 1993) leads to a similar effect, 
since one of the guiding principles of this theoretical corpus is examining via middle-range concepts how 
accumulation – although inherently contradictory and fraught with class struggle – is possible (Boyer, 
1990, p. 70; Jessop; Sum, 2006). We also suggest that studying the relationship between the mechanisms 
for coordinating social relations and the circuit of capital (Jessop, 1995), as well as the ‘political economy 
of scale’ (Jessop, 2000), may all be seen as part of this process15. If our reading is right, we can suggest 
that these concepts intend to demonstrate five points: i) the a priori inexistence of substantive unity (and 
hence functionality of any kind) for a given aspect, be it in a single social dimension (e.g., unity of the 
state apparatus) or in the interaction between more than one (e.g., economic hegemony); ii) the possi-
bility of establishing such unity in a certain spatiotemporal horizon; iii) the precariousness of such unity; 
iv) the necessity of concrete practices for such unity to be observed; and v) in view of they being developed 
by exploring the mutual implication of the political and the economic, the  multi-determined or complex 
character of the possibility of such unity being established.
Let us then consider how these concepts inform our understanding of how the SWPR and the 
KBE might have become complementary to each other. The ecological dominance of the economy, re-
cently increased due to the internationalisation of the circuit of capital and its greater capacities of time
-space distantiation and compression, indicates that the economic sphere offers greater adaptive pressures 
to the other systems than the other way around (Jessop, 2002, p. 24-28, 2010b, 2010a). It is not precisely 
a matter of capital being able to dynamically secure adequate extra-economic supports, but rather that 
‘the logic of accumulation tends to cause more problems for other systems than they cause for the expan-
ded reproduction of capital’ (Jessop, 2010b, p. 79, our emphasis), that it is able to export its crises and 
contradiction to other social dimensions. The main thrust of the idea hence lies in denoting the asym-
metry between the economy and other spheres. A particular emphasis should be put on the capacity of 
accumulation-derived problems being translated into other orders, even exploiting the latter as a means 
of guaranteeing the accumulation of capital16. In this sense, much more than to functionality, it is an idea 
related to the capacity of economic phenomena and economic power subverting the capacity of other 
systems reproducing themselves – it might perhaps be a demonstration of systemic dysfunctionality.
Accumulation strategies, state projects and hegemonic projects, on the other hand, are more rela-
ted to the possibility of establishing congruence between political and economic forms. Three aspects are 
noteworthy in this: the ability of forming a general interest (in economic or wider terms), the multiple 
14   For some important moments of the debates behind this process, see (Jessop, 1983, 1987, 1991, 2000). We believe 
authors associated to ‘open Marxism’ were amongst the main instigators of these various shifts; some contributions can be 
found in (Bonefeld, 1987, 1993; Bonefeld; Holloway, 1991; Clarke, 1991; Holloway, 1988). Two self-reviews of the 
author’s theoretical trajectory can be found in (Jessop, 2001, 2007).
15   Ecological dominance does not precisely fit our scheme, for it is not an agential concept. Nevertheless, it is how Jessop 
breaks with economic determination (in the n-th instance). The latter in a certain sense considers that there is a long-term 
pre-given unity of class and economic power, while ecological dominance points towards a contingently greater influence 
of the capital relation. As to the political economy of scale, the rough idea would be that a spatiotemporal fix contingently 
provides spatiotemporal closure to the circuit of capital, whose predominant scale is not pre-given.
16   On such a process in the Eurozone crisis, see (Jessop, 2013b).

11

bases and criteria necessary for the project or strategy to be successful and, given the latter point, the 
need to translate economic capacities into political ones and vice-versa as a condition of efficaciousness. 
Jessop points out that any general interest, even if restricted to that of ‘capital in general’, must be rela-
tionally created (Jessop, 1990, p. 152-155). Successful accumulation strategies and hegemonic projects 
must define and sediment such an interest, which then becomes the basis for institution-building. In 
other words, an important strategic dimension lies in being able to conform a social and economic ima-
ginary that, by selectively and hierarchically reducing complexity, defines subgroups of social relations 
and interests that become the practical objects of structurally oriented strategic action (Jessop, 1983, 
2007, 2013b). It should also be borne in mind that capital depends on relations outside the value form 
for its reproduction, just as the state is dependent on accumulation. If this by no means implies that 
they will by necessity conform to each other, it does suggest that, even if accumulation strategies mainly 
deal with economic factors, they tend to try and secure adequate extra-economic conditions. Likewise, 
however much hegemonic projects need not refer primarily to accumulation, they are bound to be more 
successful insofar as they are able to establish mutually compatible state forms and regimes of accumu-
lation, for – amongst others – this enables the distribution of material concessions to subordinate groups 
(Jessop, 1983, 1985, 2003).
It is thus to be expected for agents to reflexively pursue strategies that aim at bringing about cer-
tain congruence between economic and political forms. If this amounts to no more than using econo-
mic power to reach particularistic political ends (or vice-versa), it would be reduced to a case of econo-
mic domination and the lack of a substantive unity of state power – to use a Poulantzian expression, the 
state would not have relative autonomy regarding the various capitals. On the other hand, the strategic 
terrain in which hegemonic disputes and accumulation strategies are played out tends to require the sa-
crifice of more immediate interests in order to cement longer-term goals and class domination. This is 
represented in the development of a materially based general interest. The latter tends to be more stable 
and is more likely to be legitimised and accepted insofar as there is an overlapping between different 
positions of dominance, particularly in the economic and political dimensions. We may place certain 
remarks of Jessop’s in this context, such as ‘the expanded reproduction of capital is best viewed as “eco-
nomic hegemony armored by economic domination”’ (Jessop, 1983, p. 93) or that hegemony depends 
on structurally embedded factors, its strategic orientation and its relation to accumulation (Jessop, 1983, 
p. 98-107, 1985, p. 347-353).
This discussion clearly suggests that the reproduction of capital in a relatively stable fashion cen-
trally depends on there being congruence between the accumulation regime, the state form and other 
social dimensions. It moreover indicates that such a condition can only be guaranteed by specific practices 
reflexively aimed at institution-building, even if not necessarily as a planned result of the latter. In face 
of the substantive interdependence of the various social dimensions, as well as of the multi-determined 
conditions of success of economic and political strategies, there is also a constant process – as unequal 
as it may be – of translating phenomena from one dimension to the others. At last, there is also the pos-
sibility of there not being any societal unity whatsoever, in which case there would be no governance or 
regularisation of accumulation.
In any case, Jessop’s theoretical framework suggests that short of an explicit crisis one is to expect 
some congruence between the state form and the regime of accumulation. In no case should it be con-
cluded, however, that the most functional forms are the ones to be selected and retained. Hay’s (2004, 
p. 48) question of why we are to expect that the economically most functional state form is to emerge 
thus seems a valid issue. In fact, when Jessop states that ‘a Schumpeterian workfare post-national regi-
me will provide the best possible – but still imperfect and always provisional – spatio-temporal fix for a 
globalizing, knowledge-based, post-Fordist economy’ (Jessop, 2002, p. 268) we are left we the options 
of considering this a functionalist slip or seeing it as a rather empty statement. In the latter case, the 
SWPR should be seen as the state form that developed alongside the KBE, decisively shaping capital 
accumulation under this regime; the best possible fix would be reduced to the trite condition of being the 
inherently post-Fordist form. We do not see any analytical purchase with this, on the contrary – there 

12

would be a serious risk of hypostasising the SWPR and post-Fordism as ‘final’ forms, or ones with an 
already-defined developmental trajectory, which would be contrary to the approach as a whole.
We propose dealing with the issue in a more explicit evolutionary approach, for the following re-
asons. In the first place, it offers a direct manner of investigating, in a single analytical framework, the 
participation of semiotic and extra-semiotic elements in institutional development, as has been recently 
done under the CPE project. In the second place, it is well suited to better specify the factors responsible 
for (not) generating congruence in particular aspects of the social formations (such as in the reproduc-
tion of labour force or the prevalent governance mechanisms). It is also capable of shedding light on the 
processes that lead to a greater or smaller weight of the state in regularising capital accumulation. An 
evolutionary framework is furthermore a good way of avoiding functionalist traits, for the possibility of 
dysfunctional lock-ins is often a result of such an approach. On a more general note, an evolutionary 
account fits well the stylised facts regarding institutional development during crisis periods that Jessop 
(2002, 2006b, 2006e) and Brenner (2003, 2004b, 2009) present – namely, that there is a phase of experi-
mentation with old and new forms of crisis-management, which for different reasons (not quite clearly 
presented) are selected and retained, or else get discarded.
Our proposal is based on the consideration that, whereas Jessop does explore the mutual intercon-
nections between the political and the economic and indicates how strategies mainly concerning one of 
these spheres have got in the other decisive success conditions, his comments remain at a fairly general 
or non-specific level. While we are told that the state’s strategic selectivities impact the long-term via-
bility of a hegemonic project, there is not much to be found on which selectivities impact which aspects 
of the projects, nor on the particular implications of carrying forward an hegemonic project out of tone 
with certain aspects of the state form17. Likewise, there is the proposition that accumulation strategies 
are more stable when the hegemonic fraction of capital also enjoys economic domination, but there is 
little on which factors lead to this condition or on the results of it not happening. Jessop deeply explo-
res the adequacy of economic and political forms, indicates some contradictions that arise when such 
compatibility is not observed and examines how strategic action must tumble through different social 
dimensions in order to be successful, but is much less clear in investigating how and under which condi-
tions can the agents effectively secure these necessary means. Moreover, the author rarely goes down to 
the factors responsible for the structural coupling of the state form and the accumulation regime in its 
specific aspects. There does not seem to be much, for example, on which factors favour the SWPR to 
help shape the reproduction of labour power in ways favourable to the KBE – and, additionally, if these 
factors are compatible or not with those that favour a congruent scalar configuration. In these terms, an 
evolutionary framework might reveal the (in)compossibility of the congruence between the state form 
and the accumulation regime in its different aspects, which seems to fit recent research agendas (Jessop, 
2007, p. 225-245; Jones; Jessop, 2010). At the current stage, there does not seem to be clear indications 
of why certain complementarities are more present or likely than others, which we consider a relevant 
deficiency.
This suggestion is certainly not to everyone’s taste, as van Heur (2010b) attests, but it should be 
highlighted that we do not suggest it as the single theoretical development to be pursued. It does not 
make up for ‘specificity and detailed analysis’ (van Heur, 2010b, p. 453), nor can it take the place of his-
torical accounts, but we argue that it offers a valuable general analytical guide. As it is developed throu-
gh a reflexive movement from the abstract-simple to the concrete-complex, it might gradually be able 
to specify the importance of a series of factors in the evolution of political and economic forms. To the 
extent that it reveals the more resilient aspects of social formations and those more prone to be trans-
formed, it can also inform practical actions and the militancy.
In short, we propose that Jessop’s account of the emergence of the SWPR can be read in a non-
functional, non-structuralist and non-deterministic way. In order to do so, one must pay attention to how 
the author’s various works come together in this and how The future of the capitalist state is but a step of 

17   There indeed are certain remarks on this, such as that hegemony tends to be less inclusive, and more based on repression, 
when economic growth falters (Jessop, 1982, 1983, 1985, 2003). Nevertheless, we consider them to be underdeveloped.

13

a wider research agenda, avoiding the temptation to directly ‘substantiate’ the more abstract arguments 
(in this case, mainly economic in nature) in a reductionist manner – against which the author has long 
argued (Jessop, 1982). Having done so, we now propose some further changes to the agenda. They are 
related to the space that post-Fordism comprehends and the articulation between different subtypes of 
post-Fordist social formations and accumulation strategies. 
Fordism was, according to Jessop, organised around a national spatiotemporal fix18. It is the lat-
ter that allows one to study Atlantic Fordism as a series of national economies, for the essential deter-
minants of the mode of development at hand were to be found in each national space (with variations 
between them). Post-Fordism, on the other hand, is hypothetically characterised by the relativization of 
scale, a loss of primacy of the national level and, to date, no stable spatiotemporal fix. These are amongst 
some of the results linked to what Jessop has termed the ‘political economy of scale’, doubtlessly a great 
contribution of his. Nonetheless, we consider that its full potential has not yet been brought to bear on 
two points. Firstly, we suggest that, whether currently in existence or not, post-Fordism might develop a 
spatiotemporal fix that itself displays a relativized scale – or better, a complex polymorphy. When Jessop 
considers that there currently is no fix, it seems as though he is looking for essentially territorially-de-
limited arrangements with nested scales, for the possibilities most commonly referred to are the glo-
bal, the local and the triadic levels – with the latter been seen as the most likely (Jessop, 2000, p. 348, 
2006h, p. 344, 2002, p. 182). If the arguments for the relativization of scale are convincing, one should 
no longer focus only on ‘simple’, territorially-cohesive configurations, but should rather explore to what 
extent arrangements with multiple, partially overlapping and intermeshed scales, perhaps organised in 
networks, together account for a spatiotemporal fix capable of making compatible the various temporal 
and spatial dynamics of the main post-Fordist forms of capital. We do not offer a substantive answer to 
the issue, but suggest that a clue may be in the global city-regions whose importance Jessop points out. 
They might comprise the main scale of a post-Fordist fix, to which other secondary scales and networks 
would be attached – such as their direct zones of influence, high-technology districts and innovation 
poles. The idea behind this proposition is that this spatiality would encompass the main financial and 
knowledge-intensive circuits. We also suggest that, if a fix actually does institutionalise itself, it will be 
the emergent result of the interaction between various ‘partial fixes’ (Jessop, 2007, p. 187). Given its 
spatially less inclusive nature, as well as its multiple non-concentric hierarchies, it is expected of this 
‘relativized scale’ to increase many forms of inequality. As what is at stake, however, is the stabilisation 
of the accumulation of capital – an inherently contradictory process, based on exploitation –, this in no 
way requires any progressive developments to take place. It might be the case that a stable post-Fordist 
fix will lead to a recrudescence of the sociospatial division of the costs of the capital relation in many 
axes – between countries, states, neighbourhoods, between capital and labour and so forth. As a meta-
phor, we could think of a fractal of inequalities. In this case, there would certainly be a huge impact on 
legitimation and repression strategies, as well as on the stability of the mode of development as a whole. 
The implications for the various capitalist political forms loom large, for this amounts to an intense re-
organisation of contemporary spatiality that would no doubt lead to the production of, using Brenner’s 
(2004a) expression, ‘new state spaces’. Exploring the issue is clearly out our scope, but it strikes us as a 
relevant field for research.
Related to the former point, we propose that economic reproduction in the space that once was 
Atlantic Fordism has come to involve, as a necessary condition, a strong articulation with the Asian 
economies, particularly as regards the imports of manufactured goods from what is now the ‘workshop 
of the world’. Which is to say, post-Fordism should not comprise the territory of Atlantic Fordism 
thirty years later, but a larger circuit that encompasses the main phenomena behind the socioeconomic 
dynamics of the formations at hand. Post-Fordism is not a merely chronological concept, such as after-
Fordism would be, nor an evolutive one to indicate a phase of formations that once were Fordist, such 
as late Fordism. It aims, on the other hand, at representing conservation-dissolution effects (with a pre-
dominance of the latter), and designates the patterns capable of answering to the Fordist impasses and 
18   On small open Fordist economies, see (Jessop, 2006b).

14

crises (Jessop, 2006b, 2006h). As these in large part came from beyond Atlantic Fordism, as is the case 
with the organisation of production processes, post-Fordism needs to comprehend the spaces organised 
along those lines. Yet more important, the growing economic integration between the space of Atlantic 
Fordism and Eastern Asia, the former having become structurally dependent on importing manufactured 
goods produced with low wages in the latter, indicates that a key-element of post-Fordist accumulation 
lies in the relationship between the triadic economies.
The clearest example of this is in what came to be known as ‘Chimerica’, which ‘indicates the pa-
thological co-dependence of the US and Chinese economies”(Jessop et al., 2013, p. s11). Based on this, 
it is clear that theorising about the US accumulation regime (or the post-Fordist one in general) not 
taking into account the role of Eastern Asia in it implies ignoring a central dimension of the studied 
object. It is, for example, Chinese imports (and growing debt) that allows for maintaining a minimum 
consumption level for the population at large. We can say that while the Chinese and the US accumu-
lation regimes are jointly compossible, they are individually impossible. Thus, understanding either of 
them necessarily entails studying the other. The issue is that as Fordism had a national spatiotemporal 
fix one could approach the countries it comprised individually, for their tendencies were not essentially 
altered by their relationship to other spaces. For post-Fordism, however, the situation is different. As ac-
cumulation is not contained in the national level, but is determined by the relations between phenomena 
organised along relativized scales, one cannot approach it in terms of relatively self-referential national 
circuits – for they individually lack the determinants of their processes of accumulation. In other terms, 
one must study the polymorphy of accumulation being careful not to enclose it in a presupposed spatiality 
that does not comprehend its relevant circuits. As indicated above, we suggest this involves Asian ‘terri-
tories, places, scales and networks’, not necessarily including whole countries – it might be the case that 
post-Fordism necessitates certain specific networks and places, and not other wider Asian dimensions.
Associated to this, we believe the approach can be improved if framed in terms of a variegated 
capitalism, as Jessop has been recently leaning (Jessop, 2010a, 2012b, 2013a, 2013d, 2012c). As the au-
thor himself is turning to this direction, we shall not explore it in more detail here. Nevertheless, some 
brief indications of how we believe this is an important development seem in place. The two main chan-
ges that concerns us are the explicit consideration of i) how a given regime of accumulation, of variant 
thereof, impacts the conditions of existence of the rest, and ii) how by the interaction of all of them the 
world market is reproduced as the ultimate horizon, ‘as both the historical presupposition and the posit 
(outcome) of differential accumulation’ (Jessop, 2013d, p. 5). Given this, one is better placed to examine 
how the ecological dominance of a certain variety of capitalism codetermines the evolution of others, 
as well as the (im)possibility of extending regimes of accumulation beyond the spaces in which they are 
found. Another important result is that seeing the world market as being reproduced through a process 
of variegation clearly opens space for exploring social and economic alternatives. By investigating the 
interdependency of social formations, one can analyse the possibility of setting up regimes of accumu-
lation and state forms that are not versions of dominant ones, but new paths compatible with the force 
lines given by the world market. This, it seems, might eliminate a certain ‘fatalism’ that can at first sight 
be associated to the idea of a growing ecological dominance of the economy and the integration to the 
world market.
On a different note, we propose that one should not consider that there are different regimes of 
accumulation competing in the same spatiotemporal matrix. As seen above, Jessop (2013c) has recently 
considered that the transition to post-Fordism comprehended a dispute between two regimes of accu-
mulation, the KBE and a finance-dominated one. We consider this to be a setback, for less attention is 
paid to the relations between the different forms of capital and their concrete and abstract dimensions, 
particularly as regards, in this case, financial capital and ‘knowledge-intensive capital’. It is not that 
Jessop thereby ignores all articulations between these moments of the circuit of capital, but it does seem 
profoundly counterproductive to look at the issue through competing regimes, and not through a single 
one with different developmental tendencies and a contradictory relation between the above-mentio-
ned dominant forms of capital.

15

The competition between regimes of accumulation is a matter that deserves attention. In some 
moments, the concepts of regimes of accumulation and accumulation strategies seem to be conflated, as 
when Jessop (2013c, p. 20) states that ‘although I have presented the KBE and finance-dominated accu-
mulation as if they were simple alternatives, they actually co-existed as competing accumulation strate-
gies’. There is a risk of conferring agency to an emergent category (the regime), thus falling into a form 
of structuralism. There are two options in avoiding this. We might take the citation to mean that there 
were a series of social relations being developed, which could be divided in two groups. Each of these 
would display a certain internal coherence and developmental tendencies that indicated the potential of 
constituting an accumulation regime. Competition between the latter would thus assume a metaphorical 
sense, related to the fact that developing the relations from which each emerges negatively impacted the 
stability of the other. Against this, we might consider that there was an effective competition between 
accumulation strategies. In this case, it seems better not to pose a regime corresponding to each strategy, 
since ‘there can never be a one-to-one correspondence between structures and strategies’ (Jessop, 1987, 
p. 157). On the contrary, one ought to see how accumulation is regularised/governed as the global re-
sult, only partially foreseen, of the conflict between different strategies – as contradictory as they might 
be. A useful consideration is that the objects of regulation both pre-exist it, as so many ‘free elements’, 
and are constituted through it, as they are integrated into partial totalization attempts that relatively fix 
them as moments of the mode of regulation (Jessop, 1990, p. 311). According to this view, the various 
strategies attempted to coordinate social relations through different circuits that would alter the efficacy 
of all of them, and it is through the synthesis of these practices that an accumulation regime emerges 
– however different it may be from the one each individual strategy intended. While we do accept that 
‘there is neither regulation in general nor general regulation; only particular regulation and the totality of 
regulation’ (Jessop, 1990, p. 311), it should be noted that the ‘totality of regulation’ differs from the sum 
of particular regulations – the efficacy of the latter is affected by all strategies in play, while the totality 
of regulation emerges from, and as the (but partially intended) resultant of, the clash of all attempts at 
regulation. As Jessop puts it, indicating how coordination arises through conflicting strategies:
The success of the ‘nth’ strategy depends on its complementarities to all other relevant strategies […] 
There is no global subject to plan accumulation strategies […] Instead we find only different subjects 
whose activities are more or less co-ordinated, whose activities meet more or less resistance from other 
forces, and whose strategies are pursued within a structural context which is both constraining and 
facilitating (Jessop, 1987, p. 158-159).

In lieu of studying two ideal-typical accumulation regimes of doubtful existence, one would ex-
plore the contradictions of a certain form of regularisation and governance that operates without a cle-
ar strategy behind it (‘there is no global subject to plan accumulation strategies’). There are elements 
to do so. One can study the different fractions of capital (particularly those involved with finance and 
knowledge-based sectors) in terms of their capacity to exert ecological dominance or economic deter-
mination, domination and hegemony, and thereby explore the resultant tensions or complementarities. 
Jessop himself hints at this, when he suggests that there is a ‘growing antagonism between the globali-
sing knowledge-based economy as the material and ideological expression of productive capital and the 
logic of a finance-led, shareholder-value oriented process of capital accumulation’ (Jessop, 2010a, p. 36). 
It should be borne in mind that financial domination, in this context, refers to ‘the articulation of the 
circuits of finance and production and is not intended to re-assert the misleading distinction between 
finance and the “real economy”’ (Jessop, 2013a, p. 53-54). One could then explore how this supposedly 
less stable regime, which lacks a clearly dominant strategy, interacts with the hegemonic project (if any) 
as regards the latter’s bases of support, the room in it for offering material concessions, its legitimation 
strategies and so on. In the case of the US, a particularly important dimension is how the insufficiencies 
of such a regime interact with, and are partially made up for by, the country’s global hegemonic position 
and hence its capacity to issue the global reserve currency.
This argument is also informed by some substantive observations. Firstly, there is a complex and 
intense articulation between the financial and productive forms of capital, especially in knowledge-in-
tensive sectors. This suggests that the regularisation of the latter’s circuit should not be conceived in the 
16

absence of a key-role for financial capital. In spite of this not being a necessary implication of Jessop’s 
recent works (see in particular 2013c), since one can investigate the practical articulation of the two 
ideal-typical regimes proposed, it does seem at the very least a counter-productive heuristic procedure. 
As, moreover, the idea of an accumulation regime defines the elements of an economic arrangement 
that jointly reveal the main features of the form that the expanded accumulation of capital tends to as-
sume, it seems more sound to explicitly encompass in a single regime of accumulation, as was previously 
done, the articulation between financial capital and the KBE. This could perhaps happen via attempts to 
impose conflicting accumulation strategies (e.g., one of financial and the other of knowledge-intensive 
sectors), with a resultant regularisation/governance of accumulation comprising elements of both – but 
corresponding to neither. We do not propose any substantive solution, but there are various works19 that 
in pointing out the complementarities and instabilities of the relation between finance and innovation 
indicate that their interlinking is a central characteristic of contemporary capitalism – hence, both must 
be theorised together. The idea of competing regimes is made even harder if the most advanced expres-
sions of financial domination and a knowledge-intensive, innovative economy are arguably to be found, 
in a deeply connected fashion (as venture capital attests), in the same social formation – the USA, both 
home to Wall Street and Silicon Valley.
In light of the preceding, neither should one devise a state form compatible with the finance-do-
minated regime and another compatible with the KBE. It seems better to further develop the SWPR, 
paying attention to its (non-)complementarities with the various moments of the circuit of capital. It 
once more seems that some of Jessop’s recent works fall behind his earlier output, particularly as he de-
fines that the SWPR would be a congruent state form only insofar as it is ‘flexicurity’-oriented (Jessop, 
2013c, p. 18). This constitutes a perhaps excessive detachment from concrete cases (the SWPR would 
only be found in, say, Denmark and the Netherlands), as well as, which is more preoccupying, a con-
ception of regularisation of accumulation that would necessarily comprehend progressive traits. Even if 
risking repetitiveness, we stress that regularising accumulation is nothing more (nor less) than guaran-
teeing, in a precarious, partial and unstable manner, that the expanded reproduction of capital asserts 
itself as the main principle of societalization. This, by necessity, entails the reproduction of contradictions 
and of exploitation.
6.  FINAL REMARKS

This brief tour of Jessop’s account of the transition to the SWPR has defended that it constitutes, 
some deficiencies notwithstanding, a fertile research project. We have argued that there are indeed certain 
structuralist or functionalist nuances to it, as well as passages which if not carefully placed in their due 
context might be (mis)construed as a resort to economic determinism. This, however, only holds if one 
reads the author as having presented a finished and sufficient account of the emergence of the current 
state form, particularly by taking The future of the capitalist state (Jessop, 2002) in isolation. Once one 
approaches this contribution as part of an ongoing research agenda, on the other hand, we have tried to 
show that the latter is capable of unfolding a progressively finer critique of contemporary political eco-
nomy. With this in mind, we have offered the following suggestions.
First, we propose developing a more strictly evolutionary approach to the process of institutional 
creation and retention, which might eliminate some functionalist and deterministic tensions. It can, 
additionally, provide a more precise analytical blueprint to the interrelation between economic and the 
political forms, particularly as regards the conditions that favour them becoming congruent or not in spe-
cific points. In the second place, we argue for integrating Chinese and Eastern Asian spaces to post-For-
dism. This is because they are an intrinsic element of post-Fordist economic reproduction, the exclusion 
of which, therefore, leads to a cycle that cannot be closed and to a biased theorisation – notably in not 
realising the dependence of KBE to the precarious work of the ‘sweatshop of the world’. We also sug-
gest, as Jessop has recently started to do, to study post-Fordism through the interaction of its different 
19   See, for example, (Albuquerque, 2010). For a more general take on the role of financial circuits in contemporary ca-
pitalism, from a Marxist view, see (Bryan; Rafferty, 2006).

17

vação. Revista de Economia Política, v. 30, n. 3, p. 473-490, 2010.

1993.
State. Basignstoke and London: Macmillan, 1991.

sub-types. Instead of relatively independent modalities of post-Fordism and the SWPR, one would look 
at how their relationship to each other, to the various other social formations and to the world market, 
as the ultimate horizon and the necessary reference of production and valorisation, concur to reprodu-
ce all of them. It is thus a movement towards studying the (in)compossibility of the reproduction of 
post-Fordist capitalist formations in their global insertion, which additionally would, as argued above, 
facilitate identifying economic and political alternatives. In the fourth place, we propose not to theorise 
about competing regimes of accumulation in a same spatiotemporal matrix, but rather about a single re-
gime developed through conflicting strategies, so as to better apprehend the articulation of the different 
forms of capital and the impacts therefrom. At last, we suggest that the relativization of scale should be 
brought to bear on identifying eventual spatiotemporal fixes. There seems to be some residual ‘metho-
dological territorialism’ in the hypotheses Jessop advances for a post-Fordist spatiotemporal fix – based 
on his own works, one should consider the possibility of a such a fix assuming a complex polymorphy. 
7.  References
Albuquerque, E. d. M. Causa e efeito: contribuições de Marx para investigações sobre finanças e ino-
Bonefeld, W. Reformulation of state theory. Capital & Class, v. 33, p. 96-127, 1987.
______. Crisis of theory: Bob Jessop’s theory of capitalist reproduction. Capital & Class, v. 50, p. 25-47, 
Bonefeld, W.; Holloway, J. (eds.). Post-Fordism and social form: a Marxist debate on the Post-Fordist 
Boyer, R. A teoria da regulação: uma análise crítica. São Paulo: Nobel, 1990.
Brenner, N. Metropolitan institutional reform and the rescaling of state space in contemporary Western 
Europe. European Urban and Regional Studies, v. 10, n. 4, p. 297-324, 2003.
______. New state spaces: urban governance and the rescaling of statehood. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2004a.
______. Urban governance and the production of new state spaces in Western Europe, 1960–2000. 
Review of International Political Economy, v. 11, n. 3, p. 447-488, 2004b.
______. Open questions on state rescaling. Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society, v. 2, n. 1, 
p. 123-139, 2009.
Brenner, N.; Jessop, B.; Jones, M.; MacLeod, G. (eds.). State/space: a reader. Oxford: Blackwell 
Publishers, 2003.
Bryan, D.; Rafferty, M. Capitalism with derivatives: a political economy of financial derivatives, capital 
and class. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006.
Cerny, P. G. Restructuring the state in a globalizing world: capital accumulation, tangled hierarchies 
and the search for a new spatio-temporal fix. Review of International Political Economy, v. 13, n. 4, p. 
679-695, 2006.
Clarke, S. The state debate. In: Clarke, S. (eds.). The state debate. Basingstoke: Palgrave, 1991. p. 1-69.
Goodwin, M.; Jones, M.; Jones, R. Devolution, constitutional change and economic development: ex-
plaining and understanding the new institutional geographies of the British state. Regional Studies, 
v. 39, n. 4, p. 421-436, 2005.
Hay, C. Re-stating politics, re-politicising the state: neo-liberalism, economic imperatives and the rise 
of the competition state. The Political Quarterly, v. 75, n. 1, p. 38-50, 2004.
______. (What’s Marxist about) Marxist state theory? In: Hay, C.; Lister, M.; Marsh, D. (eds.). The 
state: theories and issues. Basingstoke and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006. p. 59-78.
Hirsch, J. Elements of a materialist theory of state. International Journal of Politics, v. 7, n. 2, p. 9-82, 
1977.
Holloway, J. The Great Bear, post-Fordism and class struggle: a comment on Bonefeld and Jessop. 
Capital & Class, v. 36, n. 93-104, 1988.
Jessop, B. The capitalist state. Marxist theories and methods. New York: New York University Press, 1982.
18

1983.

& Class, v. 34, p. 147-168, 1987.

______. Accumulation strategies, state forms and hegemonic projects. Kapitalistate, v. 10/11, p. 89-111, 
______. Nicos Poulantzas: Marxist theory and political strategy. Hong Kong: Macmillan, 1985.
______. Regulation theory, post-Fordism and the state: more than a reply to Werner Bonefeld. Capital 
______. State theory: putting the capitalist state in its place. Cambridge: Polity Press, 1990.
______. Polar bears and class struggle: much less than a self-criticism. In: Bonefeld, W.; Holloway, 
J. (eds.). Post-Fordism and social form: a Marxist debate on the post-Fordist State. Basignstoke and 
London: Macmillan, 1991. p. 145-169.
______. Towards a Schumpeterian workfare state? Preliminary remarks on post-Fordist political econ-
omy. Studies in Political Economy, v. 40, p. 7-41, 1993.
______. The Regulation Approach, governance, and post-Fordism: alternative perspectives on economic 
and political change? Economy and Society, v. 24, n. 3, p. 307-333, 1995.
______. Interpretive Sociology and the dialectic of structure and agency. Theory, Culture & Society, v. 13, 
n. 1, p. 119-128, 1996.
______. The crisis of the national spatio-temporal fix and the tendential ecological dominance of glo-
balizing capitalism. International Journal of Urban & Regional Research, v. 24, n. 2, p. 323-360, 2000.
______. State theory, regulation, and autopoiesis: debates and controversies. Capital & Class, n. 75, p. 
83, 2001.
______. The future of the capitalist state. Cambridge: Polity Press, 2002.
______. Putting hegemony in its place. Journal of Critical Realism, v. 2, n. 1, p. 138-148, 2003.
______. Critical realism and the regulation approach: a dialogue. In: Jessop, B.; Sum, N.-L. (eds.). Beyond 
the regulation approach: putting capitalist economies in their place. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 2006a. 
p. 299-322.
______. Fordism and post-Fordism. In: Jessop, B.; Sum, N.-L. (eds.). Beyond the regulation approach: 
putting capitalist economies in their place. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 2006b. p. 58-89.
______. Fordism, post-Fordism and the capitalist state. In: Jessop, B.; Sum, N.-L. (eds.). Beyond the 
regulation approach: putting capitalist economies in their place. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 2006c. 
p. 90-119.
______. Gramsci as a proto- and post-regulation theorist. In: Jessop, B.; Sum, N.-L. (eds.). Beyond the 
regulation approach: putting capitalist economies in their place. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 2006d. 
p. 348-373.
______. Neo-conservative regimes and the transition to post-Fordism. In: Jessop, B.; Sum, N.-L. (eds.). 
Beyond the regulation approach: putting capitalist economies in their place. Cheltenham: Edward 
Elgar, 2006e. p. 123-151.
______. Regenerating the regulation approach. In: Jessop, B.; Sum, N.-L. (eds.). Beyond the regulation 
approach: putting capitalist economies in their place. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 2006f. p. 213-246.
______. Rescaling regulation and governance in a global age. In: Jessop, B.; Sum, N.-L. (eds.). Beyond 
the regulation approach: putting capitalist economies in their place. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 2006g. 
p. 271-295.
______. Rethinking periodization after Fordism. In: Jessop, B.; Sum, N.-L. (eds.). Beyond the regulation 
approach: putting capitalist economies in their place. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 2006h. p. 323-347.
______. State power: a strategic-relational approach. Cambridge: Polity Press, 2007.
______. The continuing ecological dominance of neoliberalism in the crisis. In: Saad-Filho, A.; Yalman, 
G. L. (eds.). Economic transitions to neoliberalism in middle-income countries: policy dilemmas, economic 
crises, forms of resistance. Abingdon: Routledge, 2010a. p. 24-38.
______. What follows neo-liberalism? The deepening contradictions of US domination and the struggle 
for a new global order. In: Albritton, R.; Jessop, B.; Westra, R. (eds.). Political economy and global 
capitalism: the 21st century, present and future. London: Anthem Press, 2010b. p. 67-88.

19

______. Obstacles to a world state in the shadow of the world market. Cooperation and Conflict, v. 47, n. 
2, p. 200-219, 2012a.
______. Rethinking the diversity of capitalism: varieties of capitalism, variegated capitalism, and the 
world market. In: Lane, C.; Wood, G. (eds.). Capitalist diversity and diversity within capitalism. 
London and New York: Routledge, 2012b. p. 209-237.
______. The World Market, Variegated Capitalism, and the Crisis of European Integration. In: Nousios, 
P.; Overbeek, H.; Tsolakis, A. (eds.). Globalisation and European integration: critical approaches to 
regional order and international relations. New York: Routledge, 2012c. p. 91-111.
______. The North Atlantic Financial Crisis and varieties of capitalism: a Minsky and/or Marx mo-
ment? And perhaps Max Weber too? In: Fadda, S.; Tridico, P. (eds.). Financial crisis, labour markets 
and institutions. New York: Routledge, 2013a. p. 40-59.
______. Recovered imaginaries, imagined recoveries: a Cultural Political Economy of crisis construals 
and crisis-management in the North Atlantic financial crisis. In: Benner, M. (eds.). Before and be-
yond the global economic crisis: economics, politics and settlement. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 2013b. 
p. 234-254.
______. Revisiting the regulation approach: critical reflections on the contradictions, dilemmas, fixes 
and crisis dynamics of growth regimes. Capital & Class, v. 37, n. 1, p. 5-24, 2013c.
______. Variegated capitalism and the Eurozone crisis: Modell Deutschland, neo-liberalism, and the 
world market. In: National Bank of Poland, National Bank of Poland Conferences, 2013d, 
Warsaw. 24 april 2013. 26 p. Disponível em: <http://www.nbp.pl/badania/seminaria_files/24iv2013.
pdf>. Acesso em: 20 de maio de 2013.
Jessop, B.; Brenner, N.; Jones, M. Theorizing sociospatial relations. Environment and Planning D: 
Society and Space, v. 26, n. 3, p. 389-401, 2008.
Jessop, B.; Labrousse, A.; Lamarche, T.; Vercueil, J. Crossing boundaries: towards cultural political 
economy (interview). Revue de la règulation [En ligne], v. 12, n. 2e semestre / Autumn, 2013.
Jessop, B.; Sum, N.-L. Introduction. In: Jessop, B.; Sum, N.-L. (eds.). Beyond the regulation approach: 
putting capitalist economies in their place. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 2006. p. 1-10.
Jones, M. Recovering a sense of political economy. Political Geography, v. 27, n. 4, p. 377-399, 2008.
Jones, M.; Jessop, B. Thinking state/space incompossibly. Antipode, v. 42, n. 5, p. 1119-1149, 2010.
Marinetto, M. Review: The future of the capitalist state. Sociology, v. 38, n. 4, p. 850-851, 2004.
Offe, C.; Keane, J. Contradictions of the welfare state. 1st MIT Press. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 
Oosterlynck, S. Regulating regional uneven development and the politics of reconfiguring Belgian 
van Heur, B. Beyond regulation: towards a cultural political economy of complexity and emergence. 
______. Research and relevance: response to Jessop and Sum. New Political Economy, v. 15, n. 3, p. 453-
Varró, K. Re-politicising the analysis of “new state spaces” in Hungary and beyond: towards an effective 
Wissen, M. Contested terrains: politics of scale, the national state and struggles for the control over 

1984. 310 p.
state space. Antipode, v. 42, n. 5, p. 1151-1179, 2010.
New Political Economy, v. 15, n. 3, p. 421-444, 2010a.
456, 2010b.
engagement with “actually existing neoliberalism”. Antipode, v. 42, n. 5, p. 1253-1278, 2010.
nature. Review of International Political Economy, v. 16, n. 5, p. 883-906, 2009.

20

