The Representative Agent in Microeconomics: A

Samuelson-Koopmans Thread?

Hugo Chu∗

Abstract

This article asks whether the representative agent might have emerged as the outcome of transfor-
mations that occurred in microeconomics in the 1930s and 1940s, specially, in the subﬁeld of demand
theory. To tell this story, I begin with a particular historical interpretation of this subﬁeld, pro-
pounded by Wade Hands and Philip Mirowski in the 1990s, known as the Hotelling-Schultz Impasse.
Although this impasse was abandoned by the end of the 1930s, the testing of the Symmetry Restric-
tions and the validity of the Integrability Conditions continued to draw the attention of diﬀerent
research centers. The Cowles Commission, and its research director, Tjalling Koopmans, played an
important role during this stage and, more to the point, in the subsequent emergence of the repre-
sentative agent in microeconomics through their approach to aggregation problems. The signiﬁcance
of Paul Samuelson’s introduction of homothetic preferences into General Equilibrium theory and its
connection to Koopmans’s writings during the 1950s is also emphasized.
Keywords: Representative Agent, Aggregation Problems, Tjalling Koopmans

Resumo

Esse trabalho investiga se o agente representativo pode ter surgido como resultado das transforma¸c˜oes
que ocorreram na microeconomia nos anos de 1930 e 1940. Para construir esta narrativa, eu come¸co
com uma interpreta¸c˜ao espec´ıﬁca proposta por Wade Hands e Philip Mirowski nos anos de 1990,
conhecido como o Impasse de Hotelling-Schultz. Embora esse impasse tenha sido abandonado na
d´ecada de 1930, o teste de restri¸c˜ao de Slutsky e a validade da condi¸c˜ao de Integrabilidade contin-
uaram a chamar a aten¸c˜ao de diferentes centros de pesquisas. A Comiss˜ao Cowles e seu diretor de
pesquisa, Tjalling Koopmans, tiveram papel importante durante este est´agio e, mais importante, no
aparecimento subsequente do agente representativo na microeconomia. A signiﬁcˆancia da introdu¸c˜ao
das preferˆencias homot´eticas por Paul Samuelson no arcabou¸co de equil´ıbrio geral e sua conex˜ao com
os trabalhos de Koopmans na d´ecada de 1950 tamb´em ´e enfatizado.
Palavras-chave: Agente Representativo, Problemas de Agrega¸c˜ao, Tjalling Koopmans

JEL Codes: B2, B21, B23
´Area 1 - Hist´oria do Pensamento Econˆomico e Metodologia

∗PhD Candidate, University of S˜ao Paulo (FEA/USP) and Unioeste-FB. I would like to thank, without implying,

Professor Pedro Garcia Duarte for helpful comments on earlier drafts. Email: hugochu@usp.br

1

1

Introduction

Samuelson is omnipresent in American and even world economics; (...) In the pages of
every journal and many a collective volume he appears, read equally by esoteric specialists
in optimal growth or integrability conditions and by the most policy-oriented in practical
central banking, impatient with theoretical niceties.

- Kenneth Arrow, 1967

It has become popular among economists that a major result in microeconomic theory is consumer
rationality. The path until this outcome begins with axioms of preference, proceeds with existence
proof of a utility function and continues with the solving of a (constrained) utility maximization prob-
lem that leads to Marshallian demand functions. Such functions are said to satisfy some desirable
properties. It is possible to attain an equivalent result in a (constrained) expenditure minimization
problem where, this time, Hicksian demand functions are obtained.

The connection between Hicksian and Marshallian demand functions owes to an expression pro-
posed by Eugene Slutsky, a fundamental equation that breaks quantity demanded of a good - due to
variation in its price (or in another good’s price) - into substitution and income eﬀects. Symmetry of
the Slutsky matrix, in conjunction with Integrability Theorem, guarantee that Marshallian demand
functions reverse to the axioms of preferences, thus, connecting the outcome of utility maximization
problem to its initial deﬁnitions.

Yet, the development of microeconomic theory faced more resistances than the history presented
above (and elsewhere) suggests. A more careful look into the works as well as careers of the economists
involved might allow one to better observe how, operating in networks, they created, extended or
even ignored theoretical and/or empirical research whose outcome are not reﬂected in the canonical
history of the subject. The aim of this article is to tell one of these stories.

My purpose in this essay is, therefore, to investigate if and how the representative agent might
have been the outcome of changes in microeconomics that occurred prior and during the Second
World War. Moreover, as Kenneth Arrow reﬂected in his review of Paul Samuelson’s Collected Sci-
entiﬁc Papers, back in 1967, my aim is also to show that a signiﬁcant part of Tjalling Koopmans’s
research in microeconomics was informed by Paul Samuelson’s research in the ﬁeld, and this was
especially so concerning the representative agent. To substantiate this claim, I begin this narrative
with an important, yet overlooked episode in the development of microeconomics in the 1930s, the
“Hotelling-Schultz dialogue,” a research eﬀort that consisted in, inter alia, testing the symmetry
conditions of Hotelling demand functions. With the advent of contributions from Eugene Slutsky,
the Cowles Commission did more than testing the new symmetry conditions: under the inﬂuence of
the Keynesian revolution, the well known Slutsky income eﬀect - deﬁned at the microeconomic level -
was used to shed light on facts deﬁned at the macroeconomic one, an objective of the Slutsky-Walras
program that engaged Koopmans since the 1940s.

Apart from this introduction, this article is organized as follows. In the ﬁrst two sections, 2 and
3, I present a brief overview of the history that gave rise to the investigation in this chapter: ﬁrst,
I introduce a certain stylized version of demand theory, as generally seen in microeconomics text-
books, then, followed by a more intricate account on the subject provided by Wade Hands and Philip
Mirowski. In section 4, I take on the claim in the last paragraph, explaining why the Slutsky-Walras
program was centered on the problem of aggregation and, above all, how from this eﬀort a few con-
siderations about the representative agent can be inferred. Section 5 connects Koopmans’s research
eﬀorts as discussed in the previous section to Samuelson’s contributions in microeconomics which
also helped give rise to the representative agent. To complement the aim of this article, in section 6,
I consider the meaning of dynamics in economics, a topic originating concomitantly in a important
paper analyzed in this essay (Samuelson, 1943), with interesting implications to the interpretation
of the representative agent. In section 7, I oﬀer some concluding remarks.

2

2 The History of Classic Demand Theory Revisited

It is rather common to observe microeconomics texts ﬂirting with history before getting to the con-
tents proper, even if brieﬂy. This is the case of the graduate textbook, “Advance Microeconomic
Theory,” by Geoﬀrey Jehle and Philip Reny, that stated, “Before we begin, (...), a brief word on the
economists’ thinking will help to place what follows in its proper context” (Jehle and Reny 2011: 4),
with the authors going on to present the evolution of preferences and utility concepts in historical
perspective from Vilfredo Pareto all the way to G´erard Debreu, including still the contributions by
Eugene Slutsky and John Hicks.

Following this reasoning, in the manual, “Economics and Consumer Behaviour,” Angus Deaton
and John Muellbauer (1980: 61) wrote: “Although we make no attempt to provide a historical survey
of applications of demand theory, the studies will be presented in rough chronological order.” More
examples of this approach can be found in the literature, perhaps more predominantly in the ﬁeld of
macroeconomics.1 The aim of this section is to raise objections to such interpretations, in an attempt
to answer: “How well do we know about the history of demand theory?”

In the spring of 2005, a three-day History of Political Economy Conference was held in North
Carolina, United States, to discuss a central concern in microeconomics. In the words of the orga-
nizers, “The conference provided participants with an intense and spirited exchange on a wide range
of topics related to the history of demand theory and its related topics” (Mirowski and Hand 2006:
3).

The scholars engaged in the meeting wanted to produce a written volume capable of signpost-
ing the community beyond the uninvolving “two- or three-acts stories,” typically associated with the
topic. Notwithstanding this new research eﬀort have begun to render today’s demand theory a direct
upshot of a certain stabilization process of mid-twentieth century, the standard narrative continued
to claim an old tale. According to it, after demand theory became part of the neoclassical enterprise
in earnest around 1875, it took the theoretical framework only few sequential turns (or “play-acts”)
to reach the present stage.2

In such a smooth and stylized portrayal, the ﬁrst act took place circa 1850-1875: it was about its
origin in hedonistic psychology, i.e., “(...) rested on subjective introspection rather than objective
observation” (ibid, p. 3), a stage where cardinal measurement of utility played a mayor role and a
phase associated with such names as Jonh Stuart Mill and Jeremy Bentham. The second act was the
ordinalist revolution of the 1930s, marked by the elimination of hedonistic features and made possible
with foundational contributions from Vilfredo Pareto, John Hicks, Roy Allen, Eugene Slutsky, and
others.3 Finally, if it was a breakthrough of its own, then, Paul Samuelson’s revealed preference the-
ory would consist in the third turn, a method which seemed to give a stronger scientiﬁc basis to the
classical theory of demand (installed after the second turn), for it turned consumer’s choices into an
observable behaviour and no longer dependent on abstract and unobservable axioms of preferences.4
Investigating the version by which stabilization in demand theory happened in the 1930s-1950s
decades leads one to a way more convoluted task, yet one whose resulting account could possibly

1See Acemoglu (2009), Blanchard and Fischer (1989), Romer (2001) and Barro and Sala-i-Martin (2004).
2“Marginalism,” a late nineteenth-century movement associated to a new form of analyzing demand, is sometimes
used interchangeably with “neoclassicism” or “neoclassical school.” See Ekelund and H´ebert (2002) for an analysis of
neoclassical microeconomics.

3Lenfant (2006) defends an alternative view in which the notion of ordinalism was not a guiding principle in the

prestabilization era. For another informative article on the ordinalist revolution, see Hands (2011).

4Samuelson’s contribution was mostly due to his 1938 article, “A Note on the Pure Theory of Consumer Behaviour,”
published in Economica. There is a debate in the literature whether Samuelson’s Revealed Preference approach was
as signiﬁcant as the ordinalist revolution or simply “(...) a further reﬁnement in the ordinal utility program (a way
of empirically ‘revealing’ the consumer’s preference” (Mirowski and Hands 2006: 3). Stanley Wong’s (2006) thesis is
that Paul Samuelson knew since the very beginning that his weak axiom of revealed preference would not be enough
to derive the law of demand and, thereby, his research program would not be an alternative to the preference-based
approach to utility theory.

3

supersede the last two turns above. Further, if accurately told, it would cast light on the intellectual
and methodological origins of three related teaching and research institutions in the United States,
lending us a view into how - at least as far as the theory of consumer choice is concerned - the
current orthodox approach came to be. This is why I decided to follow Hands and Mirowski (1998)
and Mirowski and Hands (1998) for whom, “To reduce the motley of prestabilization American eco-
nomics to manageable proportions, we will focus on a particular subset of economists who shared
some similar theoretical orientation” (Mirowski and Hands 1998: 261).

All such similar theoretical orientation aimed to tackle, to a greater or lesser extent, a problem
originated in the so-called Hotelling-Schultz dialogue. By doing so in their unique ways, Samuelson’s
revealed preference theory and the approaches advanced both by the Cowles Commission and the
Chicago School produced a theoretical core during the 1938-1955 period that makes up most of to-
day’s orthodox neoclassical demand analysis, “a single monolithic homogeneous neoclassical strain”
(ibid), though never forming a single theoretical body.

What will come out of this studies are the contributions from the two exponents in this essay.
The ﬁrst one is Paul Samuelson, a personage who not only played a supporting role in the Hotelling-
Schultz impasse, but almost single-handedly provided a solution to it. The second personage is
Cowles Foundation’s Tjalling Koopmans, a key contributor in the Foundation’s normative turn of
rational choice theories in the 1943-1954 period (Herfeld 2018).

3 The Empirically-motivated Hotelling-Schultz Dialogue

3.1 The Context

Although the number of empirical research in economics began to display an increasing trend as early
as the 1970s, it took hold in the profession only in the 1980s for several reasons. Among these were
the ever-increasing availability of data, the development of new statistical and econometric methods
and the reduced cost of computer power, to which one might add a higher demand for works of
“practical relevance.”5

Even proﬁting from a whole new set of scientiﬁc and technological advances certain ﬁeld has
yet to see the expected improvement:
in demand analysis, economists continue to face hurdles of
theoretical and empirical nature and, as the story involving Harold Hotelling and Henry Schultz will
show, such a state goes back at least to the years before World War II. In hindsight, as I shall attempt
to argue, it exempliﬁes what Andrew Pickering deﬁned dialectic of resistance and accommodation,
a (scientiﬁc) process in which the representative agent is precisely what has been taken out of the
mangle machine.

In their quest to scrutinize the rise of orthodox demand theory in the United States in the ﬁrst
half of the twentieth-century, Wade Hands and Phillip Mirowski have identiﬁed a point of origin, a
sort of theoretical tabula rasa, where two “relatively minor ﬁgures” initiated a scientiﬁc inquiry that
ultimately determined the direction of few, yet inﬂuential economic research centers in the United
States.6 In the authors’ interpretation, everything began when Henry Schultz and Harold Hotelling
set out on a task in the 1930s to ﬁnd, inter alia, a theory capable of underpinning the empirical

5Few papers have recently analyzed the empirical turn that occurred in economics over the last forty years. Combing
through nearly 33 journal titles cited in selected years of the American Economic Review and using machine learning
algorithm, Angrist et al. (2017) concluded, among other things, that the profession’s turn toward empirical research
has been an evolution within instead of across ﬁelds. The volume edited by Backhouse and Cherrier (2017) provides
various views on the rise of applied research in historical perspective.

6The two papers written by Wade Hands and Phillip Mirowski were “Harold Hotelling and the Neoclassical Dream”
and “A Paradox of Budgets: the Postwar Stabilization of American Neoclassical Demand Theory,” both published in
1998. Though the authors changed the order of their co-authorship, I will simply refer to “Hands and Mirowski” (in
line with the satisfaction of the alphabetical protocol) when referring to the “Impasse” and the correct order when
speciﬁc passages of an original article are used as references or, obviously, quoted.

4

demand functions they had been - painstakingly - trying to estimate.

The ﬁrst personage in this story, Henry Schultz, was born in 1893 in a Russian-occupied Poland.7
After attending college at the City University of New York, Schultz began graduate work in economics
at Columbia University under the early econometrician Henry Ludwell Moore, writing a dissertation
on the statistical estimation of demand functions.8 With the conclusion of the doctoral degree,
Schultz was appointed professor of economics at the University of Chicago where he carried out the
major work of his career by founding a statistical laboratory to deepen the estimation of demand
functions, “(...) a large program of research of a kind deﬁnitely projected by earlier studies” (Hotelling
1939: 98).9

In need of ﬁnding a reasonable theory behind the estimated equations, Schultz began to look in
the general equilibrium approach pioneered by Leon Walras and Wilfred Pareto. In his mind, such
functions not only had pervasive interdependence at the market level (thus the general equilibrium
character), but more to the point, were the result of agents’ utility maximizing behaviour (exactly `a
la Walras). As emulating the natural sciences, there had to be “laws” behind empirical regularities
in microeconomics as well. What Schultz did not realize at the beginning, nonetheless, was how
diﬃcult his applied task would turn out to be, let alone contribute to the theory he so dearly praised.
A second contributor in those early studies of empirical demand analysis and utility theory was
Harold Hotelling, raised in Seattle, Washington, but born in Minnesota in 1895. Although graduating
in journalism in 1919, he went on to ﬁnd a more fulﬁlling career in mathematics, earning a master’s
degree in 1921. Three years later, Hotelling completed a doctorate also in mathematics at Princeton
University with a dissertation on analysis situs, known nowadays as topology, a ﬁeld where his
adviser - Oswald Veblen - contributed with the ﬁrst ever modern treatment of the topic (Darnell
1988; Mac Lane 1964).10 As he would later recall of this graduate experience, after being rejected
by the graduate program in economics at Columbia University, a fact that postponed his immediate
desire to apply the science of mathematics to uncover “new truth” in economics, studying subjects as
wide as mathematical physics, diﬀerential geometry and astrophysics gave him an even better grasp
of the tools, which turned out to be helpful in his subsequent works (Darnel 1988).

Leaving university in 1924 with jobs for pure mathematicians in short supply, Hotelling debuted
his professional life at the recently created Stanford Food Research Institute (SRI) as a mathematical
and statistical consultant (Hands and Mirowski 1998). It was at the institute, collaborating with
his colleague Holbrook Working, and mirroring Schultz’s experience with widespread economic crisis
and uncertainty (especially in the food sector), that he developed his own interests in demand theory
and estimation methods.11 In fact, as Arrow and Lehmann (2012: 903) put it, “It was during his

7His family emigrated to New York City, United States, when he was still a child. See Hotelling (1939) for more

information on the life of Henry Schultz.

8In a Festschrift to Schultz published after his death, Harold Hotelling (1939: 98) wrote: “[Schultz’s] inspiration
was in the work of Henry L. Moore, whoose piooner attempt to derive demand curves from time series stirred his
enthusiam.” Henry Moore (1869-1958), considered one of the founding fathers of econometrics, earned a PhD in
Economics from John Hopkins University. Spearheading a generation of Americans who crossed the Atlantic to learn
from fellow Europeans, Moore took classes in mathematical statistics from Karl Pearson at the University of London
and also corresponded with luminaires of that time such as Alfred Marshall, Ysidro Edgeworth, Vilfred Pareto and
L´eon Walras. On this and additional details of Moore’s career, see Mirowski (1990).

9Schultz taught at the University of Chicago from fall of 1926 until his untimely death in 1938. His name is often

associated to the early formation of the Chicago School of Economics.

10Oswald Veblen (1880-1960), nephew of the Institutionalist Thorstein Veblen, earned a PhD in mathematics at
the University of Chicago in 1903. A famous geometer of his time, Oswald taught at Princeton University during his
whole career. Also at Princeton he helped found the Institute of Advanced Study’s School of Mathematics, a place
famous for its faculty who included such names as Albert Einsten, John von Neumman and Hermann Weyl

11Holbrook Working earned a PhD in Agricultural Economics from the University of Wisconsin-Madison in 1921 and
joined SRI in 1925. Having made substantial contributions in the statistical analysis of commodity prices (JBES 1986),
his inﬂuence on Hotelling’s 1932 article can be gauged in the several times he was mentioned. Holbrook and his younger
sibling, Elmer Working, were also one of the ﬁrst economists who underscored the importance of endogeneity problems
in the estimation of demand functions. Elmer’s article, “What do Statistical ‘Demand Curves’ Show,” published in

5

Stanford period that he began to focus on the two ﬁelds - economics and statistics - in which he
would do his life’s work.”

As was the case of some academicians in the United States who used to travel abroad to learn from
their counterparts, Hotelling spent six month in England in 1929 working with a leading statistician,
making him, “(...) one of the few Americans who in the 1920s realized the revolution that R. A.
Fisher had brought about in statistics (...)” (ibid.). So long-lasting was this inﬂuence that even
following the relocation to Columbia University in 1931, “(...) most of his energy during the 15 years
there was spent developing the ﬁrst program in the modern (Fisherian) theory of statistics” (ibid.), a
fact that certainly helped him hone his publications in microeconomics. The bulk of his involvement
with Schultz, therefore, took place during this Columbia period precisely when, as editor of Journal
of Political Economy in 1932, Schultz received an article written by Harold Hotelling.12

As I have mentioned above, Henry Schultz sought answers to two speciﬁc questions related to
the measurement of demand. First, could the Walrasian model fulﬁll the theoretical void he saw in
the estimated curves? Second, since the reexamination of the theory’s mathematical foundation was
perceived as essential to comprehend the causes of the great depression, in which direction should it
be carried out? Schultz found a perfect interlocutor in Hotelling, for his main article, “Edgeworth’s
Taxation Paradox and the Nature of Demand and Supply Functions,” published in the inﬂuential
Journal of Political Economy in 1932, tackled the dual objective above.13

Even though Hotelling searched for a more theoretical approach, while Schultz was “(...) the
champion of an empirical operationalism” (Hands and Mirowski 1998: 363), they shared the following
features:
1. Concerned with practical matters, i.e., the reality of the American countryside in the years leading
to the great depression of 1929: thus, the estimation of demand functions were considered paramount
to better comprehend hidden events crippling the sector.14
2. Believed that economic theory was important only insofar as it shed light on tariﬀs, subsidies,
production quotas, and related matters.
3. Particularly on the issue of pure theory, the neoclassical price version had to be:

3.1 Grounded on mathematics.
3.2 Empirical: data should corroborate the theory.15
3.3 Somehow derived from Physics: “a true scientiﬁc method.”
3.4 The basis of everything else in economics.
3.5 Conducive to the obtainment of interdependent demand function.
A central takeaway of this section is that, ontologically, both authors believed in the fact that
demand functions “existed out there in the world” in an interdependent form, “(...) functionally
linked together by rational adjustments to other prices, incomes, as well as various accidents” (Hands
and Mirowski 1998: 245), unlike the Marshallian approach in which a simple price-quantity plot
would be acceptable. An important part of the following development in this literature then revolved

1927, remains even today a reading source in applied microeconomics courses such as Industrial Organization. Deaton
and Muellbauer’s Almost Ideal Demand System is built, among other models, on Holbrook Working’s Statistical Law
of Family Expenditure, published in 1943.

12As Hands and Mirowski (1998) have reminded us, Hotelling and Schultz had already exchanged correspondence

as early as the 1920s, but on other matters.

13The University of Chicago’s economics department, where Henry Schultz was a Professor, has been publishing
the Journal of Political Economy since 1893. See the volume edited by John List and Harald Uhlig (2017) on the
combined inﬂuence on our profession of the “Chicago economics” and its ﬂagship journal.

14As the Stanford University Historian David Kennedy once wrote: “Herbert Hoover needed no comprehensive
study to know that the farm issue was urgent. Virtually his ﬁrst act as president, even before he commissioned his
wide-ranging examination of recent social trend, was to convene a special congressional session to resolve the farm
crisis” (1999: 17-18). Then, he continued, “But as the agricultural depression of the 1920s merged with the great
depression of the 1930s, (...) the misery of rural America knew no relief” (ibid: 19).

15Both authors pioneered the applicability of linear regression analysis as well as Fisherian statistical hypothesis

testing to demand theory.

6

around a key test called symmetry condition. But as much as it was economists’ job to correctly
ﬁnd interdependency empirically, and better, base them upon the writings of Leon Walras, Vilfredo
Pareto and Francis Edgeworth, things did not work out well. Neither in the past, nor in the present.

3.2 Everything Came Down to Symmetry Conditions: past and present

In the section 5 of the “Edgeworth’s Taxation” paper, Hotelling demonstrated that a certain sym-
metry condition should hold when one took the cross-partial derivative of demand functions with
respect to prices, a feature he alternatively dubbed integrability conditions. After reading the article:

(...) Schultz immediately set his laboratory to work calculating the demand functions
and estimating the partial derivatives to test for the symmetry condition of the Hotelling
Economy, as well as the quasi-correlation coeﬃcient to measure complementarity (Hands
and Mirowski 1998: 355).

Such an attempt to test for the restriction was probably one of the ﬁrst carried out in microeconomics,
and following its transformation “to the status of core empirical content,” the authors continued
(ibid):

(...) the symmetry or integrability conditions had frequently failed to hold, and worse,
sometimes the sign diﬀered, so the complementarity coeﬃcient would give conﬂicting
results when the order of calculation was inverted.

When Schultz’s tests went awry several attempt to save the Hotelling economy were made and these
included, but were not limited to, changes in functional forms of the demand equations, modiﬁca-
tions or extensions of the model to take account of possible aggregation problem or even the whole
disposal of the Hotelling framework.16

What happened next is that a signiﬁcant part of the dialogue lost its importance with the unex-
pected death of Henry Schultz in 1938, the deﬁnitive retreat of Harold Hotelling from demand theory
and, indisputably the most important factor, the rediscovery of Eugene Slutsky’s, “Sulla Teoria del
Bilancio del Consumatore,” published as far back as 1915, but now considered the text that provided
one vital step in the proof to recover consumer’s preferences from her/his demand behaviour.17 When
the Slutsky Equations ﬁnally made its way into orthodox microeconomics (in the postwar period),
becoming the “single most important result” in demand theory (Hands 2004), or its “fundamental
equation” (Jehle and Reny 2011), another struggle began: this time to test the Slutsky Symmetry
Conditions.

Then, roughly forty-years later, and with a similar motivation, the leading empirical microe-

conomist Angus Deaton (1986: 1796) wrote:

All the techniques of demand analysis so far discussed share a common approach of
attempting to ﬁt demand functions to the observed data and then enquiring as to the
compatibility of these ﬁtted functions with utility theory.

For the above-mentioned compatibility to hold, integrability condition should be satisﬁed, which
is a diﬀerent way of saying that the symmetry conditions should be satisﬁed. In another passage,
after pointing out the considerable body of empirical literature that has been carrying out the tests,
including his (and John Muellbauer’s) almost ideal demand system of 1980, Deaton (ibid: 1791)
granted:

16Drawing on the correspondence exchanged between Hotelling and Schultz, Hands and Mirowski (1998: 356-7) list
ten ways the protagonists used in their attempt to overcome the failed empirical results, with Schultz always leaning
toward the empirical whereas Hotelling toward the theoretical.

17See Chipman and Lenfant (2002) for how Slutsky’s 1915 and 1927 contributions grew in importance in economics.

For both historical and intellectual contexts involved in Slutsky’s writings, see Barnett (2004, 2007).

7

Although there is some variation in results through diﬀerent data sets, diﬀerent approx-
imating functions, diﬀerent estimation and testing strategies, and diﬀerent commodity
disaggregations, there is a good deal of accumulated evidence rejecting the restrictions.

Even taking into account some of the latest development in the estimation of consumer behaviour,
e.g., the nonparametric approach developed since the 1980s (Stoker 1989; H¨ardle et al. 1991; Haag
et al. 2009) or based upon the use of nonseparable models in the 2000s (Hoderlein 2010; Imbens and
Newey 2003; Altonji and Matzkin 2005), contemporary economists still fall short of attaining what
Harold Hotelling and Henry Schultz wanted to attain more than eighty years ago.

4 Koopmans and the Cowles Approach to Aggregation Prob-

lems

A central claim in Wade Hands and Phillip Mirowski’s recent project of re-evaluating American de-
mand theory contends that had economists trailed more closely Harold Hotelling’s demand functions,
as explicated in his 1932 “Edgeworth Taxation Paradox” paper, the neoclassical dream would have
been fulﬁlled. Such a dream consisted in successfully addressing six theoretical concerns within the
Arrow-Debreu-Mackenzie general equilibrium model: (i) existence, (ii) uniqueness, (iii) stability of
the equilibrium price vector, (iv) comparative statics via the employment of the “correspondence
principle,” (v) welfare economics, and ﬁnally, (vi) the satisfaction of the physics heuristics.18

But partly because of its disappointing symmetry tests and partly due to the recently discovered
contributions from Eugene Slutsky, the profession walked away from Hotelling’s unlimited budget
approach: while Slutsky’s approach turned into an essential building block of neoclassical demand
analysis, the latter was relegated to the so-called “Hotelling Lemma.”19

What followed in the literature is that although there appeared, “(...)

three major reactions
to the breakdown of the Hotelling and Schultz programme, each characterized by their treatment
of the ‘integrability’ or [Slutsky] symmetry conditions (...)” (Hands and Mirowski 1998: 373), the
representative institutions also diﬀered in how the Slutsky-based demand functions could be used to
cast light on two relevant, intertwined topics of the day: ﬁrst, the Keynesian revolution and, second,
the compatibility of macroeconomics (brought out by the Keynesian Revolution) and Walras’s mi-
croeconomics. These two concerns continued to engage Cowles and, especially, Tjalling Koopmans
over the following decades.

On the ﬁrst topic, there was a general perception in the United States of the revolutionary ideas
presented in John Maynard Keynes’s 1936 General Theory. Since the interwar period had witnessed
a severe economic downturn, it was feared that it could happen in the aftermath of World War II as
well. Keynes’s theory of aggregate income became not only an important reference to better com-
prehend business cycles, but was seen as providing remedies to counterbalance them. It is with this
discernment that Carl Christ recalled in a 1994 article: “The applied econometric work of the Cowles
Commission, inspired by Marschak and directed at the improvement of macroeconomic policy, had
a deﬁnite Keynesian ﬂavor.”

Yet, Keynes’s theory of aggregate income, coupled with Slutsky’s contributions, enabled another
much-wanted interpretation in economics: the relationship of macroeconomics to microeconomics.
By breaking it out as a separate magnitude, the Slutsky income eﬀect, considered at the agent level,
provided a theoretical basis to interpret income changes at the aggregate level, as though it provided

18The general equilibrium theory represents the pinnacle of neoclassical economics.
19On this counterfactual exercise, Leonid Hurwicz (1998: 399) asserted: “Hotelling’s unlimited budget model was
not even under consideration for consumer choice theory, and hence there was no opportunity for rejection... Since
there was no rejection, no one is guilty of it.”

8

some sort of microfoundations.20

Veering towards Slutsky and Keynes seemed a promising research strategy at Cowles:

it made
possible the pursuit of Alfred Cowles’s and Jacob Marschak’s dreams of predicting stock market
and taming the business cycles, respectively (Christ 1994).
In fact, as is plainly documented in
the historiography, under the research directorship of Marshack (1942-1948) the Cowles Commission
spent time and resources in structural estimation econometrics, precisely a macroeconometric project
whose outcome went awry.

What is, perhaps, slightly lesser known is that the Commission - possibly in pursuing Cowles’s
desire - also engaged in applied works of microeconomic nature, a Walrasian-Slutsky program. This
objective, like Schultz’s eﬀorts almost a decade before, failed as well. It did so because the estima-
tions repeatedly rejected neoclassical price theory in the very crucial respect it rejected the Hotelling’s
economy: the symmetry conditions.21

In hindsight, given that most empirical studies have dealt (and continue to deal) with aggregate
demand, could this failure be associated with a previous warning by Hotelling and Schultz, for whom
the Slutsky version did not have nice properties under aggregation and, therefore, were destined to
failures?

The rejections of the symmetry hypothesis in both theories made aggregation problems an even
larger concern in the decade of the 1940s.22 On the substantial literature on the estimation of sys-
tem of demand functions, Chipman (2006) reminded of the pioneering study of Lawrence Klein and
Herman Wold (1948) and, later, of Richard Stone (1954). Around this period there also appeared
programs of inquiry dealing speciﬁcally with problems of aggregation on both theoretical and empir-
ical grounds.

In the theory realm, there was John Hicks’s 1939 “Value and Capital,” an attempt at constructing
Walrasian macro model, “(...) a general-equilibrium microfoundational program, which is conceived
as showing how Keynesian problems can arise directly from the interactions of individual agents”
(Hoover 2012: 37).23 In the empirical case, there was Lawrence Klein’s 1946 Econometrica article,
“Macroeconomics and the theory of rational behaviour,” an attempt to build aggregate variables
couched in the behaviours of both households and ﬁrms; this eﬀort inaugurated, in methodological
terms, a new tradition in macroeconometrics.24

After Klein’s article, other works followed suit, for example, in determining aggregation in one-
industry model (May 1946), in building macroeconomic values in the so-called “general case” (Pu
1946), or in studying the impacts on macro values (aggregate production function) of changes in
micro values (sectoral production functions), “with which it is derived” (May 1947: 51). Following
May (1947), Nataf (1948) tried to determine the conditions under which an aggregate production
function correspond exactly to the production functions of individual ﬁrms (rather than of isolated
sectors). Analyzing instability features in systems of diﬀerential equations, Hawkins (1948) proposed

20As explained in Hoover (2012), the relationship of macroeconomics to microeconomics was already an important
topic in the “prehistory” of microfoundational programs, a period which included research by such economists as
Ragnar Frisch and John Maynard Keynes himself. Although “microfoundations” as a systematic program of inquiry
did not exist prior to John Hick’s ﬁrst general equilibrium approach by the end of the 1930s, and continued with
Lawrence Klein’s macroeconometric project of the mid-1940s and Robert Lucas’s New Classical macroeconomics in
the 1970s, the term was ﬁrst used by a mainstream author only in the early 1970s (Phelps 1970).

21As claimed by Hands and Mirowski (1998: 375): “(...) actual quantitative restrictions implied by the neoclassical

price rarely held in the empirical exercises undertaken at Cowles.”

22As I have mentioned in the “Introduction” to this dissertation, trade theorists have long striven with the concept

of aggregation at least since Staley Jevons’s concept of trading bodies.

23Weintraub’s 1979, “Microfoundations - The compatibility of microeconomics and macroeconomics,” contains a

thorough discussion of Hicks’s microfoundational program.

24Post-World War II macroeconometrics owes to Hicks, Modigliani and Keynes as much as it owes to Tinbergen, even
though the latter two authors disagreed ﬁercely. Klein’s innovations in the subﬁeld came in the form of establishing
a middle-ground between Keynes and Tinbergen (Hoover 2012). Fuchs-Piz´on (2017) detailed the history of Klein’s
macroeconometrics program.

9

aggregation methods that could curb them. Finally, also included in these articles was a report of
papers presented at a session of the Chicago Meeting of the Econometrics Society on the “Relation-
ships Derived from Aggregate Data,” with contributions from Kenneth Arrow (1948) and Francis
Dresch (1948).25

To van Daal and Walker (1990), this spate of articles published in Econometrica between 1946
and 1949 consisted perhaps in the greatest testimony yet to the importance of aggregation problems
in economics. More dramatically, still according to the authors, with the possible exception of a
few remarks made in Cournot’s famous 1838 book (Recherches sur les Principes Math´ematique de
la Th´eorie du Richesse), no economists had ever taken the matter seriously before. One can ﬁnd a
similar impression of Cournot’s work, for example, in James Friedman’s (2000) survey of the French
economist’s works and life.

Tjalling Koopmans’s research, on the one hand, was stirred by such an aggregation concern: a
problem he decided to address by forgoing the empirical path just to adhere to the theoretical alter-
native. This move coincided with the dismissal of Jacob Marschak as Cowles’ research director in
1948. When Koopmans acceded to that position, rather than sanctioning research in applied works,
he shifted the commission’s focus to “(...) extract abstract structure of Walrasian system and sub-
ject it to the most rigorous axiomatic scrutiny” (Hands and Mirowski 1998: 375).26 An important
chapter in the history of axiomatization in economics began following this event.

An illustration of how aggregation and general equilibrium theory were interlinked subjects can
be drawn from Leonid Hurwicz’s appraisal of Hands and Mirowski’s alleged objectives of the Arrow-
Debreu research program:

[Hands and Mirowski] impute to the neoclassicists (mainly Arrow, Debreu and Samuel-
son) a programme containing a set of ﬁve objectives. These are listed as existence, unique-
ness and stability of competitive equiibria; comparative statics, and welfare economics
(...). (The problem of aggregation, discussed elsewhere, seems to have status akin to that
of the ﬁve goals) (Hurwicz 1998: 399, emphasis added).

But as much as Koopmans and other economists placed enormous eﬀorts in this aggregation project,
and even though “one can discern the skeleton of the Slutsky conditions buried within the [general
equilibrium] system,” Hands and Mirowski (1998: 375) sustained that:

Unfortunately, axiomatic elaboration also eventually led to the conclusion that the
system placed no eﬀective restrictions upon excess demand functions, thus subverting the
original impetus for the research program.

This dim view was also shared by Hurwicz (1998: 401), for whom the framework was inevitably “(...)
inadequate for aggregate prediction purposes.”

Even though placed in an econometric setting, the same diﬃculty can be observed in a letter
Koopmans wrote to Marc Nerlove after the Cowles Commission moved to New Haven (Connecticut):

(...) I have developed a general feeling that the clue to a number of diﬀerent problems
in econometrics lies in further exploration of aggregation problems, that ties our notions
of individual decision making with somewhat more aggregated relationship. I doubt that
this reﬂection is of much value to you in regard to distributed lags, but it does seem to
me that this is one of the problems that may stand to gain if progress should be made
on aggregation. Theil’s book is excellent as far as it goes. My main reservation about
it is that it studies primarily the implications of current econometric procedures, rather

25This annual meeting was held on December 27-30, 1947. As is customary, since the texts presented in one year are
published in the following one as a joint report, the authors’ contributions were dated 1948. A third paper enunciated
in the session, by Ronald Shephard, was not presented and thus did not have its abstract included in the volume.

26This eﬀort occupied most of his time until the mid-1970s.

10

than trying to answer the deeper question what procedures we should be using in view
of aggregation problems.27,28

In this vein, and also highlighting the frequency with which aggregation concerns arise in theoretical
as well as applied econometric works:

The issue of aggregation has, I believe, special status because of its relationship to
econometric research. Since much econometric research (and this, I believe, includes the
studies of Henry Schultz) uses data aggregated over certain populations or collections of
ﬁrms, there arises the question to which properties known to hold for individual agents
carry over to aggregates. One reason why this issue is important is that identiﬁability
assumptions used (and needed) by econometricians are often derived from theoretical
(or instropective) considerations applicable to individual economic agents (Hurwicz 1998:
401; emphasis added).

Koopmans’s research, on the other hand, was also stirred by a quarrel with aﬃliates of the National
Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), one of the world’s oldest business cycle research institute.29
As will be shown below, this discussion encompassed the problem of aggregation and general equi-
librium theory as well.

In reviewing the 1946 book, “Measuring Business Cycles,” authored by Arthur Burns and Wesley
Mitchell, Koopmans accused their methods of investigation as “(...) made with a minimum of assis-
tance from theoretical conceptions and hypotheses regarding the nature of the economic processes
by which the variables studied are generated” (Koopmans 1949: 161). Their theory, Koopmans
reasoned, lacked an explicit formulation about the way an economic agent made choices, essential to
explain “man’s economic behaviour,” and therefore, the ultimate causes behind the cycles.30

In response to those charges, Rutledge Vining alluded to a certain vagueness in the alternative
interpretation proposed by the Cowles economist, skeptical with what Koopmans thought stood
behind people’s choices:

Koopmans doesn’t give his hypotheses speciﬁc economic content ... and suggests that
the kind of content it should have in general terms, such as “the behaviour of group of
economic agents,” “underlying human responses,” “knowledge of man’s behaviour and
its motives” (Vining 1949: 79-80; emphasis added).

That Koopmans was ambiguous when he referred to individual vis-`a-vis group choices, and that
he conveyed his ideas through elaborate mathematical arguments (specially after the 1960s), have
already been stressed in my discussion of his writings elsewhere. Perhaps it may come as a surprise

27Letter from Tjalling Koopmans to Marc Nerlove, January 31, 1957, TKP, box 16, ﬁle folder 304.
28The book mentioned by Koopmans in the correspondence was Theil’s “Linear Aggregation of Economic Relations,”
published in 1954. Henri Theil was born in 1924 in Amsterdam, the Netherlands, and passed away in the United States
in 2000. After earning his Doctorate in Economics (with distinction) from the University of Amsterdam in 1951, Theil
began his career as a macroeconomic analyst and forecaster for the Central Planning Bureau (CPB) of the government
of the Netherlands under the directorship of Jan Tibergen. Between 1953 and 1966 he taught econometrics at Erasmus
University Rotterdam (formerly Netherlands School of Economics in Rotterdam) where he also founded and directed
The Econometric Institute. From 1966 to 1981 he was a member at Chicago’s department of economics. From 1981
until his passing, Theil remained aﬃliated with The University of Florida. Over a period of ﬁve decades he published
more than 250 articles and 17 books, of which the one mentioned by Koopmans was his very ﬁrst (Bewley, 2000). Of
all the diverse and disjoint areas theil contributed within economics, demand analysis beneﬁted with 7 books and over
90 articles (Raj, 1991).

29The NBER was established in 1919; for a historical account of its birth and later developments, see Fogel et al.
2013 and Fabricant 1984. For an early history of this and other institutions and economists that dealt with business
cycles, see Morgan (1990, especially, chapter 2).

30This initial denunciation by Koopmans sparked animosity between members of the Cowles Commission and of the
NBER. It became known in the literature as the “measurement without theory” debate, named after the title of his
article.

11

that such characteristics were already pointed out by Vining as early as 1949, as the continuation of
his text illustrates:

But apparently all he has to insist upon at present is the mathematical form, and from
his discussions it appears not unfair to regard the formal economic theory underlying his
approach as being in the main available from works no later than those of Walras (ibid,
emphasis added).

Another interesting feature that stands out in this passage relates to how closely connected, in
Vining’s discernment, Koopmans’s approach appeared to be from Walras’s. More comprehensively,
in diﬀerent excerpts, Vining spoke of Koopmans’s attempt at providing aggregate formulations within
the Walrasian framework. In one instance, Vining (ibid: 81) stated:

(...) some of us may feel that the unit of analysis and the entity the behaviour of which
it is of interest to study is not the individual economizer in his conscious, problem solving
state of mind. I believe that much of the statistical regularities that are to be observed
in population phenomena and that are relevant for the discussion of economic problems
involves the behaviour of social organisms that are distinctly more than simple algebraic
aggregates of consciously economizing individuals. I think that in a positive sense the
aggregate has an existence over and above the existence of Koopmans’ individual units
and behaviour characteristics that may not be deducible from the behaviour of these
component parts.

In another passage, in criticizing Koopmans’s econometric practice (inherited from Jan Tinbergen),
he aﬃrmed:

In a sense, these are the only problems that have been attacked by this entire line
of development - the problem of statistical estimation that would be presented by the
empirical counterpart of the Walrasian conception. Add to Walras the simple notion of
lagged eﬀects (if it is not already there) and certain devices of the nature of the diﬀerence
equation, and the problem is wholly statistical as contrasted with economic (ibid: 80).

In closing this section, if the “measurement without theory” criticisms Tjalling Koopmans raged
against the Bureau were to have some eﬀects, he had to contribute with the Walrasian theory:
building better theories of choice, perhaps with better aggregation properties, was Koopmans’s task.

5 Samuelson on Homothetic Preferences, Strong Axiom of

Revealed Preference, and the Representative Agent

Among the various contributions to economics, Paul Samuelson also made crucial inroads in the Wal-
rasian general equilibrium theory. In a series of papers spanning almost thirty years, he introduced
into the apparatus the assumption in which all individuals in the economy had identical homothetic
preferences and, by doing so, he helped establish certain desirable properties in the framework.

Beginning with the article, “Social Indiﬀerence Curves,” published in 1956, Samuelson adopted
homogeneous of degree one utility functions as representation of homothetic preferences. An impor-
tant aspect of this formulation is that demands functions resulting from such utility functions could
be aggregated to form a representative consumer (or representative agent).31 As stated in Hands
(2014), in addition to the existence of a representative consumer, bearing on the assumption of ho-
mothetic preferences warranted three other worth noting properties: (ii) aggregation, (iii) market

31See, e.g., Acemoglu (2009) and Blackborby et al. (2008) on the mathematics of the aggregation.

12

rationality, and (iv) welfare.32

Because Samuelson’s intention in the 1950s had been to contribute to the international trade lit-
erature, i.e., the search for community indiﬀerence curves, making a case for homothetic preferences
permitted also a simultaneous re-interpretation of aggregation problems. As Samuelson (1956: 21)
summarized:

Since most “individual” demand is really “family” demand, the argument can be
made that such family demands have been shown to have none of the nice properties of
modern consumption theory. However, if within the family there can be assumed to take
place an optimal reallocation of income so as to keep each member’s dollar expenditure of
equal ethical worth, then there can be derived for the whole family a set of well-behaved
indiﬀerence contours relating the totals of what it consumes: the family can be said to
act as if it maximizes such a group preference function. The same argument will apply to
all of society if optimal reallocation of income can be assumed to keep the ethical worth
of each person’s marginal dollar equal.

It is, therefore, precisely due to this extension that the Walrasian general equilibrium model:

(...) did have suﬃcient structure at the agent level to be able to say very speciﬁc (and
desirable) things about the market-level results generated by the competitive interaction
of such agents. The model was the homothetic Santa Claus case of uniform homothetic
tastes...(Hands 2014: 427, emphasis added).

Along with this aggregative property, the existence of the representative agent meant that rather
than a sypply = demand type equilibrium (for all goods in the economy), now it suﬃced to arrive at
the solution to a constrained optimization problem of that single agent. As a consequence, following
all usual assumptions of demand theory, the rationality of a single individual is (as if) transferred to
the whole system.33

Parallel to this event, in separate eﬀorts, Samuelson (1950) and Houthakker (1950) developed the
Strong Axiom of Revealed Preference (SARP) approach to consumer theory, one which emboldened
the perception that a representative agent could in fact exist in the economy: “(...) if the SARP
axiom holds on market (rather than individual) demand functions, then there always exists a ratio-
nalising representative agent: i.e., the so-called Wald case where the market reﬂects ‘revealed group
preference’ (...)” (ibid: 419).

Contrary to the reliance on the weak axiom of revealed preference (WARP), the fulﬁllment of
SARP signiﬁed the satisfaction of integrability condition necessary for the demand function to be
treated as if it were generated by a budget-constrained utility maximizing agent. Borrowing a last
passage from Wade Hands (2014: 430), he aﬃrmed:

(...) if the SARP holds on market demand functions then the demand functions behave
as if they were generated by a representative agent and the Walrasian general equilibrium
of the whole economy reduces to the consumer’s equilibrium of that agent.

An important point here is that more than enabling the construction of a particular breed of general
equilibrium model, the elimination of heterogeneity of agents and income eﬀects - as a result of
homothetic preferences - “liberated” the representative agent to other ﬁelds of economics as well,

32All four implications following the assumption of homothetic preferences are unique in their importance to the
general equilibrium model. However, to the question I am raising in this text, the most important one is the possibility
of considering the market demand as if generated by a single, representative consumer.

33The attainment of the representative agent means also the solution to two other speciﬁc problems within general

equilibrium theory: uniqueness and stability. However, I will not pursue such topics here.

13

such as growth theory, international trade, and ﬁnancial economics.34 As a matter of fact, in another
article I investigate how, if at all, Samuelson’s representative agent, as used in macroeconomics, made
it to Koopmans’s: it turns out that the channel of inﬂuence might have played out in the subﬁeld of
optimal growth theory. Before, I shall discuss a change in the meaning of dynamics as portrayed in
Hands (2010).

6 The Postwar Stabilization of Consumer Choice Theory:

redeﬁning dynamics

It seems that with regard to the stabilization of consumer choice theory, the thesis of a “skein,” or of
an “interlocking competitive system,” consisting of theories that culminated in the three American
neoclassical hubs (the Cowles general equilibrium approach, the Chicago Marshallian variant and
the Samuelson’s revealed preference doctrine) has been virtually uncontentious.35

In an article published in the European Journal of the History of Economic Thought in 2010,
Wade Hands introduced into the former interpretative thread yet another simultaneous modifying
feature:
it ceased to be dynamic. This time, the source of amendment came from another series
of contributions by Paul Samuelson. Notably, was his PhD dissertation, “Foundations of Economic
Analysis,” published in 1947, a source that played a key role.36 In his appreciation of Samuelson’s
contributions, Hands (2010: 332) wrote:

By the 1950s “dynamic” meant “based explicitly on diﬀerential or diﬀerence equations
involving time,” and optimization problems - maximum or minimum - were not of this
sort. Maximization was not a dynamic process; the Walrasian tˆatonnement was.37

In another passage, Hands claimed that:

The ultimate impact of the separation - or the impact of the profession generally ac-
cepting this separation - was that consumer choice theory, which was based on utility
maximization, ceased to have anything to do with movements or dynamics. Of course
no dynamics means no paths, no endowment eﬀects, no reference dependence, no order
of consumption, none of the other problems associated with integrabilityB. The concept
of economic dynamics is stabilized and in the process consumer choice theory is relieved
of the responsibility for dealing with all of these potentially troublesome issues. Eco-
nomic agents with well-ordered preferences deﬁned over the entire choice space became
the standard basis for consumer choice theory, and the non-integrable case and all the
diﬃculties associated with it quietly left the stage. Stabilizing dynamics thus helped
stabilize consumer choice (Hands 2010: 332).38

If one were to follow Hands’s classiﬁcation on what (additionally) might or might not belong to the
stabilized body of consumer choice theory, Koopmans’s articles in intertemporal economics would not

34“Financial Economics” studies the interactions of households, ﬁrms and ﬁnancial intermediaries in both domestic
and international settings. In the latter case, national economic policies might be even more important a force. Robert
C. Merton deﬁnes it as the overlapping of ﬁnance, monetary economics and public ﬁnance.

35As far as the Hotelling-Schultz impasse is concerned, there has not yet appeared a challenging thesis disputing its
validity, with the exception of Hammond (2006), who disagrees with chief aspects concerning the unfolding of events
from the standpoint of the Chicago School.

36In Wade Hands’s argument, since Samuelson’s 1941, 1942 and 1944 articles on stability were all incorporated into
his 1947 volume, it suﬃces to refer only to this latter work as his main contributions to the topic. Furthermore, on
the simultaneity issue, such contributions by Samuelson coincide temporarily with the formation of the “skein,” as
defended by Hands and Mirowski (1998) and Mirowski and Hands (1998).

37So clear was the message that Samuelson wanted to convey in his book that he separated it into Part I, dedicated

to optimization problems, and Part II, dealing with dynamics.

38For an explanation of IntegrabilityB, see Hands (2006).

14

pass the test. That is to say, Koopmans continued to carry out his studies in the 1950s and 1960s
the “old” way, searching for a dynamic nature within it even after a possible separation between
optimization and dynamics became more visible in the literature.

Even though it is possible to insist that Koopmans did not undertake dynamic analysis proper
since neither diﬀerential nor diﬀerence equations were used, Hands’s exempliﬁcation quoted above,
wherein “well-ordered preferences deﬁned over the entire space became the standard basis,” cannot
be used to shed light on Koopmans’s contributions either. As I have treated with some details else-
where, a crucial part of his analysis was shore up on the notion of impatience and time perspective,
thus, making time a crucial matter.39 Furthermore, as it has also been shown, Koopmans continued
to pursue a distinctive preference-based demand theory in the 1960s by postulating preferences or-
derings over time rather than on a prospect space. For several authors, such a distinction cannot be
easily applied either.

In his instructive, “Applied Consumption Analysis,” all chapters concerning Koopmans’s contri-
butions to consumer choice theory were allotted to a whole section titled “dynamics.” In appraising
the case in which the consumer looks into the future, Louis Phlips stated:

We want to explain the allocation of his budget among n commodities, when due attention
is given to the fact that he is not maximizing an instantaneous “static” or an instantaneous
“dynamic” utility function (in which the inﬂuence of the past behaviour is incorporated)
as in previous chapters, but is maximizing an “intertemporal” utility function deﬁned on
sequences over time (from now to some future date) of commodity bundles (Phlips 1983:
267).

Judy Klein (2007) made the case in which Richard Bellman used dynamic programming intensively
to carry out “economizing” eﬀorts during the second World War. Economists then began to apply
the same functional equation formulation ﬁrst in microeconomics and, later, in macroeconomics.
A successful incursion of economic dynamics into the realm of microeconomics would surely have
required its application in consumer choice theory. Lars Peter Hansen (2010) argued that the ﬁrst
use of recursive preferences can be traced to Koopmans (1960) and Koopmans et al. (1964). Stokey
et al. (1989) added to this list the article by Beal and Koopmans (1969).
Following this reasoning, considering that for Shone (2002: 3), “(...) dynamics involves time
derivative, dx/dt, where x is a continuous function of time, or diﬀerence equations, xt − xt−1 where
time is considered discrete units,” and, in the context of a neoclassical growth model, Corbae et al.
(2009: 92) asserted that, “A dynamic optimization problem is one in which a decision must be made
over time in which early decisions aﬀect later options,” it seems hardly straightforward the rupture
as proposed by Wade Hands.

Although providing a historical account that cannot be taken at face value, on the inclusion
of dynamic (and stochastic) features into economics, in the graduate text, “Recursive Methods in
Economic Dynamics” one can ﬁnd:

These theoretical developments are based on a wide variety of results in economics, math-
ematics, and statistics: the contingent-claim view of economic equilibria introduced by
Arrow (1953) and Debreu (1959), the economic applications of the calculus of varia-
tion pioneered long ago by Ramsey (1928) and Hotelling (1931), the theory of dynamic
programming of Bellman (1957) and Blackwell (1965) (Stokey et al. 1989).

The passage shows that at least some of the publications that contributed seminally to dynamics,
and which were later applied to consumption theory, e.g., Bellman (1957) and Blackwell (1965), came
out at the approximate time of their alleged separation (stabilization).40 Finally, it can be argued

39See the article, “Preference, Utility, and Koopmans’s Stance on the Representative Consumer.”
40In the case of Ramsey (1928), there is even a clearer intersection between dynamics and choice theory.

15

that dynamic optimization techniques solve problems posed, for example, in Hamiltonian dynamic
system and they date back at least to Samuelson and Solow (1956) (Wulwick, 1995).

In diﬀerent ways, the excerpts above coincide with a key economic substance in Koopmans’s
research, that is, the blurring of optimization (choice theory) and dynamics (intertemporal features).
One can discern this feature in the articles written in the 1950-1970 period as well as in the only
application he made of that theoretical framework: the 1963 normative growth model.

7 Concluding Remarks

Casting new light on the history of demand theory serves as much the writing of more accurate
account of this episode as the building of a ﬁrmer ground upon which a better comprehension of two
interwoven facts can be built: the stability of general equilibrium theory and the greater appearance
of the representative consumer in the 1950s and 1960s. Considering that this period also coincided
with the rise of optimal growth models, where inﬁnitely-lived agents play an important role, I have
tried to oﬀer an overview into the history of demand theory whereby all these topics could be more
clearly delineated.

Even though it was not my aim to emphasize the complex Hotelling and Schultz dialogue, it is
worth quoting a passage from Mirowski and Hands (1998) for two reasons. In addition to conveying
precisely the methodological and economic signiﬁcance of Samuelson’s contributions to the impasse,
the passage per se also helps us observe the state of demand theory at that time, and hence, useful for
comparing what the Cowles Commission used to be at the end of the 1930s and what it has become
after an important person in this essay, Tjalling Koopmans, took over the research directorship of
the institution in 1948.

The problem for Samuelson was to ﬁnd a way of formulating the theory of demand that
would be consistent with his positivist-operationalist methodology while simultaneously
avoiding the type of econometric testing associated with Schultz. How could this possibly
In essence his answer was to change the place where the empiricism
be done? (...)
lived in the neoclassical theory of demand.
Instead of having empiricism enter at the
back end - by testing the empirical implications deduced from theory - the revealed
preference approach would place empiricism right up front at the beginning of the exercise.
If the epistemologically dubious notion of subjective utility could be replaced with a
strictly behaviorist - thus objective, observational, operational, and meaningful - concept
of consumer action, demand theory could be reconstituted on what Samuelson considered
legitimate scientiﬁc foundations (Mirowski and Hands 1998: 283, italics added).

In other words, in the 1930s, and for most part of the 1940s, demand analysis was overwhelmingly
an econometric enterprise.

An important remark in this article, therefore, is that if the Cowles Commission carried out
applied econometric projects of microeconomic and macroeconomic natures before Koopmans, after
his appointment as research director in 1948 the institution was transformed into a fulcrum of pure
theoretical microeconomics. More important, motivated by aggregation discussions taking place in
economics, the new research program at Cowles was also directed to tackle the problem.

I have also stressed in this paper that an signiﬁcant portion of this discussion, of compatibility
of micro to macroeconomics, can be traced to another historical fact: the widespread adoption of
homothetic preferences, ﬁrst introduced by Paul Samuelson in 1956. Then, I have I showed that
Koopmans’s research purpose intersected with Samuelson’s push for homothetic preferences.

Although consumer theory and dynamics stabilized as two separate branches within microeco-
nomics in the 1950s and 1960s, Koopmans still tried to extend the ﬁrst subﬁeld through the addition
of dynamic features, initially with respect to the structure of utility functions and, later, with re-
spect to preferences. This observation, however, seems to be at odds with interpretations given, for

16

example, in Hands (2010) and I provided some examples in the literature showing why it is hard to
tell consumption theory and dynamics apart.

I hope the narrative in this article has identiﬁed few junctures that made more transparent the
relationship between the development of demand theory and the rise of the representative agent in
microeconomics.

At least two important questions remain open for further investigations. The ﬁrst one concerns
Koopmans’s own use of homothetic preferences and how much he interacted on this matter not
only with Paul Samuelson, but with Gerard Debreu, an important mathematical economist who
made essential contributions to the axiomatization of economics and who was also a member of the
Cowles Commission. A second question concerns a more clear association between the Koopmans-
Samuelson writings in homothetic preferences and the time-separability preferences used in modern
macroeconomics as discussed in Barro and King (1984).

References

Acemoglu, Daron. 2009. Introduction to Modern Economic Growth. Princeton: Princeton University

Press.

Altonji, Joseph., and Rosa Matzkin. 2005. Cross Section and Panel Data Estimators for Nonsepa-

rable Models with Endogeneous Regressors. Econometrica, 73(4): 1053-1102.

Angrist, Joshua., Pierre Azoulay., Glenn Ellinson., Ryan Hill., and Susan Lu. 2017. Economic
Research Evolves: Fields and Styles. American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings, 107(5):
293-297.

Arrow, Kenneth. 1948. Summarizing a Population of Behaviour Patterns. Report of the Chicago

Meeting, December 27-30, 1947, Econometrica, 16(2): 203.

——. 1967. Samuelson Collected. Journal of Political Economy, 75(5): 730-737.
Arrow, Kenneth., and Erich L. Lehmann. 2012. Harold Hotelling. In: Javier Rojo (ed.), Selected

Works of E. L. Lehmann, pp. 903-913. Boston, MA: Springer Science+Business Media.

Backhouse, Roger., and B´eatrice Cherrier, eds. 2017. The Age of Applied Economists: The Trans-
formation of Economics since the 1970s. Annual Supplement to vol. 49 of History of Political
Economy. Durham: Duke University Press.

Barnett, Vincent. 2004. E. E. Slutsky: Mathematical Statistician, Economist and Political Economist?

Journal of the History of Economic Thought, 26(1): 5-18.

——. 2007. The Contextual Sources of Slutsky’s Eﬀects: 1915, 1927 and After. Journal of the

History of Economic Thought, 29(4): 403-416.

Barnett, William. 2007. An Interview with Paul Samuelson.

In: P. Samuelson and W. Barnett
(eds.), Inside the Economist’s Mind - Conversation with Eminent Economists, pp. 143-164. MA:
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Barro, Robert., and John King. 1984. Time-Separable Preferences and Intertemporal-Substitution

Models of Business Cycles. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 99(4): 817-839.

Barro, Robert., Xavier Sala-i-Martin. 2004. Economic Growth. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Beals, Richard., and Tjalling Koopmans. 1969. Maximizing Stationary Utility in a Constant Tech-

nology. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics, 17(5): 1001-1015.

Bewley, Ronald. 2000. Mr. Henri Theil: an Interview with the International Journal of Forecasting.

International Journal of Forecasting, 16(1): 1-16.

Blackborby, Charles., Daniel Primont., and Robert Russel. 2008. Gorman, W.M. (Terence).

In:
S. N. Darlauf and L. E. Blume (eds.), The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd edition.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Blanchard, Olivier., and Stanley Fischer. 1989. Lectures on Macroeconomics. Taipei: Maw Chang

Book Company.

17

Chipman, John. 2006. Aggregation and Estimation in the Theory of Demand. In: P. Mirowski and
D. Wade Hands (eds.), Agreement on Demand: Consumer Theory in Twentieth-Century. Annual
Supplement to vol. 38 of History of Political Economy, pp. 106-129. Durham: Duke University
Press.

——. 2006. Koopmans, Tjalling Koopmans (1910-1985). In: Ross Emmett (ed.), The Biographical

Dictionary of American Economists, vol. 2, pp. 525-535. London: Thoemmes Continuum.

Chipman, John., and Jean-S´ebastien Lenfant. 2002. Slutsky’s 1915 Article: How it Came to be

Found and Interpreted. History of Political Economy, 34(3): 553-597.

Christ, Carl F. 1994. The Cowles Commission Contributions to Econometrics at Chicago, 1939-1955.

The Journal of Economic Literature, 32(1): 30-59.

Corbae, D., M. Stinchcombe., and J. Zeman. 2009. A Introduction to Mathematical Analysis for

Economic Theory and Econometrics. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press.

Deaton, Angus. 1986. Demand Analysis. In: Z. Griliches and M. D. Intriligator (eds.), Handbook of

Econometrics, vol III, ch. 30, pp. 1767-1839. Elsevier Science Publishers.

Deaton, Angus., and John Muellbauer. 1980. Economics and Consumer Behaviour. Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press.

Debreu, Gerard. 1959. Theory of Value: An Axiomatic Analysis of Economic Equilibrium. New

Haven and London: Yale University Press.

——. [1959] 1960. Topological Method in Cardinal Utility Theory. Cowles Foundation Discussion

Paper No 76.

Dresch, Francis. 1948. Stochastic Aspects of the Aggregation Problem. Report of the Chicago

Meeting, December 27-30, 1947, Econometrica, 16(2): 203-204.

Friedman, James W. 2000. The Legacy of Augustin Cournout. Cahiers d’´economie Politique. 37:31-

46.

Garrison, Roger W. 1990. Austrian Capital Theory: The Early Controversies. In: Bruce J. Caldwell
(ed.), Carl Menger and his Legacy in Economics. Annual Supplement to vol. 22 of History of
Political Economy, pp. 133-154. Durham: Duke University Press.

Haag, Berthold., Stefan Hoderlein., and Krishna Pendakur. 2009. Testing and Imposing Slutsky

simmetry in nonparametric demand systems. Journal of Econometrics, 153: 33-50.

Hammond, J. D. 2006. More Fiber than Thread? Evidence on the Mirowski-Hands Yarn. In: P.
Mirowski and D. Wade Hands (eds.), Agreement on Demand: Consumer Theory in Twentieth-
Century. Annual Supplement to vol. 38 of History of Political Economy, pp. 130-152. Durham:
Duke University Press.
Hands, D. Wade, 2006.

Integrability, Rationalizability, and Path-dependency in the History of
Demand Theory. In: P. Mirowski and D. Wade Hands (eds.), Agreement on Demand: Consumer
Theory in Twentieth-Century. Annual Supplement to vol. 38 of History of Political Economy, pp.
153-185. Durham: Duke University Press.

——. 2010. Stabilizing Consumer Choice: The Role of the “True Dynamic Stability” and Related
Concepts in the History of Consumer Choice. The European Journal of the History of Economic
Thought, 17(2): 313-343.

——. 2011. Back to the Ordenalist Revolution: Behavioural Economic Concerns in Early Modern

Consumer Choice Theory. Metroeconomica, 62(2): 386-410.

——. 2016. The Individual and the Market: Paul Samuelson on (Homothetic) Santa Claus Eco-

nomics. The European Journal of the History of Economic Thought, 23(3): 425-452.

Hands, D. Wade., and Philip Mirowski. 1998. Harold Hotelling and the Neoclassical Dream. In: R.
Backhouse, D. Hausman, U. M¨aki and A. Salanti (eds.), Economics and Methodology - Crossing
Boundaries, pp. 322-397. MacMilland and St. Martin.

Hansen, Lars Peter. 2010. Recursive Valuation and Sentiments. Exploring Links Between Asset
Pricing and Macroeconomic Modelling, Bendheim Lectures, The Bendheim Center for Finance,
Princeton University.

18

Hawkins, David. 1948. Some Conditions of Macroeconomics Stability. Econometrica, 16(4): 309-322.
H¨ardle, Wolfgang., Werner Hildenbrand., and Michael Jerison. 1991. Empirical Evidence on the Law

of Demand. Econometrica, 29(4): 1525-1549.

Herfeld, Catherine. 2018. From Theories of Human Behaviour to Rules of Rational Choice: Tracing
a Normative Turn at the Cowles Commission, 1943-1954. History of Political Economy, 50(1):
1-48.

Hoderlein, S. 2011. How Many Consumers are Rational? Journal of Econometrics, 164(2): 294-309.
Hoover, Kevin. 2012. Microfoundational Programs.
In: P. G. Duarte and G. T. Lima (eds.),
Microfoundations Reconsidered - The Relationship of Micro and Macroeconomics in Historical
Perspective, pp. 19-61. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.

Hotelling, Harold. 1932. Edgeworth’s Taxation Paradox and the Nature of Demand and Supply

Functions. Journal of Political Economy, 40(5): 577-616.

——. 1939. The Work of Henry Schultz. Econometrica, 7(2): 97-103.
Houthakker, Hendrik. 1950. Revealed Preference and the Utility Function. Economica, 17:159-74.
Hurwicz, Leonid. 1998. Comment. In: R. Backhouse, D. Hausman, U. M¨aki and A. Salanti (eds.),

Economics and Methodology - Crossing Boundaries, pp. 398-416. MacMilland and St. Martin.

Imbens, G., and W. K. Newey. 2009.

Identiﬁcation and Estimation of Triangular Simultaneous

Equation Model Without Additivity. Econometrica, 77(5): 1481-1512.

JBES, 1986. Announcement - Death of Holbrook Workings. Journal of Business & Economic

Statistics, 4(3): 395.

Jehle, Geoﬀrey A., and Philip J. Reny. 2011. Advanced Microeconomic Theory. Harlow, England:

Financial Times Prentice Hall.

Kennedy, David M. 1999. Freedom from Fear - The American People in Depression and War, 1929-

1945. New York: Oxford University Press.

King, John. 2012. The Microfoundations Delusions: Metaphor and Dogma in the History of Macroe-

conomics. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing.

Klein, Judy. 2007. Cold War, Dynamic Programming, and the Science of Economizing: Bellman

Strikes Gold in Policy Space. First Annual Conference on the History of Recent Economics.

Klein, Lawrence. 1946. Macroeconomics and the Theory of Rational Behaviour. Econometrica,

14(2): 93-108.

Koopmans, Tjalling Charles Papers (TKP). Manuscript and Archives, Yale University Library.
Koopmans, Tjalling C. 1947. Measurement Without Theory. The Review of Economics and Statis-

tics, 29(3): 161-172.

——. 1949. Identiﬁcation Problems in Economic Model Construction. Econometrica, 17(2): 125-144.
——. 1960. Stationary Ordinal Utility and Time Perspective. Econometrica, 28(2): 287-309.
——. 1964. On Flexibility of Future Preferences. In: Beckmann, M; C. Christ., and M. Nerlove
(eds.), The Scientiﬁc Papers of Tjalling C. Koopmans, vol. 1, pp. 469-480. Berlin: Springer-
Verlag, 1970.

Koopmans, Tjalling., Peter Diamond., and Richard Williamson. 1964. Stationary Utility and Time

Perspective. Econometrica, 32(1/2): 82-100.

Lenfant, Jean-S´ebastien. 2006. Complementarity and Demand Theory:

from the 1920s to the
1940s. In: P. Mirowski and D. Wade Hands (eds.), Agreement on Demand: Consumer Theory in
Twentieth-Century. Annual Supplement to vol. 38 of History of Political Economy, pp. 48-85.
Durham: Duke University Press.

List, John., and Harald Uhlig. The Past, Present, and Future of Economics: A Celebration of the
125-year Anniversary of the JPE and Chicago Economics. Journal of Political Economy, 125(6):
1723-1930.

Mac Lane, Saunders. 1964. Oswald Veblen 1880-1960 - A Biographical Memoir. Washington DC:

National Academies Press.

19

May, Kenneth. 1946. The Aggregation Problem for a One-Industry Model. Econometrica, 14(4):

285-298.

——. 1947. Technological Change and Aggregation. Econometrica, 15(1): 51-63.
Mirowski, Philip. 1990. Problems in the Paternity in Econometrics. History of Political Economy,

22(4): 587-609.

Mirowski, Philip., and D. Wade Hands. 1998. A Paradox of Budgets: The Postwar Stabilization
of American Neoclassical Demand Theory.
In: M. S. Morgan and M. Rutherford (eds.), From
Interwar Pluralism to Postwar Neoclassicism. Annual Supplement to vol. 30 of History of Political
Economy, pp. 260-292. Durham: Duke University Press.

Morgan, Mary S. 1990. The History of Econometric Ideas. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nataf, Andr´e. 1948. Sur la Possibilit´e de construction de certaines macromod`eles. Econometrica,

16(3): 232-244.

Phelps, Edmund E. 1970, ed. Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and Inﬂation Theory.

New York: W.W Norton and Company Inc,

Pickering, Andrew. 1993. The Mangle of Practice: Agency and Emergency in the Sociology of

Science. American Journal of Sociology, 99(3): 559-589.

Pinz´on-Fuchs, Erich. Economics as a “tooled” discipline: Lawrence R. Klein and the Making Macroe-

conometric Modeling, 1939-1959. PhD Dissertation, University Paris 1 Panth´eon-Sobborne.

Phlips, Louis. 1983. Applied Consumption Analysis - Revised and Enlarged Edition. Amsterdam:

North Holland.

Raj, Baldev. 1992. Henri Theil’s Biography and his Contributions to Economics and Econometrics:
An Overview.
In: B. Raj and J. Koerts (eds.), Henri Theil’s Contributions to Economics and
Econometrics. Vol. 1: Econometric Theory and Methodology, pp. 3-16. Dordrecht: Springer
Science + Business Media.

Ramsey, Frank. 1928. A Mathematical Theory of Saving. The Economic Journal, 38(152): 543-559.
Romer, David. 2001. Advanced Macroeconomics. Second Edition. Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill.
Samuelson, Paul. 1938. A Note on the Pure Theory of Consumer Behaviour. Economica, 5: 61-71.
——. 1943. Dynamic, Statics, and the Stationary State. The Review of Economic Studies, 25(1):

58-68.

——. 1956. Social Indiﬀerence Curves. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 70(1): 1-22.
Schultz, Henry. 1938. The Theory and Measurement of Demand. Chicago: The University of Chicago

Press.

Shone, Ronald. 2002. Economic Dynamics: Phase Diagrams and Their Economic Applications.

Second Edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Slutsky, Eugene. 1915. Sulla Teoria del Bilancio del Consumatore. Giornale Degli Economisti,

51:1-26.

Stoker, Thomas M. 1989. Tests of Additive Derivative Constraint. Review of Economic Studies, 56:

535-552.

Stokey, Nancy., Robert Lucas., and Edward Prescott. 1989. Recursive Methods in Economic Dy-

namics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Theil, Henri. 1954. Linear Aggregation of Economic Relations. Amsterdam: North Holland.
van Daal, Jan., and Donald A. Walker. 1990. The Problem of Aggregation in Walras’s General

Equilibrium Theory. History of Political Economy, 22(3): 489-505.

Vining, Rutledge. 1949. Koopmans on the Choice of Variables and the Methods of Measurement.

The Review of Economics and Statistics, 31(2): 77-86.

Weintraub, E. Roy. 1979. Microfoundations: The Compatibility of Microeconomics and Macroeco-

nomics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Wong, Stanley. 2006. The Foundation of Paul Samuelson’s Revealed Preference Theory. Revised

edition. London: Routledge.

20

