Gender and Race Analysis in Heterodox Journals: A Bibliometrics Study  

Luis Gustavo de Paula 

 
 

Felipe Almeida 

Universidade Federal do Paraná 

Universidade Federal do Paraná 

 
 

 
Resumo:  Reconhecer  que  alguns  indivíduos,  como  mulheres,  afrodescendentes  e  imigrantes  latinos,  têm  menos 
direitos  econômicos,  sociais  e  políticos  do  que  outros  é  uma  característica  comumente  atribuída  as  abordagens 
heterodoxas.  Este  estudo  investiga  como  os  artigos  publicados  em  revistas  heterodoxas  abordam  temas  como 
gênero  e raça.  O  artigo  analisa  as  cinco  mais representativas  revistas  heterodoxas,  segundo o  ranking  de  revistas 
econômicas proposto por Fred Lee e Bruce Cronin, a saber, Cambridge Journal of Economics, Journal of Economic 
Issues, Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, Review of Radical Political Economics, and Economy and Society. 
A análise aparentada repousa sobre bibliometria, o que permite construir indicadores e analisar padrões nos artigos 
heterodoxos  para  compreender  como  gênero  e  raça  vêm  sendo  estudados  em  tais  textos.  O  estudo  conclui  que 
textos sobre afrodescendentes são parcialmente conduzidos através de uma análise de gênero e que o Marxismo é a 
corrente heterodoxa dominante nos textos sobre afrodescendentes.  
 
Palavras-chave: Gênero, Mulher, Afrodescendentes, Economia Heterodoxa, Revistas Heterodoxas 
 
Classificação JEL: B50 
 
Abstract:  Recognizing  that  some  individuals,  such  as  women,  black  people,  and  Latin  Americans,  have  fewer 
economic, social, and political rights than others is claimed to be a common feature of heterodox approaches. This 
study  investigates  how  papers  published  in  heterodox  journals  deal  with  gender  and  race  analysis.  It  analyzes 
heterodox journals following Fred Lee and Bruce Cronin‟s rankings of economic journals and relies on the top five 
heterodox  journals,  namely,  the  Cambridge  Journal  of  Economics,  Journal  of  Economic  Issues,  Journal  of  Post 
Keynesian Economics, Review of Radical Political Economics, and Economy and Society. Our analysis relies on 
bibliometrics that allows us to build indicators and analyze patterns present in heterodox papers to understand how 
gender  and  race  have  been  studied.  We  conclude  that  studies  on  black  people  are  partly  conducted  through  an 
analysis on gender and that Marxism is the main heterodox approach to deal with black people issues. 
 
Keywords: Gender, Woman, Black people, Heterodox Economics, Heterodox Journals 
 
JEL Classification code: B50 
 
Área 1 - História do Pensamento Econômico e Metodologia 
 
1. Introduction 
 

It is claimed that heterodox approaches recognize that some social classes  such as women, black 
people,  and  Latin  Americans  have  fewer  economic,  social,  and  political  rights  than  others.  Heterodox 
economics makes such classes visible in  studies far beyond a dummy variable.  Our paper examines the 
analysis of gender and race in heterodox economics. This paper relies on bibliometric analysis to identify 
studies  on  gender  and  race  in  the  top  heterodox  journals.  Bibliometrics  refers  to  the  application  of 
mathematical and statistical procedures in textual elements for its systematization and analysis of patterns 
present in the scientific discussion. The relationship between the textual elements of a given set of words 
is represented in the form of figures, using diagrams and graph structures. We establish the top heterodox 
journals using Fred Lee and Bruce Cronin‟s rankings (Lee and Cronin, 2010). Our study relies on the top 
five ranked heterodox journals: the Cambridge Journal of Economics (CJE), Journal of Economic Issues 
(JEI), Journal of Post Keynesian Economics (JPKE), Review of Radical Political Economics (RRPE), and 
Economy and Society (ES).1  

                                                           
1 In our paper, we use the term “heterodox journals” multiple times to mention journals we analyze.    

1 

 

Initially, we established words associated with gender and race to bibliometrically identify papers 
that  study  such  issues.  Bibliometric  analysis  allows  examination  of  the  most  cited  papers  that  use  the 
selected words in their titles, abstracts, keywords,  or references. We established a ranking based on  this 
and analyzed the top  ten most cited papers. Secondly, our study  relies on a bibliometric analysis  of the 
words in the papers‟ titles. We understand that the title of a paper is its identity, it is the first introduction 
between a reader and a paper and therefore carries weight. The bibliometric analysis of the words in the 
papers‟  titles  is  conducted  through  building  clusters  of  words  through  a  conceptual  structure  map  and 
performing  a  multiple  correspondence  analysis.  The  former  refers  to  a  diagram  that  portrays  relations 
between concepts, to organize a structure of ideas. The latter is a technique for graphical and numerical 
analysis  of  categorical  data.2  It  refers  to  an  exploratory  data  analysis  to  explain  information  that  is  not 
directly  observable  at  first  (Cuccurullo,  Aria,  and  Sarto,  2016;  Aria  and  Cuccurullo,  2017).  Then,  we 
analyze  the  co-occurrence  of  words  in  the  titles  of  papers  and  identify  clusters  that  express  common 
concepts.  

Finally, we analyze the references cited by the papers3. The bibliometric analysis of the references 
relies  on  the  study  of  co-citation  networks.  Co-citation  is  defined  “as  the  frequency  with  which  two 
documents are cited together” (Small, 1973:  295). The co-citation of at  least  two references takes  place 
when both were addressed by at least a paper in our sample. Therefore, these references were included in 
the  co-citation  network  of  references  and  represent  the  most  relevant  references  for  a  discussion.  Then, 
we build cluster maps of the co-citation network.4 

This  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  Section  2  discusses  the  sample  selection  and  our  analysis  of 
the  most  cited  papers.  The  third  section  presents  our  analysis  of  the  words  in  the  titles  and  the  fourth 
section provides the reference analysis. The final section concludes the paper. 
 
2. Selection of Papers and the Most Cited Papers 
 

We first established words associated with gender and race to bibliometrically identify papers on 
such issues. The selected words were “gender,” “women,” and “woman” to identify papers on gender and 
“race,”  “black  people,”  “black  person,”  “Latin  people,”  and  “Latin  person”  to  identify  papers  on  race. 
However, “race” is a problematic word because it can mean not only a grouping of human beings based 
on  culture,  history,  and  ethnicity;  but  also  a  competition  or  a  passage.  Therefore,  we  changed  the  word 
“race”  to  “racism.”  The  bibliometric  analysis  allows  the  study  of  the  most  cited  papers  that  use  the 
selected  words  in  their  titles,  abstracts,  keywords,  and  references.  Table  1  shows  the  outcome  of  our 
bibliometric analysis. 

Table 1: Papers in heterodox journal using the selected words 

 

   
 
 

Selected 

Words 

Gender  
Women (*) 
Black 
People (**) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Journals 

 

CJE 

JEI 

JPKE 

RRPE 

123 
141 

8 

78 
100 

6 

4 
6 

0 

129 
208 

34 

ES 

97 
121 

6 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

                                                           
2 In this co-word analysis, the co-occurred words are plotted on a two-dimensional map. The map can be interpreted according 
to the positions of the words and their distribution across dimensions of the graph. Also, words that have similar distributions, 
are plotted closer in the map. Our paper focuses on this last point. 
3 The bibliometric analysis of words in the titles and references of papers is conducted with the aid of the bibliometrix package 
of the statistical program R (Aria and Cuccurullo, 2017). 
4 For co-citation networks, references are grouped into clusters by a random walk function called Walktrap (Pons and Latapy, 
2006).  The  association  between  vertices  is  given  by  the  measure  of  similarities  called  Association  Strength  (Van  Eck  and 
Waltman, 2009). Lastly, the presentation of the figures follows the algorithm of Fruchterman and Reingold (1991). 

 

2 

Racism 

10 

6 

0 

32 

21 

 

       (*) The software was programed to read “woman” and “women” as the same. 
       (*) The software was programed to read “black person” and “black people” as the same. 
 
There is no mention of “Latin people” in Table 1 because our bibliometric analysis turned up just 
two  papers  with  “Latin  people”  in  them.5  One  of  these  studies  is  by  Pérez  and  Vernengo  (2010), 
published  in  the  JPKE,  that  examines  Latin  American  economic  growth  from  2000  to  2006.  The  other 
study is by Sieder (2011), published in ES, which analyzes the impact of globalization on the relationship 
between  legislation  and  indigenous  people  in  post-war  Guatemala.  Neither  Pérez  and  Vernengo  (2010) 
nor Sieder (2011) deal with “Latin people;” they were bibliometrically selected because they included the 
words “Latin” and “people.”6 Hence, we assumed that the main heterodox journals did not include studies 
on  Latinos.  Additionally,  our  analysis  on  race  is  a  study  of  papers  on  black  people.  This  raises  the 
following question: Are studies on Latinos not central to heterodox approaches?7 

 

Our  bibliometric  analysis  pointed  out  that  the  most  representative  heterodox  journal  for  gender 
and race issues is the RRPE. The least representative journal is JPKE, with no papers on race and just a 
few on gender. Hence, we assumed that the JPKE is not an important heterodox journal dealing with race 
and  gender  and  removed  it  from  our  sample.  Table  1  also  shows  an  important  outcome  that  studies  on 
gender  are  much  more  representative  than  those  on  race.  Therefore,  a  second  question  arises  from  our 
bibliometric  study:  Are  studies  on  race  (black  people)  not  central  to  heterodox  approaches?8  To 
examine papers on black people, we aggregate papers from each heterodox journal on the issue and look 
for a sample that can be handled bibliometrically. Hence, we do not analyze each heterodox journal for 
black people as we analyze gender.  

Our  analysis  focused  on  the  top  ten  most  cited  papers,  which  made  it  possible  to  perceive  the 
content  of  the  most  representative  papers  published  by  the  same  journal  on  gender  and  black  people  in 
heterodox journals in general. As the papers were selected by titles, abstracts, keywords, and references, 
we  went  through  each  of  the  top  ten,  studying  their  content.  We  classified  them  into:  (1)  studies  on 
discrimination; papers that analyzed women or black people as social classes that have fewer economic, 
social, and political rights; (2) minor mentions; papers that considered women or black people as social 
classes but they were not the key issue; (3) illustrations; papers that relied on women or black people as 
social  classes  to  illustrate  a  theoretical  or  empirical  argument;  (4)  “words”  just  in  the  reference;  papers 
that were bibliometrically selected just because the words “women” and “black people” were in title(s) or 
reference(s). We introduce the top ten most cited papers on gender and black people in the RRPE, CJE, 
ES, and JEI.   

Studies  on  discrimination  published  in  the  RRPE  are  Glenn  (1985),  Milkman  (1976),  Deere 
(1976),  and  Ciscel  and  Heath  (2001).  Glenn  (1985),  the  most  cited  paper,  is  a  key  study  on  minority 
discrimination; it has been most cited for both gender and black people, with 136 citations. It is a study on 
black,  Mexican-American,  and  Chinese-American  women  based  on  a  historical  perspective  of  work.  It 
examines  women‟s  oppression  from  the  perspective  of  both  race  and  gender  in  a  Marxist-feminist 
fashion.  The  fourth  most  cited  paper,  Milkman  (1976),  was  cited  82  times.  It  studies  the  impact  of  the 
Great  Depression  on  women‟s  work  roles  (paid  and  unpaid),  stressing  the  cultural  differences  between 
men and women in capitalism.  

Deere (1976) is the sixth most cited paper, at 48 times; it examines the division of labor based on 
gender in capitalist periphery production. Women‟s participation in agriculture in the periphery capitalist 
system  was  conditioned  by  the  requirements  of  capital  accumulation.  Ciscel  and  Heath  (2001),  the 
seventh  most  cited  paper  (43  times),  relies  on  social  capital  theory  to  address  the  distinction  between 
home  and  market  to  understand  long-standing  social  networks.  It  also  finds  that  labor  market 

                                                           
5 The software was programed to read “Latin person” and “Latin people” as the same. 
6 Or “person” – see footnote 5. 
7  It  is  not  this  paper‟s  ambition  to  answer  the  question.  However,  as  far  as  we  understand,  this  question  is  an  important 
outcome of our study. 
8 Footnote 7 applies here also. 

3 

 

relationships do not mean freedom from a patriarchal family and society; there is no conflict between the 
two, the former take place in society and reflect its structure and features.  
  
Gintis  (1976)  and  Eyer  and  Sterling  (1977)  are  RRPE  illustrations.  Gintis  (1976)  is  the  second 
most  cited  paper,  cited  96  times;  it  compares  the  Neoclassical  and  Marxist  approaches  of  the  firm  and 
finds that in examining the internal organization of a firm, a supervisor‟s authority relies on its legitimacy 
from  the  subordinates‟  perspective.  The  word  “women”  is  used  by  Gintis  (1976)  to  illustrate  that  the 
authority of women over men is generally unstable in American society.  Eyer and Sterling (1977) is the 
eighth  most  cited  paper  (cited  42  times);  it  studies  the  association  between  modern  capitalist  social 
organizations  and  excess  mortality  among  adults  in  developed  countries.  In  Eyer  and  Sterling  (1977), 
“women” arises through gender age-specific death rates and the impact of family or economic situation, 
such as divorce and unemployment, on death rates. Hence, Eyer and Sterling (1977) is not about “gender” 
and  “women”,  but  they  are  instrumentally  used  to  analyze  modern  capitalist  organizations  and  excess 
mortality.  
 
The RRPE‟s minor mentions are Gintis and Bowles (1981) and Ahlers (2010); both do not analyze 
women  or  gender  issues.  Gintis  and  Bowles  (1981),  the  fifth  most  cited  paper  (cited  57  times),  is  a 
reaction  to  the  criticism  from  Neoclassical  and  Sraffian  economists  of  Marxian  labor  theory.  In  their 
defense,  Gintis  and  Bowles  (1981)  briefly  mention  “gender”  stressing  that  there  is  a  gender  division  of 
labor. Ahlers (2010), the tenth most cited paper (cited 37 times), is a study on the political economy in the 
water sector and its mention of gender issues analyzes the use of water. Finally, both Bryan, Martin, and 
Rafferty  (2009)  and  Fine  (2002)  are  RRPE‟s  “words”  just  in  the  reference;  they  do  not  conduct  an 
analysis of women or gender issues. Bryan, Martin, and Rafferty (2009) (cited 85 times and the third most 
cited paper) is a study on financialization and its impact on re-constituting how people understand class 
and class relations. Fine (2002), the ninth most cited paper, was cited 38 times.  
 
In  the  CJE,  the  main  studies  on  discrimination  are  Wajcman  (2010),  Agarwal  (2000),  and 
Humphries  (1977).  Wajcman  (2010),  the  fifth  most  cited  paper  (cited  163  times),  introduces  a  feminist 
theory  of  technology,  which  updates  earlier  feminist  debates  on  technology  and  complements  feminist 
scholarship  and  science  and  technology  studies.  The  sixth  most  cited  paper,  at  159  times,  is  Agarwal 
(2000); it is a study on the lack of gender perspective in natural resource management. Humphries (1977) 
is  the  eighth  most  cited  paper;  it  was  cited  137  times.  It  finds  that  working-class  families  are  a  central 
feature of capitalist social formations and examines workers‟ defense of a social concept of working-class 
families that affects their standard of living, class cohesion, and ability to wage class struggle. Humphries 
(1977) relies on the roles played by women both in family and labor market activities.  

Simonazzi  (2009),  Lazonick  (1979),  and  Scott  (2000)  are  CJE‟s  minor  mentions  and  therefore 
they  are  not  studies  about  gender  issues  or  a  debate  on  women  in  economic  systems.  The  fourth  most 
cited  paper,  Simonazzi  (2009),  cited  169  times,  studies  elderly  care.  It  uses  the  word  “women”  to 
characterize  welfare  regimes  and  care  services.  Lazonick  (1979),  the  ninth  most  cited  paper,(cited  116 
times), is a study on mule-spinning factories, where women are cheaper as mule spinning workers. Scott 
(2000), the tenth most cited paper being cited 114 times, is a study on the intellectual history of economic 
geography, where gender is instrumentally used to address when economic studies on gender took place. 
None of the studies in the CJE were classified as illustrations. Storper (1989), Martin (1999), Orlikowski 
(2010),  and  Faggian  and  McCann  (2009)  are  CJE‟s  “words”  just  in  the  reference.  Storper  (1989)  is  the 
most cited paper in the CJE (cited 219 times), Martin (1999), is the second most cited paper  (cited 398 
times),  Orlikowski  (2010)  is  the  third  most  cited  paper  (cited  358  times),  and  Faggian  and  McCann 
(2009) is the seventh most cited paper (cited 142 times).  
 
In  ES,  Mauss  (1973),  Rankin  (2001),  and  Valverde  (1996)  are  studies  on  discrimination.  Mauss 
(1973), the most cited paper  (cited 733 times), examines body techniques, that is, “ways in  which from 
society to society men know how to use their bodies” and addresses the differences between men‟s and 
women‟s  body  techniques;  in  some  cases  it  denotes  a  men‟s  society  and  in  others,  a  women‟s  society. 
Rankin  (2001),  the  third  most  cited  paper  (cited  291  times),  studies  the  emergence  of  microcredit 
programs as a strategy for poverty alleviation in Nepal, with women borrowers as the target of a range of 
financial  institutions  from  commercial  banks  to  subsidized  rural  development  banks,  as  a  governmental 
strategy.  Consequently,  microcredit  became  a  symbol  of  social  citizenship  and  women‟s  needs  came  in 

4 

 

line  with  neoliberalism.  Valverde  (1996),  the  ninth  most  cited  paper  (cited  165  times),  follows  a 
Foucauldian  perspective  to  compare  liberal  ethical  governance  and  persistent  coexistence  of  liberal  and 
illiberal  modes  of  moral/ethical  governance.  Two  illustrations  are  introduced:  “the  naturalization  of 
distinct  'kinds'  or  types  of  humans  and  the  geographicalization  of  distinct  spaces  supposedly  requiring 
distinct  modes  of  governance”  (Valverde  1996:  357).  Gender  issues  are  central  in  Valverde‟s  (1996) 
illustrations.    

Law and Urry (2004), Meillassoux (1972), Amin (2005), and Leyshon and Thrift (1999) are ES‟s 
minor  references.  The  second  most  cited  paper,  Law  and  Urry  (2004),  cited  609  times,  is  a 
methodological  paper  that  discusses  the  power  of  social  science  and  its  methods.  The  word  “women” 
comes up just once, where it highlights that sociology was focusing more on women‟s studies. The fifth 
most cited paper  (cited 223 times), Meillassoux (1972), is a study on capitalist systems and agricultural 
communities, where reproduction of labor-power is under the control of women and matrimonial policy. 
In Amin (2005), the seventh must cited paper, cited 201 times, the word “women” comes up to illustrate 
activists, while gender comes up as a category in a community. Leyshon and Thrift (1999), the tenth most 
cited paper (cited 145), studies the impact of information technology on market knowledge used by retail 
banks. It highlights the new gender culture in banks, which is replacing women activities, and that gender 
is a standard variable for credit-scoring. ES‟s illustrations are Dean (1995) and Knox, Savage, and Harvey 
(2006).  Dean  (1995),  the  fourth  most  cited  paper  (cited  241  times),  addresses  women‟s  and  gay 
movements to illustrate identity politics. Knox, Savage, and Harvey (2006), a study on the development 
of social networks that includes women (Fijian women), is the eighth most cited paper (cited 165 times). 
Dean (2002) is ES‟s “words” just in the reference; it is the sixth must cited paper, being cited 222 times. 
 
The  JEI  has  published  a  large  number  of  studies  on  discrimination  with  respect  to  gender,  for 
example,  Bernasek  and  Shwiff  (2001),  Wheelock  and  Oughton  (1996),  Summerfield  (1994),  Vijaya 
(2010),  Staveren  and  Odebode  (2007),  and  Linz  (1996).  Bernasek  and  Shwiff  (2001)  is  the  most  cited 
paper  (cited  117  times),  which  analyzes  how  pension  allocations  differ  based  on  gender  and  the 
household  financial  decision-making  process.  They  argue  that  women  earn  less  than  men  over  their 
working lives, hence women are more exposed to poverty in their old age. The second most cited paper 
(cited  50  times),  Wheelock  and  Oughton  (1996),  uses  empirical  and  historical  material  on  economic 
change and development and the household. They argue that the household can be delimited and defined 
and  distinguished  between  the  formal  and  the  informal  economy.  In  their  analysis,  gender  and  age  are 
critically important in the household structure. 

Summerfield  (1994),  the  fourth  most  cited  paper  (cited  41  times),  studies  how  China‟s 
transformation  into  a  market-oriented  economy  changed  employment  conditions  for  women.  Vijaya 
(2010),  the  sixth  most  cited  paper  (cited  30  times),  examines  medical  tourism  in  India  and  Thailand.  It 
shows that opportunities within the host countries for healthcare workers are marked by class and gender 
advantages.  Staveren  and  Odebode  (2007),  the  seventh  most  cited  paper  (cited  29  times),  studies 
livelihoods of Yorub women in Nigeria. It analyzes gender norms as institutions which have asymmetric 
effects on different groups. Linz (1996), the tenth most cited paper (cited 27 times), analyzes the “causes 
and  consequences  of  gender  differences  in  employment,  wages,  and  promotion  patterns  in  the  Russian 
economy at the beginning of the transition [to a capitalism economy] process.” 

JEI‟s  minor  reference,  Stanfield  (1999),  is  the  third  most  cited  paper  (cited  43  times);  it  is  his 
presidential address to the Association for Evolutionary Economics. Stanfield (1999) pulls together some 
of the important issues in Institutional Economics. He stresses that the American family is changing, but 
this  is  not  developed  in  the  study.  None  of  the  papers  in  the  JEI  were  classified  as  illustrations,  while 
Marvasti  (2005),  Prasch  (2000),  and  Ibrahim  and  Galt  (2003)  are  its  “words”  just  in  the  reference. 
Marvasti (2005) was cited 37 times, being the fifth most cited paper. Prasch (2000) is the eight most cited 
paper, cited 28 times. Ibrahim and Galt (2003) was cited 27 times, being the ninth most cited paper.  
 
Regarding  black  people  analysis,  studies  on  discrimination  are  Hale  (2011),  Mason  (1999),  and 
Williams  (1987).  Hale  (2011),  the  fourth  most  cited  paper  (cited  45  times),  studies  the  impact  of 
neoliberalism on blacks and indigenous land rights struggles in Central America. Mason (1999), the fifth 
most  cited  paper,  (cited  40  times),  analyzes  persistent  interracial  wage  differences  and  labor  market 
discrimination against Blacks and Latinos. Williams (1987), the eight most cited paper (cited 33 times), 

5 

 

introduces a Marxian notion of competition that stresses discrimination in competitive capitalist societies 
with  respect  to  work  conditions.  The  minor  references  are  Stenson  (1993)  and  Mason  (1995).  Stenson 
(1993)  is  the  second  most  cited  paper  containing  the  phrase  “black  people”  that  was  cited  77  times.  It 
considers  young  black  people  as  a  segment  of  the  marginalized  population.  Mason  (1995),  the  seventh 
most cited paper (cited 30 times), mentions in a footnote the earning differences between black and white 
men. None of the studies on Blacks was classified as an illustration, while Du and Dong (2009) and Seiz 
(1991) were classified as “words” just in the reference. Du and Dong (2009) is the sixth most cited paper, 
cited 35 times. Seiz (1991) is the tenth most cited paper, cited 29 times.  
Concerning black people, there is another category: studies on gender that contain an analysis on 
 
black  people.  The  most  cited  papers  containing  “black  people”  reinforce  an  output  of  the  RRPE  most 
cited papers containing “woman” and “gender.” Glenn (1985), the RRPE‟s most cited paper concerning 
“woman” and “gender,” is also the most cited paper containing “black people.” Hence, Glenn (1985) can 
be considered to be a key study on minority discrimination. Cited 136 times, Glenn (1985) is a study on 
Black,  Mexican-American,  and  Chinese-American  women;  it  analyzes  discrimination  against  non-
Caucasian women. Hence, gender issue is a cornerstone of this study. Lister (1995), the third most cited 
paper (cited 52 times), like Glenn (1985) is a study more about women and gender than black people. It 
deals  with  the  development  of  the  feminist  concept  of  citizenship.  However,  the  paper  includes  black 
people  since  it  is  an  analysis  of  black  feminists  and  citizenship.  McCrate  (1987),  the  ninth  most  cited 
paper, cited 33 times, also analyzes black people using a feminist approach. It offers an extension of the 
Marxian analysis of employment relations to analyze marriage, wherein, black women and black families 
are highlighted.  
 
3. Word analysis of Titles 
 
 
Our bibliometric study analyzes selected words in the titles of papers. We argue that the title of a 
paper is its identity, it is the first introduction between a reader and a paper and therefore carries a weight. 
Consequently, we bibliometrically investigate the titles of papers in our sample. This investigation relied 
on building clusters of words that are used in the same title, that is, the conceptual structure map. Hence, 
we can analyze the co-occurrence of words in a title, giving us the conceptual structure maps on gender 
and  a  conceptual  structure  map  on  black  people.  Figure  1  is  the  RRPE‟s  conceptual  structure  map  on 
gender. 
 

FIGURE 1 - RRPE’s conceptual structure map (gender) 

 

 

 

6 

Figure 1  shows three clusters  in RRPE‟s conceptual structure map on  gender. RRPE‟s cluster 1, 
shown  in  the  bottom  of  the  figure,  includes  the  words  “feminist,”  “radical,”  “critique,”  “economics,” 
“theory,” “marxist,” “capitalism,” “social.” Since these words were used in title, we can assume that this 
cluster  was  built  on  theoretically  inclined  papers.  RRPE‟s  cluster  2,  located  to  the  right  of  the  figure, 
contains  the  words  “gender,”  “patriarchy,”  “segregation,”  “race,”  “history,”  “crisis,”  “class,”  “politics,” 
“workers,” “policies,” “policy,” “Mexican,” and “United States.” These words suggest a cluster built not 
only on gender but also on segregation in a more encompassing way, including race and Mexican issues. 
Papers on policy associated with gender seem to be included in such clusters. The third cluster contains 
the  words  “women,”  “discrimination,”  “employment,”  “capitalism,”  “working,”  “racial,”  “wage,” 
“family,” “inequality,” “labor,” “sexual,” “division,” “domestic,” “paid,” “unpaid,” and “segmentation.” 
This cluster appears to be built on studies on women discrimination in the labor market.  Since the third 
cluster contains the word “racial,” and the second cluster contains the words “race,” the insight that part 
of the discussion on black people occurs through gender studies is reinforced.  

FIGURE 2 - CJE’s conceptual structure map (gender) 

 

 

Figure  2  is  the  CJE‟s  conceptual  structure  map  on  gender,  with  three  clusters.  CJE‟s  cluster  1, 
located  at  the  top  in  Figure  2,  can  be  understood  to  be  a  labor  market  cluster  as  it  contains  the  words 
“women,” “labor,” “employment,” “work,” “working,” “wages,” “inequality,” “market,” and “markets.” 
These words suggest studies on the inequality of women in the labor market. Another cluster is related to 
the  labor  market.  This  cluster  is  on  the  right  of  the  figure  and  it  contains  the  words  “gender,”  “wage,” 
“systems,”  “equal,”  “pay,”  and  “gap;”  we  call  this  cluster  the  earnings  gap  cluster.  It  is  suggested  that 
there  is  no  large  difference  between  the  labor  market  cluster  and  the  earnings  gap  cluster.  A  minor 
difference would be that the former points to studies more inclined to analyze labor tasks, while the latter 
suggests studies more associated with differences in earnings by gender. The third cluster, at the bottom 
of  the  figure,  contains  the  words  “feminist,”  “model,”  “development,”  “human,”  “time,”  “poverty,” 
“social,” “technology,” and “analysis.” This cluster seems to focus on papers on economic development 
including formal models.      

Figure 3 illustrates the ES‟s conceptual structure map, including papers on gender. It contains two 
clusters.  The  first  contains  the  words  “woman,”  “economic,”  “local,”  “development,”  “neoliberalism,” 
“policy,” “strategies,” “governing,” and “British.” These words suggest studies on the government‟s role 
and  the  organization  of  the  society  with  respect  to  women.  The  other  cluster  includes  more  words, 
“feminism,”  “women,”  “government,”  “rights,”  “equality,”  “role,”  “social,”  “market,”  “society,” 
“modern,”  “space,”  “labour,”  “work,”  and  “politics.”  It  is  difficult  to  suggest  the  key  issues  studied  by 

 

7 

these papers since there  are many diverse words. We  assume that  this  cluster  contains  social  studies on 
gender, but it is a broad denomination.  

 

FIGURE 3 - ES’s conceptual structure map (gender) 

 
As in the case of ES, JEI‟s conceptual structure map on gender contains two clusters. One includes 
fewer  words,  “study,”  “case,”  “workers,”  “labor,”  “women‟s,”  “market,”  “household,”  “job,”  “family,” 
“work,”  “equity,”  “flexibility,”  “pay,”  “role,”  “impact,”  and  “Poland;”  we  can  assume  that  this  cluster 
was  mainly  built  on  studies  on  labor  markets.  The  other  cluster  contains  many  diverse  words.  Some  of 
them, “wage,” “income” and “employment” also suggest papers on labor markets, but the diversity of the 
other  words  such  as  “capital,”  “growth,”  “social,”  “political,”  and  “financial”  does  not  allow  any 
supplementary interpretations. 

 

FIGURE 4 - JEI’s conceptual structure map (gender) 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

8 

FIGURE 5 – Black people’s conceptual structure map  

 

Figure  5  is  a  conceptual  structure  map  on  black  people  with  three  clusters.  The  cluster  at  the 
bottom, black people‟s cluster 1, includes the words “racism,” “market,” “radical,” “labor,” “production,” 
“wage,” “racial,” “discrimination,” and “Marxian.” Clearly, this cluster relies on papers on discrimination 
by race in labor markets. Additionally, it is indicated that the Marxian approach plays a key role in such 
papers.  The  cluster  on  the  right,  black  people‟s  cluster  2,  includes  the  words  “black,”  “white,”  “class,” 
“trends,”  “working,”  “economic,”  and  “development.”  “Black,”  “white,”  and  “class”  point  to  papers  on 
ethnic issues  (feature 1  of cluster  2). “Working” may indicate labor markets, however,  cluster 2  cannot 
strictly  suggest  labor  markets  because  it  does  not  coincide  with  cluster  1.  “Trends,”  “economic,”  and 
“development”  suggest  papers  that  study  economic  development  (feature  2  of  cluster  2).  Combining 
features  1  and  2,  we  can  assume  that  cluster  2  was  built  on  papers  that  explore  ethnic  subjects  of 
economic  development.  Finally,  cluster  3,  located  at  the  top,  includes  the  words  “men,”  “gender,” 
“women,” “womens,” and “feminist” that indicate papers on gender issues; “worker,” “work,” “income,” 
“occupational,”  and  “labour”  point  to  papers  on  the  labor  market.  Hence,  we  can  assume  that  cluster  3 
was built on papers that analyze black people in the labor market as a sub-group of gender questions in 
the labor market, reinforcing an outcome of the top ten most cited papers on black people and the RRPE‟s 
conceptual structure map on gender. 
 
4. Analysis of References  
 

This analysis relies on the study of co-citation networks. Co-citation takes place when a reference 
is cited by two papers published in the same journal in the case of studies on gender, or by two heterodox 
papers in the case of studies on black people. Therefore, the co-citation network introduces the common 
references of papers on gender or black people. We build cluster maps of the co-citation network. Figure 
6 shows the RRPE‟s cluster map of the co-citation network of papers on gender.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

9 

FIGURE 6: RRPE‟s Co-Citation Network 

 

 

The RRPE‟s co-citation network on gender contains three clusters. The cluster at the top of Figure 
6  (RRPE‟s  cluster  1)  is  composed  by  Hartmann  (1976,  1979,  and  1981a),  Barrett  (1980),  and  Engels 
(1884). These references suggest that RRPE‟s cluster 1 was built on papers associated with the Marxist-
feminist  approach.  The  cluster  in  the  middle  of  Figure  6  (RRPE‟s  cluster  2)  contains  the  most  co-cited 
references, Marx (1867), Braverman (1974), and Gordon, Edwards, and Reich (1982). Reich (1981) and 
Edwards (1979) are also part of RRPE‟s cluster 2. Hence, we can assume that papers that built RRPE‟s 
cluster  2  follow  a  Marxist  approach.  The  difference  between  RRPE‟s  cluster  1  and  2  is  that  the  former 
complements the Marxist approach with the Feminist approach to analyze gender issues, while the latter 
relies on Marxism to deal with gender subjects. The third cluster, RRPE‟s cluster 3, at the bottom of the 
figure, contains institutionalist references, Veblen (1899) and Galbraith (1958), and methodological and 
philosophical  references,  McCloskey  (1985)  and  Foucault  (1977),  without  neglecting  Marxism,  Marx 
(1858) and Gottlieb (1984). Consequently, we can assume that papers that built RRPE‟s cluster 3 may be 
based on Marxism, institutionalism, methodology, philosophy, and connections between two or more of 
them. It is important to highlight that we can find references to orthodox economics in RRPE‟s cluster 3, 
mainly Gary Becker‟s studies (Becker, 1965 and 1981). Given the references in cluster 3, we can assume 
that papers mention  Becker‟s studies in  a  critical way. As expected¸  the  co-citation network  shows that 
Marxism is key in RRPE‟s journals. 

FIGURE 7: CJE‟s Co-Citation Network 

 

 

 

 

10 

 
Figure  7  introduces  CJE‟s  cluster  map  of  the  co-citation  network  on  gender.  There  are  three 
clusters  in  CJE‟s  co-citation  network.  If  we  analyze  the  top  five  most  co-cited  papers  of  the  largest 
cluster, located in  the middle of the figure, CJE‟s cluster 1, we can assume that this cluster  is based  on 
Karl  Marx‟s  Capital  and  methodological  and  capabilities  approaches.  The  top  five  co-cited  studies  are 
Marx  (1867),  Lawson  (1997),  Sen  (1999),  Nussbaum  (2000),  and  Lawson  (2003).  However,  if  we 
consider the other co-cited studies of CJE‟s cluster 1, such as Veblen (1899), Polanyik (1944), Giddens 
(1984), and Granovetter (1985), we may affirm that CJE‟s cluster 1 is based on references that suggests a 
convergence of heterodox approaches. Hence, this cluster indicates that CJE‟s papers on gender mainly 
rely on a pluralistic perspective9. There is another cluster, at the bottom of the figure (CJE‟s cluster 2), in 
which  the  main  references  are  Becker  (1957),  Heckman  (1979),  and  Blau  and  Kahn  (2003).  They  are 
orthodox references. Of course, CJE‟s papers can refer to those studies through criticism. However, just 
mainstream references do not connote criticism. Hence, we can assume that cluster 2 relies on orthodox 
inclined papers despite the CJE being known as a heterodox journal. The third cluster is on the top of the 
figure  (CJE‟s  cluster  3).  Piore  and  Sabel  (1984),  Scott  (1988),  Bluestone  and  Harrison  (1982),  and 
Harvey (1982) are the main references of CJE‟s cluster 3. As they are studies on industrial organization, 
we can affirm that CJE‟s cluster 3 was  built  through papers that  are based  on industrial organization to 
discuss gender issues.  

FIGURE 8: ES‟s Co-Citation Network 

 

 

 
 
Figure  8  shows  ES‟s  cluster  maps  of  the  co-citation  network  on  gender.  Different  from  RRPE‟s 
and CJE‟s co-citation networks, ES‟s clusters are not well defined. There is no clear distinction between 
the two largest clusters, the ones at the bottom (ES‟s cluster 1) and center (ES‟s cluster 2) in the figure. 
Both clusters strongly use Foucault‟s (1975, 1974, and 1991) studies as major references. The differences 
between  these  clusters  are  the  other  references  associated  with  Foucault‟s  studies.  In  cluster  1,  Nikolas 
Rose‟s studies, Rose (1990, 1993, and 1999)  and Rose and Miller (1992), are also  major references.  In 
cluster 2, the other main references are Weber (1905 and 1922) and Latour (1988). Latour (1991) is also a 
main reference in ES‟s cluster 3, the one in the top of Figure 8. Cluster 3 is also includes Durkheim (1911 
and 1951) and Callon (1998) as main references. Hence, we can assume that ES‟s clusters 1, 2, and 3 rely 
on studies that combine references from philosophy and sociology to analyze gender issues. ES‟s cluster 
4 is located on the right. Its difference from the others is more perceivable. The main references of cluster 
4 are Butler (1990) and Young (1990); they are both studies that are strictly associated with gender issues. 
Consequently, papers that were the basis of cluster 4 relied on references related to gender. If we compare 

                                                           
9 It is important to stress that the orthodox references, such as Marshall (1980) and Becker (1981), can be identified in cluster 
1.  However,  they  are  few.  Comparing  these  with  the  others  in  the  same  cluster,  we  can  assume  that  Marshall  (1980)  and 
Becker (1981) mean a counterfactual analysis or references that are criticized by the content of the papers. 

11 

 

ES‟s co-citation network with that of RRPE and CJE, ES‟s is the only one that does not include Marx‟s 
study as a main reference.  
 
JEI‟s cluster map of co-citation networks is illustrated in Figure 9. JEI‟s clustering is not clear as 
ES‟s. In JEI‟s cluster 1, Polanyi (1944) is the major reference, while the following studies by Veblen and 
Stanfield are also frequently co-cited: Veblen (1898, 1899, 1904, and 1923), Stanfield (1985 and 1995), 
and  Stanfield  and  Stanfield  (1997).  It  is  important  to  stress  that  Stanfield  (1986)  is  a  book  on  Polanyi. 
Cluster 1 also contains post-Keynesian studies by Wray (1998) and Minsky (1986) as references. Hence, 
we can assume that JEI‟s cluster 1 is based on papers on theoretical convergence of Polanyi‟s historical 
and  sociological  approaches,  and  Veblenian  institutionalism  and  post-Keynesianism.  There  is  another 
clear cluster in JEI‟s co-citation network, cluster 2, shown at the bottom in Figure 9. While Veblen (1919) 
and Polanyi (1957) are references in this cluster, the main references are Commons (1934) as well as his 
other  studies  (Commons,  1924  e  1931).  Consequently,  cluster  2  is  inclined  to  Commonsian 
institutionalism.  There  are  three  other  clusters  in  JEI‟s  co-citation  network;  however,  they  contain  very 
distinct references which makes it difficult to affirm something about the papers on which they were built. 
For  instance,  there  is  a  cluster  containing  Smith  (1909),  Granovetter  (1986),  North  (1990),  and  Sen 
(1999). As in ES‟s co-citation network, JEI‟s does not carry Marx‟s study as a main reference.  

FIGURE 9: JEI‟s Co-Citation Network 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

12 

 

FIGURE 10: Co-Citation Network: papers on black people 

 

 
 
Figure  10  shows  the  four  clusters  of  the  co-citation  network  of  studies  on  black  people.  Black 
people‟s  cluster  1  contains  the  following  main  references:  Reich  (1981),  Marx  (1867),  Albelda  (1985), 
Gordon, Edwards, and Reich (1982), and Castles and Kosack (1973). Consequently, we can conclude that 
cluster 1 is  strongly Marxist in  approach. As our sample embraces heterodox papers in  general,  we can 
affirm that the main heterodox approach to deal with black people issues is Marxism. Another cluster that 
contains  important  references  is  to  the  bottom  left  of  the  figure,  black  people‟s  cluster  2.  It  includes 
Phelps (1972), Williams (1987), Becker (1957), Bulow and Summers (1986), and Arrow (1972). With the 
exception  of  Williams  (1987),  this  cluster  is  based  on  orthodox  references.  It  sounds  odd  because  our 
sample is based on heterodox journals, however it means that orthodox references are cited by heterodox 
papers in our sample. It may be argued by some that this cluster implies criticism to orthodox approaches, 
as the presence of Williams (1987) indicates. It would be partially true, since some of the papers can be a 
critique on orthodoxy. However, the stronger presence of orthodox references compared to the heterodox 
ones means that there are studies that just rely on orthodoxy. Black people‟s cluster 3, at the top right in 
Figure 10, contains the following main references: Hooks (1981), Folbre (1982), and Hartmann (1981b). 
Despite our sample being built on studies on black people‟s issues, these references are associated with 
the feminist approach. Therefore, this cluster reinforces a previous outcome that studies on black people 
partly take place through studies on gender. Black people‟s cluster 4, on the top left in Figure 10, contains 
Hooks (1984), Phillips (1993), and Scott (1988), references associated with the feminist approach. Hence, 
both  clusters  3  and  4  rely  on  the  feminist  approach.  Analytically,  it  is  not  possible  to  understand  why 
there  are  two  different  clusters  on  feminism.  The  answer  may  be  technological;  the  software  is 
programmed  to  build  clusters,  and  a  program  may  see  something  different  from  an  analysis  of  the 
references. Therefore, cluster 4 also reinforces the view that heterodox studies on black people take place 
through gender analysis.   
 
5. Final Comments 
 

To  analyze  how  heterodox  economics  deals  with  gender  and  race  issues,  we  examine  the 
following  top  heterodox  journals:  Cambridge  Journal  of  Economics  (CJE),  Journal  of  Economic  Issues 

 

13 

(JEI), Journal of Post Keynesian Economics (JPKE), Review of Radical Political Economics (RRPE), and 
Economy and Society (ES), following Lee and Cronin (2010). Initially, we selected heterodox papers that 
deal with gender and race. Only two papers in our sample were studies on Latin people and few papers 
were on black people. Hence, we addressed two questions and synthesized them into one: Are studies on 
Latin or black people not central to heterodox approaches? Our paper points out that RRPE is the most 
representative heterodox journal for gender and race issues, while JPKE is the least. Hence, we removed 
JPKE from our sample. Since there are only a few papers on black people, we aggregated the papers from 
each heterodox journal on the issue so that the sample could be handled bibliometrically. Therefore, we 
use different analyses to analyze the issues of black people and gender. We analyzed papers published by 
heterodox journals on black people and papers published by each heterodox journal on gender. 

Regarding  gender,  we  focused  on  the  top  ten  most  cited  papers  per  journal.  We  classified  the 
papers as (1) studies on discrimination; (2) minor mentions; (3) illustrations; and (4) “words” just in the 
reference. The first  category, that is,  studies on  discrimination,  are  papers  that analyze  women or black 
people  as  social  classes  that  have  fewer  economic,  social  and  political  rights.  By  this  classification,  we 
cannot assume that there is a main heterodox journal on gender issues. Studies in ES classified as studies 
on  discrimination  are  the  most  cited  among  the  heterodox  journals,  while  the  RRPE  published  more 
papers  on  gender  issues.  The  JEI  contained  a  large  number  of  studies  on  discrimination  about  gender, 
with six papers. The CJE‟s most representative papers, the second and the third most cited papers, are not 
an  analysis  of  gender  or  women  as  an  oppressed  class.  However,  CJE‟s  papers  classified  as  studies  on 
discrimination are more  cited than RRPE‟s and JEI‟s studies. For studies  on  black people, we  analyzed 
the  top  ten  most  cited  papers  by  heterodox  journals.  Three  papers  on  black  people  were  classified  as 
studies  on  discrimination.  If  we  compare  these  papers  with  those  on  gender,  the  former  are  less  cited. 
Concerning  black  people,  there  is  another  category:  studies  on  gender  that  contain  an  analysis  of  black 
people. Three papers on black people were classified in this category which means papers that take black 
people into consideration but not as a keystone of the analysis, deal with gender issues.  

Our paper also analyzes words in the titles through a conceptual structure map. For gender studies, 
we  identified  three  clusters  in  the  RRPE:  a  cluster  related  to  theoretically  inclined  papers,  another 
associated  with  gender  as  well  as  with  segregation  including  race  issues,  and  a  third  on  discrimination 
against women in the labor market. The second cluster reinforces the view that analysis on black people 
occurs  through  gender  studies.  CJE‟s  conceptual  structure  map  revealed  two  clusters  focusing  on  the 
labor  market.  A  subtle  difference  between  these  clusters  is  the  focus  on  labor  tasks  and  differences  in 
income earnings by gender as main concerns. Additionally, CJE‟s conceptual structure map also indicated 
a cluster on economic development including formal models that included feminist issues. The conceptual 
structure maps  of ES  and JEI  highlighted two clusters each.  In both  cases, there is  an undefined cluster 
because of an excess of words co-occurrence. ES‟s defined cluster is based on the government‟s role and 
the organization of the society  with  respect  to  women, while JEI‟s cluster is  based  on discrimination  in 
the labor market. Hence, labor market matters seem to be the main subject of heterodox papers on gender. 
In the conceptual structure map on black people, there are three clusters; the first is on discrimination by 
race in the labor market, another on ethnic subjects of economic development, and the last one on black 
people in the labor market as a sub-group of gender issues. The latter reinforces an outcome of the top ten 
most cited papers on black people and RRPE‟s conceptual structure map on gender. 

The last bibliometric analysis  introduced  in  our  paper is  the study  of cluster maps of  co-citation 
networks.  RRPE‟s  co-citation  network  on  gender  shows  three  clusters:  one  on  the  Marxist-feminist 
approach,  another  on  Marxism  (without  the  supplement  of  feminism),  and  the  third  on  Marxism, 
institutionalism, methodology, philosophy and connections between two or more of them. These clusters 
rely  on  pluralism  (convergence  of  heterodox  approaches),  orthodox  economics,  and  industrial 
organization.  Again,  ES‟s  and  JEI‟s  bibliometric  analysis  do  not  offer  well-defined  outcomes.  For  ES, 
there are three clusters associated with references from philosophy and sociology and a cluster related to 
studies  strictly  associated  with  gender  issues.  JEI‟s  clustering  is  more  undefined;  there  is  one  broad 
cluster  based  on  Polanyi‟s  historical  and  sociological  approaches,  Veblenian  institutionalism  and  post-
Keynesianism. Another JEI cluster, the only clear one, relies on Commonsian institutionalism. There are 
three other JEI clusters that contain very distinct references which makes it difficult to affirm something. 

14 

 

In the case of papers on black people, the cluster map of co-citation networks pointed to a Marxist cluster, 
an orthodox cluster, and two clusters on the feminist approach. The latter reinforces the view that studies 
on black people partly take place through studies on gender. The cluster that contains the main references 
is the Marxist one, hence our paper concludes that the main heterodox approach to deal with black people 
issues is Marxism. 
 
 
References 
 
Agarwal,  Bina.  “Conceptualising  environmental  collective  action:  why  gender  matters”  Cambridge 

Journal of Economics, 2000, 24(3): 283–310 

Ahlers,  Rhodante.  “Fixing  and  Nixing:  The  Politics  of  Water  Privatization”  Review  of  Radical  Political 

Economics, 2010, 42(2), 213–230 

Albelda, Randy. “Nice Work  If You Can Get  It:  Segmentation of White and Black Women Workers in 

the Post-War Period”. Review of Radical Political Economics, 1985, 17 (3): 72-85 

Amin, Ash. “Local community on trial” Economy and Society, 2005, 34(4): 612-633 
Aria,  Massimo  and  Cuccurullo,  Corrado.  “bibliometrix:  An  R-tool  for  comprehensive  science  mapping 

analysis” Journal of Informetrics, 2017, 11(4): 959-975 

Arrow, Kenneth.  “Some Mathematical  Models of Race Discrimination  in the  Labor Market”.  In Pascal, 

Anthony H. (Ed). Racial Discrimination in Economic Life. Lexington: Lexington Books, 1972 

Bernasek, Alexandra and Stephanie Shwiff. “Gender, Risk, and Retirement” Journal of Economic Issues, 

2001, 35(2): 345-356 

Barrett,  Michele.  Women’s  Oppression  Today:  Problems  in  Marxist  Feminist  Analysis.  London:  Verso, 

1980 

Becker, Gary. The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1957 
Becker, Gary. “A Theory of the Allocation of Time”. The Economic Journal, 1965, 75: 493-517 
Becker, Gary. “Human Capital, Effort, and the Sexual Division of Labor” Journal of Labor Economics, 

1985, 3(1): S33-S58 

Blau,  Francine  and  Lawrence  Kahn.  “Understanding  International  Differences  in  the  Gender  Pay  Gap” 

Journal of Labor Economics, 2003, 21(1): 106-144 

Bluestone, Barry and Bennett Harrison. The Deindustrialization of America: Plant Closings, Community 

Abandonment, and the Dismantling of Basic Industry. New York: Basic Books, 1982 

Braverman,  Harry.  Labor  and  Monopoly  Capital:  the  Degradation  of  Work  in  the  Twentieth  Century. 

New York: Monthly Review Press, 1974 

Bryan, Dick, Randy Martin, and Mike Rafferty. “Financialization and Marx: Giving Labor and Capital a 

Financial Makeover” Review of Radical Political Economics, 2009, 41(4), 458–472 

Bulow,  Jeremy  and  Lawrence  Summers.  “A  Theory  of  Dual  Labor  Markets  with  Applications  to 
Industrial  Policy,  Discrimination  and  Keynesian  Unemployment”.  Journal  of  Labor  Economics, 
1986, 4: 376-414 

Butler,  Judith.  Gender  Trouble:  Feminism  and  the  Subversion  of  Identity.  London  and  New  York: 

Routledge, 1990 

Callon, Michel. The Laws of the Markets. Oxford: Blackwell, 1998 
Castles,  Stephen  and  Godula  Kosack.  Immigrant  Workers  and  Class  Structure  in  Western  Europe. 

London: Oxford University Press, 1973 

Ciscel, David and Julia Heath. “To market, to market: Imperial capitalism‟s destruction of social capital 

and the family” Review of Radical Political Economics, 2001, 33(4), 401–414 

Commons, John. Legal Foundations of Capitalism. New York: Macmillan Company, 1924 
Commons, John. “Institutional Economics”. American Economic Review, 1931, 21(4): 648-657 
Commons, John. Institutional Economics: Its Place in Political Economy. New Brunswick: Transactions 

Publishers, 1934 

 

15 

Cuccurullo,  Corrado,  Aria,  Massimo  and  Sarto,  Fabrizia.  “Foundations  and  trends  in  performance 
management.  A  twenty-five  years  bibliometric  analysis  in  business  and  public  administration 
domains” Scientometrics, 2006, 108(2): 595-611. 

Dean, Mitchell. “Governing the unemployed self in an active society” Economy and Society, 1995, 24(4): 

559-583 

Dean, Mitchell. “Liberal government and authoritarianism” Economy and Society, 2002, 31(1): 37-61 
Deere,  Carmen  Diana.  “Rural  Women‟s  Subsistence  Production  in  the  Capitalist  Periphery”  Review  of 

Radical Political Economics, 1976, 8(1), 9–17 

Du, Fenglian and Xiao-yuan Dong. “Why do women have longer durations of unemployment than men in 

post-restructuring urban China?” Cambridge Journal of Economics, 2009, 33(2): 233–25 

Durkheim, Émile. Elementary Forms of the Religious Life. New York: Collier, 1991 
Durkheim, Émile. Suicide: a Study in Sociology. New York: The Free Press, 1951 
Engels,  Friedrich.  The  Origin  of  the  Family,  Private  Property  and  the  State.  New  York:  International 

Publishers, 1884 [1972] 

Eyer,  Joseph  and  Peter  Sterling.  “Stress-Related  Mortality  and  Social  Organization”  Review  of  Radical 

Political Economics, 1977, 9(1), 1–44 

Faggian,  Alessandra  and  Philip  McCann.  “Human  capital,  graduate  migration  and  innovation  in  British 

regions” Cambridge Journal of Economics, 2009, 33(2): 317–333 

Fine, Ben. “„Economic imperialism‟: a view from the periphery” Review of Radical Political Economics, 

2002, 34(2), 187–201 

Folbre,  Nancy.  “Exploitation  Comes  Home:  a  Critique  of  the  Marxian  Theory  of  Family  Labour”. 

Cambridge Journal of Economics, 1982, 6 (4): 317-329 

Foucault, Michel. Discipline and Punish: the Birth of the Prison. New York: Random House, 1975 
Foucault, Michel. The History of Sexuality, Volume 1. London: Penguin, 1976 
Foucault, Michel.  “Power/Knowledge:  Selected  Interviews  and Other Writings 1972-1977”. New  York: 

Pantheon, 1977 

Foucault, Michel. “Governmentality” In Burchell, Graham, Colin Gordon, and Peter Miller. The Foucault 

Effect: Studies in Governmentality. Chicago: University Of Chicago Press, 1991 

Fruchterman,  Tomas  and  Reingold,  Edward.  “Graph  drawing  by  force‐directed  placement” Software: 

Practice and experience, 1991, 21(11): 1129-1164. 

Galbraith, John Kenneth. The Affluent Society. Cambridge: The Riverside Press, 1958 
Giddens, Anthony. The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of Structuration. Cambridge; Polity 

Press, 1984 

Gintis,  Herbert.  “The  Nature  of  Labor  Exchange  and  the  Theory  of  Capitalist  Production”  Review  of 

Radical Political Economics, 1976, 8(2), 36–54 

Gintis,  Herbert  and  Samuel  Bowles.  “Structure  and  Practice  in  the  Labor  Theory  of  Value”  Review  of 

Radical Political Economics, 981, 12(4), 1–26 

Gottlieb, Rhonda. “The Political  Economy of Sexuality”.  Review of Radical  Political Economics, 1984, 

16: 143-166 

Gordon, David, Richard Edwards, and Michael Reich. Segmented Work, Divided Workers: The historical 

transformation of labor in the United State. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982 

Granovetter,  Mark.  “Economic  Action  and  Social  Structure:  the  Problem  of  Embeddedness”  American 

Journal of Sociology, 1985, 91 (3): 481-510 

Glenn,  Evelyn  Nakano.  “Racial  Ethnic  Women‟s  Labor:  The  Intersection  of  Race,  Gender  and  Class 

Oppression” Review of Radical Political Economics, 1985, 17(3): 86–108. 

Hale,  Charles  (2011)  “Resistencia  para  que?  Territory,  autonomy  and  neoliberal  entanglements  in  the 

„empty spaces‟ of Central America” Economy and Society, 2011, 40:2, 184-210 

Hartmann, Heidi. “Capitalism, Patriarchy and Job Segregation by Sex”. Signs, 1976, 1: 137-169 
Hartmann,  Heidi.  “The  Unhappy  Marriage  of  Marxism  and  Feminism:  Towards  a  More  Progressive 

Union” Capital and Class, 1979, 8: 3-33 

Hartmann,  Heidi.  “The  Family  as  a  Locus  for  Gender,  Class  and  Political  Struggle:  the  Example  of 

Housework” Signs, 1981a, 6 (5): 366-394 

16 

 

Hartmann,  Heidi  and  L  Sargent.  “The  Unhappy  Marriage  of  Marxism  and  Feminism:  Towards  a  More 
Progressive  Union”.  In  Women  And  Revolution:  A  Discussion  Of  The  Unhappy  Marriage  Of 
Marxism And Feminism, Lydia Sargent (Ed.).  Boston: South End Press, 1981b 

Harvey, David. The Limits to Capital. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1982 
Heckman, James. “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error” Econometrica, 1979, 47: 153-161 
Hooks, Bell. Ain't I A Woman: Black Women And Feminism. Boston: South End Press, 1981 
Hooks, Bell. Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center. Boston: South End Press, 1984 
Humphries, Jane. “Class struggle and the persistence of the working-class family” Cambridge Journal of 

Economics, 1977, 1(3): 241–258 

Ibrahim, Gamal and Vaughan Galt. “Ethnic Business Development: Toward a Theoretical Synthesis and 

Policy Framework” Journal of Economic Issues, 2003, 37(4): 1107-1119 

Knox, Hannah, Mike Savage and Penny Harvey. “Social networks and the study of relations: networks as 

method, metaphor and form” Economy and Society, 2006, 35(1): 13-140 

Latour, Bruno. Science in Action: How To Follow Scientists and Engineers Through Society. Cambridge: 

Harvard University Press, 1988 

Latour, Bruno. We Have Never Been Modern. London: Harvester, 1991 
Lazonick,  William.  “Industrial  relations  and  technical  change:  the  case  of  the  self-acting  mule” 

Cambridge Journal of Economics, 1979, 3(3): 231–262 

Law, John and John Urry. “Enacting the social” Economy and Society, 2004, 33(3): 390-410 
Lawson, Tony. Economics and Reality. London: Routledge, 1997 
Lawson, Tony. Reorienting Economics. London: Routledge, 2003 
Lee,  Fred,  and  Bruce  Cronin.  “Research  Quality  Rankings  of  Heterodox  Economics  Journals  in  a 

Contested Discipline”. American Journal of Economics and Sociology 69, 5 (2010): 109-1452 

Leyshon,  Andrew  and  Nigel  Thrift.  “Lists  come  alive:  electronic  systems  of  knowledge  and  the  rise  of 

credit-scoring in retail banking” Economy and Society, 1999, 28(3): 434-466 

Lister, Ruth. “Dilemmas in engendering Citizenship” Economy and Society, 1995, 24(1): 35-40 
Linz, Susan. “Gender Differences in the Russian Labor Market” Journal of Economic Issues, 1996, 30(1): 

161-185  

Marshall, Alfred. Principles of Economics. London: Macmillan, 1890 
Martin, Ron. “The new 'geographical turn' in economics: some critical reflections” Cambridge Journal of 

Economics, 1999, 23(1): 65-91 

Marvasti,  Akbar.  “U.S.  Academic  Institutions  and  Perceived  Effectiveness  of  Foreign-Born  Faculty” 

Journal of Economic Issues, 2005, 39(1): 151-176 

Marx, Karl. The Grundrisse. David MClellan (editor). New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1858 
Marx, Karl. Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, Vol.1. Toronto: Pacific Public Studio, 1867 [2010]  
Mason,  Patrick.  “Race,  competition  and  differential  wages”  Cambridge  Journal  of  Economics,  1995, 

19(4): 545–567 

Mason,  Patrick.  “Male  interracial  wage  differentials:  competing  explanations”  Cambridge  Journal  of 

Economics, 1999, 23(3): 261–299 

Mauss, Marcel. “Techniques of the body” Economy and Society, 1973, 2(1): 70-88 
McCloskey, Deirdre. The Rhetoric of Economics. Madison: University Of Wisconsin Press, 1985 
McCrate,  Elaine.  “Trade,  Merger  and  Employment:  Economic  Theory  on  Marriage”  Review  of  Radical 

Political Economics, 1987, 19(1): 73–89. 

Meillassoux, Claude. “From reproduction to production” Economy and Society, 1972, 1(1): 93-105 
Milkman, Ruth. “Women‟s Work and Economic Crisis: Some Lessons of the Great Depression” Review 

of Radical Political Economics, 1976, 8(1), 71–97 

Minsky, Hyman. Stabilizing an Unstable Economy. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1986 
North, Douglass. Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance. Cambridge: Cambridge 

University Press, 1990 

Nussbaum,  Martha.  Women  and  Human  Development:  The  Capabilities  Approach.  Cambridge: 

Cambridge University Press, 2000 

 

17 

Orlikowski, Wanda. “The sociomateriality of organisational life: considering technology in management 

research” Cambridge Journal of Economics, 2010, 34(1): 25–141 

Pérez,  Esteban;  Matías  Vernengo.  “Back  to  the  future:  Latin  America's  current  development  strategy” 

Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, 2010, 32(4): 623-644 

Phillips, Anne. Democracy and Difference. Cambridge: Polity, 1993 
Phelps,  Edmund S. “The Statistical  Theory of Racism and Sexism”. American Economic Review, 1972, 

62 (4): 659-661 

Piore, Michael and Charles Sabel. The Second Industrial Divide. New York: Basic Books, 1984 
Polanyi, Karl. The Great Transformation: The Political and Economic Origins of our Time. New York, 

Rinehart, 1944 

Polanyi, Karl. “The Economy as Instituted Process”. In Trade and Market in the Early Empires. Polanyi, 

Karl, Conrad Arensberg, and Harry Pearson (Eds.), New York: The Free Press, 1957 

Pons,  Pascal  and  Latapy,  Matthieu.  "Computing  communities  in  large  networks  using  random  walks" 

Jounal of Graph Algorithms and Applications, 2006, 10(2): 191-218. 

Prasch, Robert. “Reassessing the Labor Supply Curve” Journal of Economic Issues, 2000, 34(3): 679-692 
Rankin, Katharine. “Governing development: neoliberalism, microcredit, and rational economic woman” 

Economy and Society, 2001, 30(1): 18-37 

Reich,  Michael.  “Racial  Inequality:  a  Political-Economic  Analysis”  Princeton:  Princeton  University 

Press, 1981 

Rose, Nikolas. Governing the Soul: the Shaping of the Private Self. London: Routledge, 1990 
Rose,  Nikolas.  “Government,  Authority  and  Expertise  in  Advanced  Liberalism”.  Economy  and  Society, 

1993, 21(3): 283-299 

Rose,  Nikolas.  Powers  of  Freedom:  Reframing  Political  Thought.  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University 

Press, 1999 

Rose, Nikolas and Peter Miller. “Political Power Beyond the State: Problematics of Government”. British 

Journal of Sociology, 1992, 43(2): 173-205 

Scott, A. J. New Industrial Spaces: Flexible Production Organization and Regional Development in North 

America and Western Europe. London: Pion, 1988 

Scott,  Allen.  “Economic  geography:  the  great  half-century”  Cambridge  Journal  of  Economics,  2000, 

24(4): 483–504 

Scott, Joan W. “Deconstructing Equality Versus Difference: Or, the Uses of Post Structuralist Theory For 

Feminism”. Feminist Studies, 1988, 14 (1): 33-50 

Seiz,  Janet.  “The  Bargaining  Approach  and  Feminist  Methodology”  Review  of  Radical  Political 

Economics, 1991, 23(1–2): 22–29 

Sen, Amartya. Development as Freedom. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999 
Sieder,  Rachel.    “„Emancipation‟  or  „regulation‟?  Law,  globalization  and  indigenous  peoples‟  rights  in 

post-war Guatemala” Economy and Society, 2011, 40(2): 239-265 

Simonazzi,  Annamaria.  “Care  regimes  and  national  employment  models”  Cambridge  Journal  of 

Economics, 2009, 33(2): 211–232 

Small,  Henry.  “Co-citation  in  the  scientific  literature:  A  new  measure  of  the  relationship  between  two 
documents” Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 1973, 24(4): 265-
269. 

Smith, Adam. An Inquiry Into the Nature And Causes of the Wealth of Nations. New York: P F Collier 

And Son Co, 1909 

Stanfield,  James  Ronald.  The  Economic  Thought  of  Karl  Polanyi:  Lives  and  Livelihood.  New  York:  St 

Martin's Press, 1986 

Stanfield,  James  Ronald.  Economics,  Power,  and  Culture:  Essays  in  the  Development  of  Radical 

Institutionalism. London: Macmillan, 1995 

Stanfield, James Ronald and Jaqueline B. Stanfield. “Where Has Love Gone? Reciprocity, Redistribution, 

and the Nurturance Gap”. Journal of Socio-Economics, 1997, 26(2): 111-126 

Stanfield,  James  Ronald.  “The  Scope,  Method,  and  Significance  of  Original  Institutional  Economics” 

Journal of Economic Issues, 1999, 33(2):  231-255 

18 

 

Staveren, Irene van and Olasunbo Odebode. “Gender Norms as Asymmetric Institutions: A Case Study of 

Yoruba Women in Nigeria” Journal of Economic Issues, 2007, 41(4): 903-925 

Stenson, Kevin. “Community policing as a governmental technology” Economy and Society, 1993, 22(3):  

373-389 

Storper,  Michael.  “The  transition  to  flexible  specialisation  in  the  US  film  industry:  external  economice 
the  division  of  labour,  and  the  crossing  of  industrial  divides”  Cambridge  Journal  of  Economics, 
1989, 13(2): 273–305 

Summerfield, Gale. “Economic Reform and the Employment of Chinese Women” Journal of Economic 

Issues, 1994, 28(3): 715-732 

Valverde, Mariana. “„Despotism‟ and ethical liberal governance” Economy and Society, 1996, 25(3): 357-

372 

Van  Eck,  Nees  Jan  and  Waltman,  Ludo.  “How  to  normalize  cooccurrence  data?  An  analysis  of  some 
wellknown  similarity  measures”  Journal  of  the  American  Society  for  Information  Science  and 
Technology, 2009, 60(8): 1635-1651. 

Veblen, Thorstein. “Why is Economics not an Evolutionary Science?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 

1898, 12: 373-397 

Veblen, Thorstein. The Theory of Leisure Class. New York: Macmillan, 1899 
Veblen, Thorstein. The Theory of Business Enterprise. New York: Charles Scribner‟s Sons, 1904 
Veblen,  Thorstein.  The  Place  of  Science  in  Modern  Civilisation  and  Other  Essays.  New  York:  Russell 

And Russell, 1919 

Veblen, Thorstein. (1923) The Absentee Ownership and Business Enterprise in Recent Times: the Case of 

America. New York: Huebsch, 1923 

Vijaya,  Ramya.  “Medical  Tourism:  Revenue  Generation  or  International  Transfer  of  Healthcare 

Problems?” Journal of Economic Issues, 2010, 44(1): 53-70 

Wajcman, Judy. “Feminist theories of technology” Cambridge Journal of Economics, 2010, 34(1): 143–

152 

Williams, Rhonda. M. “Capital, Competition, and Discrimination: A Reconsideration of Racial Earnings 

Inequality” Review of Radical Political Economics, 1987, 19(2): 1–15 

Weber, Max. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. London: Routledge, 1905 
Weber, Max. Economy and Society. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University Of California Press, 1922 
Young, Iris Marion. Justice and the Politics of Difference. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1990 
Wheelock, Jane and Elizabeth Oughton. “The Household as a Focus for Research” Journal of Economic 

Issues, 1996, 30(1): 143-159 

Wray,  L.  Randall.  Understanding  Modern  Money:  the  Key  to  Full  Employment  and  Price  Stability. 

Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 1998 

 

 

19 

