The Double Edge of Case-Studies: A Frame-Based Definition  of Economic  Models 

 

Abstract 

 

Arthur  Brackmann  Netto1 
 

transposition 

the  methodological 

for  scientific  concepts,  creating  numerous 

Starting  on  the  1950s,  the  philosophy  of  science  rearranged  its  methods.  Logic  gradually  lost  space  as 
philosophers’  exclusive  tool  of  analysis,  whereas  case-studies  and  historical  methods  emerged  as viable 
instruments.  However, 
concealed  a  double-edged  knife.  The 
approximation  of philosophy  and scientific  practice  happened  at the expense  of exponentially  widening  the 
list  of  possible  philosophical  definitions 
incomparab le 
explanations.  The  present  paper  thus  advocates  in  favor  of  the  use  of  more  objective  tools  for  defining 
scientific  concepts,  looking  to  reduce  incomparability  of  definitions.  From  this  point  of  view,  framing 
proposals  are  presented  as  suitable  mechanisms  for  reasoned  definitions,  given  that  frames’  exemplar-
dependency  entail 
the  necessity  of  organized  selections  of  case-studies.  In  this  context,  communit y 
targeting  understood  as  a  limit  of  time  and  discipline  for  the  selections  of  case-studies  stood  out  as  an 
organizational  criterion.  Considering  this  criterion,  the  present  paper selected  as case-studies,  for  defining 
the  concept  of an economic  model,  the  first  two cases where  the  term  ‘model’  was utilized  for  referring  to 
abstract  economic  reasoning.  The  proposed  frame  presented  the  following  attributes:  mathematica l 
structure,  adaptability,  simplification,  neutrality  and purpose. 
 
Keywords:  Frames;  Economic  Models;  Case-Studies;  Conceptual  Pragmatism;  Models 
 

Resumo 

 

Começando  nos  anos  50,  a filosofia  da  ciência  rearranjou  seus  métodos.  A  lógica  gradualmente  perdeu 
espaço  como  a  ferramenta  exclusiva  de  análise  dos  filósofos,  enquanto  estudos  de  casos  e  métodos 
históricos  emergiram  como  instrumentos  viáveis.  Entretanto,  a  transposição  metodológica  escondeu  uma 
faca de dois  gumes.  A aproximação  da filosofia  da prática  científica  ocorreu  ao custo de exponencialme nt e 
aumentar  a lista  de definições  filosóficas  possíveis  dos conceitos  científicos,  criando  numerosas  explicações 
incomparáveis.  O presente  artigo,  então,  advoga  em  favor  do  uso  de  instrumentos  mais  objetivos  para 
definir  conceitos  científicos,  visando  reduzir  a incomparabilidade  das definições.  Deste  ponto  de vista,  os 
frames  são  apresentados  como  um  mecanismo  cabível  para  definições  arrazoadas,  considerando  que  a 
dependência  de  exemplares  presente  nos  frames  implica  na  necessidade  de uma  escolha  organizada  dos 
estudos  de  caso. Assim,  apontamento  de  comunidade,  entendido  como  um  limite  de  tempo  e disciplina s 
para a seleção  de estudo  de caso, se destacou  como  um  critério  organizacional.  Considerando  esse critério 
o  artigo  selecionou  como  estudos  de  caso,  para  definir  o  conceito  de  modelo  econômico  dentro  da 
economia,  os  dois  primeiros  casos  nos  quais  o termo  modelo  foi  utilizado  para se  referir  ao pensamento 
econômico  abstrato.  O  frame  proposto  se  constitui  dos  seguintes  atributos:  estrutura  matemátic a, 
adaptabilidade,  neutralidade,  propósito  e simplificações. 
 
Palavras-chave:  Frames;  Modelos  Econômicos;  Estudos  de Caso; Pragmatismo  Conceitual;  Modelos 
 
 
Classificação JEL:  B23; B31; B40 
 
Área ANPEC:  Área 1 - História  do Pensamento  Econômico  e Metodologia 
 
 
 

                                                                 
1 Doctoral student at the University of São Paulo (USP), Brazil. E-mail: arthurbnetto@gmail.com 

1 

 

1)  Introduction 

 

However,  the  methodological 

Starting  on  the  1950s,  philosophy  of  science  rearranged  its  methods.  Logic  gradually  lost  space  as 
philosophers’  exclusive  tool  of  analysis,  whereas  case-studies  and  historical  methods  emerged  as viable 
instruments.  In  this  context,  philosophers  such  as  Kuhn  and  Feyerabend  embarked  on  a  thread  of 
discussions  regarding  the  logic  of  scientific  evolutions.  Concomitantly,  the  pragmatic  view  of  theories 
specialized  in  the  conceptual  analysis  of science.  Conceptual  pragmatism  concerned  with  the  definition  of 
scientific  concepts (e.g. explanation,  causality,  experiment,  model)  through  the examination  of case-studies. 
transposition  concealed  a  double-edged  knife.  On  the  one  hand, 
pragmatism  came  closer  to the  reality  of scientists.  On the  other  hand,  the  renounce  of logical  instrume nt s 
in  favor  of case-studies  exponentially  widened  the list  of possible  definitions  for scientific  concepts.  In the 
case  of  scientific  models,  the  list  counts  with:  models  as  make-believe  (Toon  2010a, 2010b),  models  as 
mediating  instruments  (Morrison  1999;  Morrison  and  Morgan  1999);  models  as  fictions  (Frigg  2010; 
Godfrey-Smith  2009);  models  as  experiments  (Mäki  2005);  toy  models  (Reutlinger,  Hangleiter  and 
Hartmann  forthcoming);  minimal  models  (Grüne-Yanoff  2009; Fumagalli  2016) models  as isolating  tools 
(Mäki  1992; 1994; 2009);  models  as analogies  (Gilboa  2014);  models  as mini-theories  (Rappaport  2001), 
and it  continues  to grow.  As a result,  the  pragmatic  view  is  far  from  being  consensual  about  the definit io n 
of  models.  Consequently,  pragmatists’  discussions  about  the  definition  of  models  are  uncomfortab l y 
frustrating,  what  has been hampering  the development  of discussions.   

The  present  paper  thus  advocates  in  favor  of  the  use  of  more  objective  tools  for  defining  scientific 
concepts,  looking  to reduce  incomparability  of definitions.  In  the  light  of  cognitive  sciences,  frame-based 
accounts  will  be demonstrated  as promising  instruments  of definition,  especially  considering  that  the  focal 
point  of  the  construction  of  frames  is  the  selection  of  exemplars.   Among  framing  proposals,  Barsalou’s 
(1987; 1992) frames  are selected  and presented  as the mechanism  of definition  for the concept  of economic 
model.   

Given  that  the  selection  of  exemplars  is  essential  both  for  the  definition  of  a concept  and for  allowing 
future  comparability,  a criterion  for  the  selection  of  exemplars  is  also  presented.  Community  targeting  is 
presented  as a criterion  for such  selections.  Following  Kuhn  (1974; 1983; 1996 [1962]) and Burian  (2001), 
limits  of  time  and discipline  are presented  as tokens  of credibility  for the  selection  of exemplars.   

Finally,  after  exposing  the  source  of  pragmatic  frustrations  and  presenting  how  frames  and  organized 
selections  of  exemplars  could  aid  future  debates,  a  frame-based  definition  of  economic  models  is 
formulated.    Von  Neumann  (1945)  and  Tinbergen  (1935)  are  chosen  as  a  plausible  foundation  for  a 
definition  of  economic  models.  After  a brief  discussion  of both  models,  the frame  is defined.   

In  order  to present  all  these  points,  the  paper  is  organized  as follows.  After  this  brief  introduction,  in 
section  2,  Barsalou’s  frame  account  is  explained.  Section  3  discusses  the  frustrations  of  conceptual 
pragmatism  and  how  frames  could  resolve  them.  Thus,  in  section  4,  the  selection  of  exemplars 
is 
highlighted  and  discussed.  The  following  section  demonstrates  the  selected  exemplars  and  debates  their 
nuances.  In  the  sequence,  section  6 defines  the  frame  and indicates  possible  directions  for  future  debates. 
In the  end, the  last  section  presents  some final  remarks. 

 
2)  Frame-based  definition  of Concepts 

 

Whereas  the  nature  of  concepts  and  the  relation  between  them  and  reality  may  be  controversia l 
quandaries  in  the  philosophy  of  mind  and  language,  the  fact  is  that  conceptualization  occurs  in  our minds 
(or  outside  of  it2).  According  to  Rosch  (1978),  concepts  and  categorization  are  essential  features  of  our 
reasoning  once they  organize  the perceptual  world  and economize  cognitive  effort.  As Levitin  (2014) points 
out,  it  would  be quite  difficult  to understand  the  world  if  each  leave  of  grass  of  the  backyard  or each  seed 
of bean  on the lunch  plate  was itself  a special  category  deserving  special  attention.   

                                                                 
2 Whether concepts are abstracta or mental representations is a recurrent philosophical debate. See Margolis and Laurence 
(2007) for a discussion. 

2 

 

Thus,  in  a  purely  functional  point  of  view,  conceptualization  is  a  reality.  Moreover,  following  the 
empirical  evaluation  of  the  above  cited  cognitive  scientists,  concepts  must  be structured  in  a  cognitive l y 
economical  mode.  However,  before  the  ascension  of  the  neurosciences  in  the  second  half  of  the  XXth 
century,  philosophers  defined  concepts  without  the  aid  of  empirical  studies.  As  Strawson  (1992)  and 
Ramsey  (1992)  highlight,  the  endeavor  of  the  analytic  philosopher  has  mostly  been  the  “conceptua l 
analysis”.  In  philosophy,  during  the  centuries  of  study  before  the  emergence  of  empirical  neuroscience s,  
the  structure  of  concepts  was  understood  primarily  by  what  came  to  be  known  as  the  ‘classical  view’. 
According  to  such  view,  concepts  are  categorized  through  a  set  of  sufficient  and  necessary  conditions. 
Hence,  classically,  to conceptualize  was an ‘all-or-nothing’  task.  

The  most  prominent  philosophical  blow  at  the  classical  view  was  Wittgenstein’s  (1953)  family 
resemblance.  For  Wittgenstein  (1953),  concepts  and  words  are  identified  analogously 
to  how  the 
classification  of  the  members  of  a  family  occurs.  In  a  family,  it  is  impossible  to  determine  a  set  of 
characteristics  essential  for  its  members,  even  though  it  is  noticeable  that  all  members  share  simi la r 
characteristics  that  allow  their  recognition  as members  of it. Wittgenstein  (1953) presents  the word “game” 
as an illustration  of family  resemblance:  card games,  board games,  ball  games,  or any  other  game,  all  share 
similar  characteristics,  while  an  exact  set  of characteristics  cannot  be identified.  For Wittgenstein  (1953): 
“there’s  no  better  expression  to  characterize  these  similarities  than  ‘family  resemblance’”  (Wittgenste i n 
1953, 67, p. 32). Evidently,  Wittgenstein’s  language  game  cannot  be conciliated  with  the  classical  view. 
There  is  no single  set of characteristics  determining  concepts  for  him. 

The  rise  of  the  cognitive  sciences  has  brought  with  it  the  interest  in  the  empirical  validation  of  these 
philosophical  views  of  concepts.  How  exactly  our mind  conceptualizes?  Rosch  and Mervis  (1975) played 
a crucial  role  in  the  study  of  this  question.  The  authors  prepared an  experiment  in  which  the  subjects  had 
to list  all  the attributes  they  could  think  of for a set of exemplars  from  superordinate  concepts. For furniture, 
the subjects  would  have  to list  the  attributes  of  chair, sofa and bed for  instance.  If there  were necessary  and 
sufficient  conditions,  all  the items  of the category  would  present  them.  However,  Rosch  and Mervis  (1975) 
noticed  that  hardly  the  subjects  listed  overlapped  characteristics  for  the  items  of  the categories. 

Following  their  results,  Rosch  (1973) and Rosch  and Mervis  (1975) argued  that  superordinate  concepts 
were  described  by  family  resemblance  rather  than  by  sets  of  necessary  and  sufficient  conditions. 
Furthermore,  their  results  demonstrated  that  certain  items  were  more  rapidly  identified  as  members  of  a 
category  and presented  more characteristics  also mentioned  to the superordinate  concept. These  results  have 
been  generally  designated  as typicality  effects,  prototype  theories  and  graded  structures.  In  summary,  all 
ideas  have  in  common  the  perception  that  categories  are  defined  by  comparing  items  to  prototypica l 
exemplars  (e.g.  robins are prototypes  of  bird).  Even  though  there  were  methodological  challenges  for  the 
experiment,  prototypical  ideas  conceived  a whole  new  world  of  theories  of  conceptualization.   

According  to  Medin  (1989),  Rosch  and  Mervis  (1975)  generated  the  probabilistic  line  of  concepts’ 
evaluation,  given  that  in  their  view  members  of a category  were defined  through  probabilistic  comparisons 
with  prototypical  exemplars.   In Komatsu’s  (1992) point  of view,  probabilistic  theories  evolved  in  at least 
three  different  directions:  family  resemblance,  exemplar  and  schema  views.  The  main  dissidence  lied  in 
their  interpretations  of how  prototypes  should  be structured  inside  the  mind. 

Amidst  these  interpretations,  frame-based  accounts  emerged.  Frames  were  a hybrid  proposal,  capable 
of coping  with  most criticisms  directed  towards probabilistic  views  (Barsalou  1992).  Consequently,  during 
the 1980s and 1990s, frames  became  a prolific  research  agenda  in  linguistics,  computer  sciences,  cognitiv e 
sciences,  and  philosophy.  Moreover  –  and  more  relevant  for  the  purpose  of  the  present  paper  -, frames 
presented  themselves  as  a  suitable  methodology  for  operationalizing 
the  representation  of  concepts 
(Garbacz  2016). Thus,  while  not  necessarily  reproducing  how  the  representation  of concepts  occurs  in  the 
mind3,  the application  of frame-based  definitions  flourished  as an interesting  mechanism  for  philosophica l 
definitions  and  discussions.   

In  the  philosophy  of  science,  Barsalou’s  (1987, 1992) frames  endured  as a regular  tool  of  conceptual 
analysis.  Under  the spotlight  rest the applications  of Barsalou’s  proposals  for the  analysis  of Kuhnian  ideas 

                                                                 
3 See Lakoff (1987) for an argument against similarity-based theories as explanations for the representations of concepts in 
the mind. 

3 

 

and  the  definition  of  theoretical  scientific  concepts4.  Alone,  Barsalou’s  popularity 
in  philosophica l 
applications  could  already  constitute  an  alluring  justification  for  its  utilization  as  an  instrument  for  the 
definition  of  the  concept  of economic models in  the  following  pages,  especially  considering  that  it  has not 
yet  been  used  for  it.  However,  after  a brief  overview  of the  proposal,  some  weaknesses  of frames  may  be 
observed  and a second  more  prominent  reason  must  come  out.  Still,  before  suggesting  this  second  reason, 
a review  of Barsalou’s  methodology  is  necessary. 

First  of  all,  frames  are  a species  of  bottom-up  conceptual  structure,  in  which  subordinate  and  related 
concepts serve as exemplars  for superordinate  concepts. According  to Barsalou  (1992), the main  component 
of  frames  is  their  attribute-value  sets.  Attributes  are  abstract  characteristics  expected  in  the  differe nt 
exemplars  of  a  concept.  Values,  in  their  turn,  are  the  materialized  perception  of  such  attributes.  As  an 
illustration,  the  concept  of a colored ball may  present  the attribute  color  and the possible  values  for it  (e.g. 
green,  white,  yellow).  Following  the  example,  values  are  the  observational  stimuli  of  attributes.  Thus, 
components  materialize  from  the analysis  of subordinate  exemplars.  As a result,  a colored  ball  could  not be 
conceived  without  individual  exemplars,  such  as yellow  ball,  green  ball  and blue  ball.  An illustration  more 
commonly  found  in  the  literature  is the  case of  birds: 

 

Fig.  1 – Frame  of  Bird 

Source:  prepared by the author5 

 

 
As observed, Landbird and waterbird have as salient  observational  stimuli  the following  characteristics : 
pointed  beak;  rounded  beak; big  body;  small  body;  clawed  paws;  no-clawed  paws.  These  characterist ic s 
instantiate  the  emergence  of a  set of  features:  beak; body and  paws. While  a quick  observation  could  lead 
to  the  understanding  that  this  abstract  set  of  features  determines  the  subordinate  concepts,  in  fact  the 
causality  runs  in  the  other  way.  The  subordinate  exemplars  have  determined  the  set of  attributes  required 
for  the  concept  of  birds.  Consequently,  Barsalou’s  frames  are  recurrently  referred  as  partial  dynamic-
frames.  Attribute-value  sets are adjustable  to the set of  subordinate  exemplars.  For this  reason,  the  bottom 
up peculiarity  imposes  that  concepts  become  at least  partially  exemplar-dependent.   

The  hybrid  nature  of  the  proposal  rests  in  this  characteristic.  Prototypical  effects  may  be competent ly 
connected  to exemplar-dependency.  For instance,  the set of attributes  could  be determined  by a fixed  set of 
prototypes.  The  set of resulting  attributes  thus  becomes  a list  of  expected  characteristics  for  the  exemplars 
of  the  category,  which  resembles  the  classical  view.  Following  this  line  of  thought,  Andersen,  Barker and 
Chen6  have  discussed  how  the  modification  and  insertion  of  prototypes  depicts  the  Kuhnian  process  of 
revolution.   

                                                                 
4 See Andersen,  Barker e Chen  (1996; 2006), Barker (2001; 2011), Chen, Andersen and Barker (1998), Barker, Chen and 
Andersen (2003), Votsis e Schurz (2012). 
5 Birds seem to be authors’ preferred concept for introducing Dynamic Frames, given that several authors have opted for it as 
an introduction to philosophical utilizations (Andersen, Barker e Chen 1996; 2006, Barker 2001; 2011, Chen, Andersen and 
Barker 1998; Barker, Chen and Andersen 2003, Urbaniak 2010, Votsis e Schurz 2012). Yet,  different superordinate concepts 
are found in Garbacz (2013, 2016), Petersen (2007), Urbaniak (2010) and Votsis e Schurz (2012).  
6 Andersen, Barker and Chen  attempt  to explain incommensurability from the point of view of Dynami c Frames (Andersen, 
Barker and Chen 1996; 2006, Barker 2001, 2011; Chen, Andersen and Barker 1998; Chen 1997). Their thoughts ma y be found 
extensively in Andersen, Barker and Chen (2006) and a synthesis may be found in Barker (2011). 

4 

 

The  complexity  of  frames  can  be exponentially  increased  when  the  fact  that  each  node  of  a frame  is 
itself  a  concept  is  considered.  In  other  words,  “there  might  be frames  within  frames”  (Garbacz  2013,  p. 
423). Thus,  frames  may  face  constant  changes,  considering  that  all  components  of a frame  may  have  their 
exemplars  altered.  However,  Barsalou  (1992) also  points  out  that  frames  may  present  two  different  limit s 
to their  dynamicity:  structural  invariants  and constraints.  In  summary,  both determine  prevailing  activat io n 
patterns  of  attributes  and  values  (Urbaniak  2009). Barker,  Chen  and  Andersen  (2003) exemplify  the  idea: 
“there  are  no  birds  with  legs  that  attach  to  their  necks”  (Barker,  Chen  e  Andersen  2003,  p.  226).  As  a 
consequence,  dynamic  frames  allow 
the  connections  between  values 
(constraints)  and attributes  (invariants).  For example,  legs  may  be a characteristic  only  of birds with  bodies. 
Most  of  these  constraints  and  invariants  are empirical  truths  more  important  for  cognitive  scientists  than 
for  philosophers.  Barsalou  (1992) himself  neglects  structural  invariants  during  his  analysis.   Therefore,  to 
maintain  simplicity,  both  will  be overlooked  henceforward. 

the  possibility  of  restricting 

 
3)  Why  frames? The double-edge of case-studies 

 

Although  Barsalou’s  frame  account  presented  a new  perspective  for the  representation  of  concepts and 
achieved  some  level  of  popularity,  its  adoption  is  far  from  being  a  consensus  among  philosophers  and 
cognitive  scientists.  Thagard  (2009), for instance,  discords  from  Andersen,  Barker and Chen (2006) in what 
concerns  the explanation  capacity  of a frame  account.  Zenker  (2014), on the other  hand,  defends  the use of 
conceptual  spaces rather  than  dynamic  frames  for explaining  changes  in  scientific  concepts.   

The  controversy  arises  from  the  fact  that  frames  have  already  been  supposedly  overcome  by  newer 
theories  of  conceptual  representation,  especially  in  the  cognitive  sciences.  Medin  (1989)  affirms  that 
conceptual  representation  has passed through  at least three intellectual  shifts.  Probabilistic  views  substitut ed 
the classical  view,  but they  have  also  been replaced  by what  the author  calls  the view  of concepts organized 
as theories.  Komatsu  (1992) endorses  Medin’s  argument,  even  though  the  author  divides  the  probabilist ic 
view  into  different  segments.  Margolis  and Laurence  (1999)  and Margolis  and  Laurece  (2007), while  not 
necessarily  accepting  that  the  shifts  implied  in  improvement  (see Margolis  1994), reinforce  that  there  are 
several  alternative  approaches  for  the  definition  of  concepts,  such  as  conceptual  atomism,  neoclassica l 
views,  and pluralistic  views.   

A core issue  contesting  frame-based  accounts  stems  from  the evidence  that  probabilistic  views  and their 
derivates  are best suited  for the  definition  of ‘kinds’  (e.g. natural  kinds  such  as trees,  water,  and tigers)  and 
‘artifacts’  (e.g.  human-made  objects  such  as  sofas,  hammers,  and  houses).  Osheron  and  Smith  (1981) 
remind  that  complex  concepts  like  belief, desire¸  explanation remain  outside  of the scope of  capabilities  of 
probabilistic  views.   

Considering  these  contentions,  it  is  natural  to  question  why  frames  should  be the  right  approach  for 
operationalizing  the  definition  of philosophical  concepts,  particularly  scientific  models  as the focus  of  the 
present  paper. Beyond  frames’  popularity,  one simple  reason  stands  out  as a defense  favoring  frames.  The 
reason  is  purely  operational  and  results  of  the historical  accumulation  of  frustrated  definitions  of scientific 
concepts  carried  by  pragmatic  philosophers.    In  order  to understand  where  the  frustration  rests  and  how 
frames  could  operate to dissolve  them,  a minor  detour  for overviewing  the  recent  history  of the philosop hy 
of science  is  necessary.   

To begin  with,  the second half  of the XXth  century  marked  a turning  point  in  the philosophy  of scienc e. 
Until  the emergence  of Einstein’s  theories  and non-Euclidean  mathematics,  logic  was the predominant  tool 
of analysis  for philosophers  of science.  Cumulativeness  and linearity  were viewed  as central  characterist ic s 
of the scientific  enterprise  and logic  suited  this  perspective  perfectly.  The debacle of the scientific  enterprise 
questioned  both  the views  and the tools  of philosophers  of science.   

On  the  one  hand,  some  philosophers  of  science  upgraded  their  logical  instruments.  As  a  result, 
modernized  instruments  gradually  flourished  as  escape routes  for  a logical  view  of  scientific  theories.  In 
this  ambiance,  formal  semantics  prevailed  among  the  revamped  views,  given  its  competency  in  inserting  a 
new layer  of logical  analysis  (Odenbaugh  2007). More specifically,  philosopher  of science’s  Syntactic  view 
was questioned  by the rise  of  the semantic  view.  For the purpose  at hand,  it  is  only  important  to notice  that 
both  views  relied  upon  logical  instruments  (Liu  1997).  On  the  other  hand,  the  scientific  crisis  started  a 

5 

 

movement  to approximate  the philosophy  of  science  to the practice  of scientists.  In Downes  (1992) words: 
“[...] philosophers  should  focus  on the nature  of scientific  theorizing.  Theorizing  is carried  out by practicing 
scientists,  and  we  cannot  say  what  scientific  theories  are  unless  we  appreciate  the  myriad  ways  they  are 
used and developed  in  all  of the  sciences”  (Downes  1992, p. 142). 

In  order  to face  the  condoned  practical  dilemmas  of  the  scientific  enterprise,  logic  had to  be replaced 
by  a  more  pragmatic  approach.  Logical  reasoning  was  distorting 
the  philosophical  apprehension  of 
scientific  specificities.  This  transition  created  a methodological  dissonance  in  the  philosophy  of  science 
“between  those  who  think  that  philosophy  of  science  needs  a formal  framework  or  other  and  those  who 
think  otherwise.”  (Contessa  2006,  p.  376).  Thus,  instead  of  the  logic  of  syntacticians  and  semanticist s, 
pragmatists  opted  for  studying  philosophy  of  science  from  the  perspective  of  the  history  of  science  and 
case-studies  (Odenabaugh  2007).  

Roughly,  the  pragmatic  turn  can  be divided  into  two  stances.  At one  side,  philosophers  such  as Kuhn 
(1996 [1962])  and Feyerabend  (1975) commenced  the  branch  of  historical  pragmatism,  using  case-studies 
to explain  the  evolution  of the  scientific  enterprise.  On the other  side,  the pragmatic  turn  established  a new 
approach  in  the  conceptual  analysis  of  science:  the  pragmatic  view  of  theories.  According  to  Winther 
(2015),  the  pragmatic  view  consolidated  during  the  1980s,  especially  after  Cartwright’s  (1983)  semina l 
work.  Still,  before  Cartwright  (1983)  there  were  already  pragmatic  conceptual  analyses  such  as  Hesse’s 
(1966) for instance.   

The  pragmatic  view  of  theories  may  be defined  as:  conceptual  pragmatism.  Conceptual  pragmatis m, 
thus,  was the field  which  implemented  the study  of scientific  concepts through  case studies.  At the spotlight 
stand  concepts  like  explanation,  causation,  evidence,  models,  and  experiments.  As  case-studies  are  the 
foundational  ground  of  analysis,  frequently  conceptual  pragmatism  occurs  in  the  sphere  of  specific 
scientific  disciplines,  such  as economics,  biology,  physics  and so forth.  Thus,  the pragmatic  view  of theories 
constitutes  an  important  part  of  the  expanding  fields  of  philosophy  of  science  (e.g.  philosophy  of 
economics,  philosophy  of biology,  etc.). The  following  image  summarizes  this  brief  overview: 

 

Fig.  2 – Overview  of  the Pragmatic  Turn 

Source:  prepared by the author 

 

 

Since  the  establishment  of  conceptual  pragmatism,  pragmatists  have  defined  scientific  concepts  in 
numerous  forms.  In the  case of models,  the list  counts  with:  models  as make-believe  (Toon  2010a, 2010b), 
models  as mediating  instruments  (Morrison  1999; Morrison  and Morgan  1999);  models  as fictions  (Frigg 
2010; Godfrey-Smith  2009); models  as experiments  (Mäki  2005); toy  models  (Reutlinger,  Hangleiter  and 
Hartmann  forthcoming);  minimal  models  (Grüne-Yanoff  2009; Fumagalli  2016) models  as isolating  tools 
(Mäki  1992; 1994; 2009);  models  as analogies  (Gilboa  2014);  models  as mini-theories  (Rappaport  2001). 
Frigg  and Hartmann  (2012) in  their  encyclopedic  entry  regarding  scientific  models  point  out an even  bigger 
list  of  definitions:  “Probing  models,  phenomenological  models,  computational  models,  developmenta l 
models,  explanatory  models,  impoverished  models,  testing  models,  idealized  models,  theoretical  models, 
scale  models,  heuristic  models,  caricature  models,  didactic  models,  fantasy  models,  toy  models,  imagina r y 
models,  mathematical  models,  substitute  models,  iconic  models,  formal  models,  analogue  models  and 
instrumental  models  are but some  of  the notions  that  are used  to categorize  models.”  (Frigg  and  Hartmann 
2012, p.1) 

 

6 

From  this  wide  list,  it  can  be inferred  that  the  pragmatic  view  is  far  from  being  consensual  about  the 
definition  of  models.  Consequently,  pragmatists’  discussions  about  the  definition  of  models  are 
uncomfortably  frustrating.  As Godfrey-Smith  (2009, p. 104) affirms:  “[...]  the  word “model”  itself  is  used 
diversily.  So,  it  is  not  a  good  idea  to  organize  discussion  around  the  question:  ‘what  are  models?’”.   
Analogously,  Morgan  (2012) avers:   

 

“Fifteen years of researching, thinking and writing  about models have convinced me  that there are no easy answers to questions  
about what  models  are,  and how  modelling  works.  Some  questions are more  helpful  than others . Asking:  what  qualities  do 
models  need to make  them  useful in science? And what functions do models  play in  a science? Are more  fruitful  than asking 
what are models.” (Morgan 2012,  p. xvi). 

 

Therefore,  unsatisfactory  discourses  frequently  arise:  “more  or  less  anything  that  is  used  in  science  to 
describe  empirical  phenomena  is  a model”  (Bailer-Jones  2009, p. 4). Although  identity  is  not  expected  in 
pragmatic  definitions,  profound  dissimilarities  hamper  the  progress  of subsequent  discussions. 
 
A frame-based  account  for  defining  models  reveals  the  root of  pragmatic  frustrations:  case-studies. 
The  line  of reasoning  is  straightforward:  if  the  definition  of  concepts  occurs  in  a bottom  up  manner  (from 
exemplars  to attributes),  and if  case-studies  are pragmatists’  exemplars,  pragmatic  definitions  differ  due to 
the mismatch  of case-studies.  Logically,  following  frames,  the dissonant  definitions  of models  (and of other 
scientific  concepts  defined  through  conceptual  pragmatism)  derive  from  the  lack  of  consensus  in  the  
selection  of case-studies  (exemplars).  Thus,  the discard  of logic  concealed  a two-edged knife.  The historica l 
method  approximated  philosophers  and  scientists,  but  the  renounce  of  logic  widened  the  possibilities  of 
definition  exponentially.   

To illustrate,  two definitions  where  the dissonance  is evident  can  be observed:  Weisberg  (2013) and 
Morrison  and  Morgan  (1999).  For Weisberg  (2013),  a model  definition  is  adequately  funded  by  the  San 
Francisco  Bay-Delta  Model,  the  Lotka-Volterra  model  and  Schelling’s  Segregation  Model.  On  the  other 
hand,  for Morrison  and Morgan  (1999), the characteristics  of models  should  be defined  through  Sir George 
Francis  Fitzgerald’s  mechanical  models  of  aether,  Geert  Reuten’s  Marxian  analysis  model,  the  MIT-Bag 
model,  the  quantum  Hamiltonian,  Irving  Fisher’s  and  Leontief’s  economic  models,  and  finally  nuclear 
physics’  liquid  drop model.  Unmistakably,  there  is  not  a single  match  in  their  selection  of  case studies.  As 
a result,  while  Weisberg  (2013) talks  about the attributes  construal,  structure  and description,  Morrison  and 
Morgan  (1999)  discuss  attributes  such  as  learning,  representation,  and  function.  The  following  image 
illustrates  the  incomparability. 

 

Fig.  3 – Incomparable  definitions 

Source:  prepared by the author 

 

 

It is  important  to notice  that current  pragmatic  definitions  are not  incorrect.  Selections  of exemplars 
cannot  be  right  or  wrong.  Therefore,  any  set  of  attributes  and  values  presented  –  excluding  minor 
misunderstandings  – are valid  and  exist  for  the  exemplars  selected.  The  dilemma  consists  in  discovering 
how  to  compare 
the  wide  variety  of  attributes  and  values.  Unfortunately,  comparability  seems 
uncomfortable  without  common  points  of view.  Discrepant  selections  cause  the development  of  individ ua l 
and isolated  theories,  which  rarely  collaborate  with  each other. 

 

7 

Frame’s  exemplar-dependency  clarify  the  importance  of case-studies  to single  out  the  attributes  of  the 
concepts  being  defined.  As  so,  frames  expose  the  double-edge  of  case  studies  and  the  cause  behind  the 
widening  of  the  list  of  pragmatic  definitions.  In  exposing 
the  weakness  of  unorganized  pragmatic 
definitions,  frames  create a new level  of discussions  for pragmatists.  When depicting  any frame,  the bottom-
up characteristic  (from  exemplars  to attributes)  is  ubiquitous  and not  solely  attributes  and  values  might  be 
discussed,  but also  the  selection  of  exemplars:  “does  the  attributes  and values  represent  the  characterist ic s 
of  the  exemplars?”;  “Were  the  exemplars  significant  for  the  community  in  question?”;  “If  differe nt 
exemplars  had been selected,  would  the attributes  also be different?”;  “Have  these attributes  and exemplars 
altered  over time?” 

Moreover,  frames  may  organize  the  debate  in  two  additional  forms.  First,  conceptual  pragmatis m 
frequently  compares  models  to  different  abstract  categories  (e.g.  fictions,  analogies,  experiments ). 
According  to the  frame  approach,  these  comparisons  may  come  in  two  separate  forms,  either  models  and 
fictions,  for instance,  are the exemplars  of  a high  order concept  or models  are being  exemplars  for defining 
fictions  (and  vice-versa).  As  follows, 
the  awareness  of  the  concept  being  defined. 
Confounding  exemplar  and  concept  distorts  completely  the  process  of  definition,  given  that  the  causalit y 
runs  solely  from  exemplars  to attributes.   Second, as cognitive  scientists  highlight,  each  node of  the frame 
is  a complex  frame  itself.  Considering  this,  each  node  may  be discussed  exhaustively.  Hence,  conceptual 
pragmatism  embarks  frequently  on  debates  about  the  definitions  of  a  single  attribute  or  value  of  models 
(e.g.  the  mathematical  structure,  the  nature  of  simplifications,  the  purpose  of  models).  Being  conscious 
about  these nuances  of conceptualization  may  organize  the debate and avoid  unproductive  discussions. 

frames  oblige 

Apart  from  these  supplementary  organizational  advantages,  it  should  be  clear  that  the  main  point 
supporting  framing  is  the fact  that  a frame-based  account  sheds light  on the  incomparability  of definitio ns 
which  are based  on disparate  case-studies.   Now, the  adoption  of  frames  will  not  organize  the  debate  for 
itself.  If discrepant  selections  of  case-studies  are really  the case supporting  the existence  of such  a wide  list 
of  pragmatic  definitions,  how  should  the  exemplars  be  selected  in  order  to  allow  the  comparability  of 
definitions?   

 
4)  How  to select the exemplars? 

 

As a theory  of  representation  of concepts,  frames  are limited  tools.  A narrow  selection  of exemplars  is 
necessary  in  order  to  define  a  concept  outside  the  realm  of  our  minds.  In  the  context  of  conceptual 
pragmatism, 
that  case-studies  are 
precarious  foundations  for  philosophical  arguments  (especially  in  the philosophy  of  science): 

these  exemplars  are  case-studies.  However,  Pitt  (2001)  reminds 

 

“On the one hand, if the case is selected because it exemplifies  the philosophical point being articulated, then it is not clear  that 
the philosophical claims  have been supported, because it could be argued that the historical data was manipulated to fit the point. 
On the other hand, if  one starts with a case study, it is not clear  where to go from  there for it is unreasonable to generalize  from 
one case or even two or three” (Pitt 2001,  p. 373). 

 
Pitt’s  (2001) concerns  are not thoughtless.  The  cited  list  of model’s  definitions  and the even  bigger 
list  of attributes  are an indication  that philosophical  discussions  should  be aware of the dilemmas  regarding 
the  use  of  case-studies.  However,  in  opposition  to Pitt’s  (2001) criticisms,  Burian  (2001) asserts  that  case 
studies  may  be  grouped  in  order  to  constitute  a  solid  basis  for  reasoning.  Burian  (2001)  suggests  two 
grouping  methods:  longitudinal  and comparative.  The first  contends  that  the analysis  of  case studies  should 
be organized  according  to time,  while  the  second  defends  that  case  studies  must  be grouped  according  to 
their  discipline. 

Burian’s  (2001)  proposal  develops  differently  whether  applied  in  historical  pragmatism  or  in 
conceptual  pragmatism.  First,  in  the  case  of  historical  pragmatism,  Burian’s  ideas  correlate  with  Kuhn’s 
works (1974; 1983; 1996 [1962]). After  the controversies  of The  Strucuture  of Scientific  Revolution  (1996 
[1962]), Kuhn  redefined  scientific  paradigms  as tacit  agreements  of scientific  communities  around  narrow 
sets  of  exemplary  works,  accountable  both  as  theoretical  and  methodological  paragons.  In  a  schematic 
illustration,  what  Kuhn  and Burian  suggest  is  that  imagining  that  scientists  have  an  agreement  around  one 
exemplar  of the  physics  of the  1920s and  another  exemplar  of  the psychology  of  the 1990s is not  credible. 
8 

 

Hardly  a group  of  scientists  would  agree  with  using  such  disparate  set  of  exemplars  as  its  paradigmat ic 
foundation.  The  boundaries  of  time  and  discipline  are  not  respected  since  the  two  exemplars  are decades 
apart and both  disciplines  have  little  in  common  - especially  considering  the  differences  in  time.   

As follows,  both Burian’s  constraints  and Kuhn’s  paradigms  may be seen as limitations  of discipline 
and time  for  the choice  of exemplars.  In their  views,  rather  than  existing  encompassing  scientific  concepts, 
several  concepts  related  to groups  in  specific  times  and places  exist.   As a result,  they  accept that  scientific 
concepts  may  change.  This  belief  compelled  Kuhn  to  study  the  logic  behind  the  change  of  scientific 
concepts:  what  is  the criterion  of  scientists  for  changing their  exemplars?  For such  task, Kuhn  was obliged 
to reveal  where  the longitudinal  boundaries  of  scientific  communities  were. For instance,  in  order to study 
the  logic  behind  the  change  of  Ptolemaic  ideas  by  Newtonian  ones,  the  shifting  point  has  to be observed 
carefully.  Hence,  in  the  context  of historical  pragmatism,  the  longitudinal  constraint  plays  a crucial  role.   

On  the  other  hand,  given  that  the  point  of  view  of  historical  pragmatism  is  global,  comparative 
constraints  are secondary.  Lakatos (1978) and Kuhn  (1974; 1983) affirm  that  total  consensus  is not a reality 
inside  scientific  communities  because  those  are, in  fact,  an  association  of  smaller  groups.  However,  both 
accept  that  usually  scientists  agree  on  their  ideas  about  central  theoretical  concepts,  while  discordance 
occurs  around  methodological  and  radial  theoretical  concepts.  Historical  pragmatists  look  at  science 
concerned  with  great  theoretical  transitions  such  as that  of Phlogiston  in  Chemistry  or Gravity  in  Physics. 
This  macro  point  of  view  exempts  historical  pragmatism  of  defining  exactly  the  borders of discipline.   

In contrast with  historical  pragmatism,  conceptual  pragmatism  - even  though  supported  by historica l 
case-studies  - it  is  not  a  field  of  history,  but  of  scientific  conceptual  analysis.    Historians’  study  of  the 
change  of  exemplars  is  substituted  by  a focus  on  stable  scientific  ideas.  Therefore,  for  this  different  task, 
longitudinal  and  comparative  constraints  assume  different  roles.  Longitudinal  constraints  still  exist  as  it 
would  be unwise  to select  a Copernican  exemplar  and a Newtonian  exemplar  to define  a specific  physics’ 
concept.  However,  the  exact  point  of change  becomes  unimportant,  what  reduces  the  responsibility  of  the 
longitudinal  constraint.  Thus,  for  conceptual  pragmatism,  longitudinal  constraints  are  secondary  and  the 
only  attention  should  be to not select  exemplars  from  rival  paradigms  without  clear  justifications  for doing 
so.  

Comparative  constraints,  on the  other  hand,  increase  their  importance.  As the point  of view  moves 
from  a macroscopic  perspective  to a more  specific  one,  the  smaller  groups  inside  scientific  communit ie s 
flash  out.  In  this  context,  minor  nuances  may  cause  great  distortions.  Quantum  mechanics  and  general 
relativity,  for  instance,  even  though  coexisting 
in  contemporary  physics,  may  substantiate  differe nt 
understandings  of  methodological  and  radial  theoretical  concepts  (e.g.  experiment)  as their  objects  study 
differ  - small  particles  and massive  objects respectively.  In economics,  marxians  and neoclassicists  coexist, 
but  their  definitions  of  profit  hardly  match.  Even  though  there  may  be  overlaps  between  historical  and 
conceptual  pragmatism,  the  following  schematic  image  promotes  a basic  understanding  of  their  concerns  
and, consequently,  of the relevance  of longitudinal  and  comparative  constraints  for  their  analysis. 

 

Fig.  4 – Historical  and  Conceptual  interests 

Source:  prepared by the author 

 

 

From  this  micro  point  of  view,  it  is  essential  that  pragmatists’  selection  of  exemplars  follows  a 
criterion  of  community targeting. That  is,  conceptual  pragmatism  should  consider  to what  community  the 

9 

 

concept  belongs  to  before  commencing  the  definition.  Methodological  and  theoretical  concepts  differ 
according 
to  the  groups  of  scientists  and  an  encompassing  selection  overlooks  important  nuances. 
Moreover,  an  encompassing  definition  of  a  concept  is  probably 
inconceivable  without  supportive 
definitions.  Therefore,  framing  approach  pairs  appropriately  with  community  targeting. 

For example,  in  a frame  mode of  reasoning,  an encompassing  definition  of models  would  rely  upon 
specific  exemplars  such  as  economic  models,  biology  models,  and  physics  models,  each  one  being  a 
complex  frame  itself.  Hence, according  to this  line  of reasoning,  the definition  of specific  exemplars  should 
occur before  the definition  of an encompassing  definition.  In this  sense, community  targeting  matches  with 
frames’  precondition  of  hierarchical  conceptualizations.  Case-studies  are  the  exemplars  of  specific 
communities,  which  by their  turn  are exemplars  of  bigger  communities.  The  following  image  explains  the 
hierarchy: 

 

Fig.  5 – Hierarchy  of  Definitions 

Source:  prepared by the author 

 

 

New layers  of  hierarchy  could  be inserted  in  the  network  of  frames.  The  concept  of  an  economic 
model,  for  instance,  could  be defined  by Post-Keynesian  models,  Neoclassic  models  and Marxian  models. 
Those  could  also be divided  into  different  categories.  Post-Keynesian  models  may  be defined  by Kaleckian 
models,  Minskyan  models  and Keynesian  models  for  example.  The  frame  network  could  grow  indefinite l y, 
which  entails  the necessity  of targeting  clearly  the community.   As follows,  arbitrary  selections  do not target 
specific  communities  and have  low  credibility,  considering  that  hardly  a group  of  scientists  would  define 
their  concepts  arbitrarily.  In fact,  hardly  a scientist  would  know well  enough  specific  exemplars  outside  his 
own  community.   

Thus,  encompassing  definitions  are  still  possible,  but  demand  previous  definitions  or,  at  least, 
credible  justifications  for  the  selected  exemplars.  Why  would  a  scientist  define  the  concept  of  a  model 
based on Lotka-Volterra’s  model  and  the San  Francisco  Bay  delta  model?  As Bailer-Jones  affirms:  “there 
is  what  philosophers  think,  and there  is  what  scientists  think,  and there  is  what  scientist  practice”  (Bailer-
Jones 2009, p. 14). If Downes  (1992) is correct and Pragmatism  is  an effort  to approximate  philosophers  to 
the  scientific  practice,  conceptual  pragmatism  should  define  scientific  concepts  from  the  perspective  of 
scientists.  This  demand  constrained  and  justified  selections  of  exemplars  once  encompassing  definitio ns 
are in  fact  a philosophical  perspective. 

Considering  these  points,  longitudinal  and comparative  constraints  are tokens  of  credibility  for  the 
definition  of scientific  concepts. Not necessarily  the exemplars  must  be the exemplars  that  scientists  agreed 
tacitly.  Still  the established  boundaries  of time  and discipline  guarantee  that  the scientists  could  have chosen 
these as exemplars.  In contrast  with  current  pragmatic  practices,  comparing  targeted  selections  prevents  the 
total  incomparability  of definitions,  given  that time  and discipline  will  create a common  line  of observation.  
In  summary,  community  targeting  is  a claim  for  pragmatists  to justify  their  selections  of  exemplars  and to 
add the  level  of exemplars  to the  debate.   

 

 

10 

5)  A credible  foundation   

 

In  order  to  not  remain  solely  a  methodological  criticism  and  to  demonstrate  an  application  of  the 
previous  ideas,  the  present  section  selects  two  exemplars  of  models  for  a  definition  of  the  concept  of 
economic  models.  Thus,  the  following  pages  will  define  the  concept  of  economic  models  for  the  period 
lasting  from  the  1930s  to  the  1950s.  Tinbergen  (1935)  and  Von  Neumann  (1945)  will  serve  as  the 
foundation  for  the  definition.  According 
the  following  question  must  be 
answered:  why  Tinbergen  (1935) and Von  Neumann  (1945) constitute  a credible  basis  for  the definition  of 
the  concept of  economic  models? 

to  the  previous  arguments, 

The justification  exploits  a philosophical  controversy.  According  to Boumans  (2005) and Netto (2016), 
these  two  pieces  were  the  first  ones  to  utilize  the  term  model  for  defining  abstract  economic  reasoning. 
Until  their  works, economists  used schemes,  diagrams  and systems  as terms  referring  to their  ideas.  In this 
context:  could  the concept of  economic  models  exist  without  the term?  Answering  this  question  is far from 
the  purpose  of  the  present  paper.  However,  a  common  philosophical  line  of  reasoning 
inserts  both 
exemplars  in  a distinguished  position  for  defining  the  concept  at aim.  Assuming  that  a concept  (or mental 
representation)  may  only  exist  concurrently  with  its corresponded  word requires  that  Tinbergen  (1935) and 
Von  Neumann  (1945)  are  the  exemplars  which  designed  the  first  definition  of  economic  models.  As  a 
consequence,  their  works  settled  the  way  for  the  modern  economic  method  and  for  all  subsequent 
definitions  of  models  inside  the  community  of economics.   

Thus,  a semantic-historical  justification  constitutes  a solid  pretext  for the choice  of the exemplars.  Even 
if  assumed  that  concepts  exist  without  words,  the  connection  between  both  will  remain  undeniable.  The 
word plays  a crucial  role in  the development  of the concept  inside  communities.  Along  these  lines,  the  fact 
that  both  authors  were  the  first  authors  to  use  the  term  constitutes  a  solid  foundation  for  framing  an 
encompassing  definition  of  economic  models  without  defining  subordinate  concepts  pertaining 
to 
subordinate  communities.  If  both  exemplars  were  truly  the  first  ones  to use  the  term  and  words  precede 
concepts,  the  following  frame  is  the  pioneering  definition  of  models  inside  economics  and  it  may  be 
assumed  that  there  were  no  subordinate  concepts  to  it.    Moreover,  both  must  not  have  remained  as  the 
foundations  of  the  concept  up  to  modern  days,  and  thus  probably  defined  the  concept  for  a  determined 
period.  This  period  will  be assumed  to be from  the  1930s to the  1950s. 

 

5.1)  Tinbergen 

 

Tinbergen’s  1935  model  “Quantitative  Fragen  der  Konjukturpolitik”  was  a  set  of  18 interconnect ed 
mathematical  equations.  Some  expressed  definitions,  while  others  were  classified  as  reactions.  Thus, 
through  its  interconnections  there  was the  possibility  of formulating  a mathematical  structure  representing 
economic  cycles.  Tinbergen’s  academic  training  in  the natural  sciences  supported  this  peculiar  formulatio n. 
Notably,  physics  was a clear  influence  in  Tinbergen’s  works,  since  he had  his  academic  training  in  it.  He 
had  been  supervised  by  Paul  Ehrenfest,  who  guided  him  through  his  application  of  ideas  from  physics  to 
social  problems,  especially  economics.  Consequently,  mathematical  reasoning  based  on  physics  was  a 
natural  mode  of thinking  for  Tinbergen.  Then,  building  the  model  structure  on differential  equations  from 
classical  mechanics  was  an  instinctive  option  for  him,  especially  considering  the  resemblance  between 
pendulum  movements  and economic  fluctuations. 

However,  unlike  theoretical  and  practical  studies  of  pendulums  in  physics,  whose  focus  was  mainly 
scientific,  Tinbergen  was concerned  with  the  social  relevance  of  the  study  of  cycles.  Thus,  when  he opted 
for  studying  economics,  Tinbergen  intended  to increase  the  social  utility  of his  works (Alberts,  1998). As 
a result,  his  models  were  aimed  towards  practice.  Along  these  lines,  Hallet  (1989)  affirms:  “Tinberge n’ s 
models  were therefore  the first  of a whole  economy  and the first  to be aimed  specifically  at policy  analysis ” 
(Hallet  1989, p. 189).  

This  characteristic  was evident  in  Tinbergen’s  works. Already  in  his  first  exemplar  of model,  Tinberge n 
had a clear  idea  of the  intention  behind  his  works. In the  sixth  section  of his  1935 model  he discussed  how 
to  manipulate  the  mathematical  structure  in  order  to  apply  its  concepts  for  solving  economic  policy 

 

11 

quandaries.  For  Tinbergen,  the  main  benefit  of  his  model  was  the  possibility  of  applying  his  work  for 
different  practical  concerns.   

Nonetheless,  Tinbergen  was aware that  his  model  was a simplification  of reality.  As a consequence,  to 
maintain  the practical  value  of his  model,  Tinbergen  affirmed  that the balancing  of reality  and simplificat io n 
was essential.  As a set of simplifications,  a model  is  not the  reality:   

 

“To this end, we now have to construct a model of the economy in which only regular relations exist. A detailed picture of re ality, 
however, would  lead to an extraordinarily  complicated  model,  because of the large  number  of  variables” (Tinbergen 1935,  p. 
370,  translated by the author). 

 
Considering  models  are only  a representation  of reality,  Tinbergen  asserted  models  present  a trade-off 
between  representativeness  and  easiness  of  use.  The  simpler  a  model  is,  the  easier  its  use  become.  In 
contrast,  increased  simplicity  reduces  the  model’s  capacity  of  representing  reality.  In  Morgan’s  (1990) 
words, Tinbergen  “[...] saw that a successful  applied  model  needed to replicate  reality  as closely  as possible, 
but  that  the  model  would  only  be amenable  to policy  analysis  if  it  were  relatively  simple.”  (Morgan  1990, 
p. 102). 

Thus,  for  Tinbergen,  although  assumptions  are necessary  for  a model,  those  should  balance  reality  and 
practical  relevance.  Tinbergen  (1935),  for  instance,  opted  for  the  following  assumptions  as  a  form  of 
representing  reality,  while  also maintaining  the possibility  of practical  applications:   

 

“There are only enterprises that produce consumer goods with the help of labor and capital. The workers spent their whole wag es 
on the consumer goods market. The entrepreneurs and capitalists, who are considered as a group, invest part of their income  and 
acquire consumer goods for the rest” (Tinbergen 1935,  p. 372,  translated by the author).  

 
The first  assumption  assumes  the existence  of only  two production  factors,  capital  and labor. The second 
defines  the  spending  habits  of  economic  classes,  such  that  workers  spend  all  they  earn.  Finally,  the  third 
delineates  capitalists’  investment  rules  in  a  homogeneous  manner.  Seemingly,  when  defining  model’s 
assumptions,  Tinbergen  isolated  the characteristics  of the economy  he was interested  in  studying  (workers’ 
consumption  and capitalists’  investment),  but  ensured  none  of  his  assumptions  was severely  disconnected 
from  reality,  opting  solely  for  excluding  unnecessary  problems. 

Yet,  practical  use  was  not  guaranteed  by  the  mere  balance  of  reality  and  simplicity  in  a model.  The 
political  ambiance  of  Tinbergen’s  Netherlands  was  divided  by  several  opposing  parties,  which  hardly 
agreed  upon  policies.  As  a result,  any  tool  had  to  be  completely  neutral  in  the  view  of  the  parties  to be 
accepted  only  for  its  scientific 
insights.  Otherwise,  parties  would  discard  the  instrument  without 
acknowledging  its ideas.  Therefore,  the modeling  tradition  initiated  by Tinbergen  had the purpose  of being 
politically  neutral  as  a  mode  of  allowing  social  benefits  of  models  to  spread.  In  Van  den  Boogaard’s 
perspective: 

 

“one of the fundamental characteristics of the Dutch modeling  practice is that the model  is considered to be a neutral device  – 
an umbrella  over separate parties – which explains why model outcomes have more  credibility  than the different  interpretations 
of national economy.” (Van  den Boogaard 1998,  p. 347)   

 
In  fact,  model  neutrality  had  not  to be completely  real,  neither  in  a theoretical  nor  in  a political  sense 
(since  theory  and  politics  are  not  necessarily  distinct),  but  the  model  should  be  understood  as  if  it  were 
neutral.  Therefore,  the  root of neutrality  of Tinbergen’s  models  was their  empirical  basis and the possibilit y 
of  modifying  their  characteristics  when  facing  different  facts.  This  capacity  allowed  Tinbergen’s  ideas  to 
be applied  in  different  ways.  Hence,  even  though  “Tinbergen  was clear  that  theory  precedes the empirica l, 
challenging  the  usefulness  of  the  ‘facts  without  theory’  approach”  (Dopfer  1989, p. 678), he  accepted the 
feedback  from  reality.  In  other  words,  Tinbergen’s  models  had  to  be  capable  of  confronting  facts  and 
modifying  its  ideas  according  to them. 

Neutrality,  then,  is a characteristic  resulting  from  the  fact  that  models  in  Tinbergen’s  point  of  view  are 
not  an end in  themselves.  He demonstrated  this  aspect  of models  in  his  1935 exemplar,  as he  affirmed  the 
model  should  be observed  in  different  formulations  before  being  used  in  practical  situations.  Tinberge n 

 

12 

(1935),  for  instance,  contended  the  necessity  of  observing  distinct  models:  “It  is  advisable  to  examine  a 
larger  number  of  different  models  before  considering  the  conclusions  as final”  (Tinbergen  1935, p.  371, 
translated  by the author).  In the  sequence,  Tinbergen  defended  the  requirement  of adorning  the model  with 
more  complex  ideas:  “However,  it  is  by no  means  to be denied  that  our  model  is  a scheme  which  is  very 
simplified  to reality.  The  method  can, however,  be extended  to more complicated  cases”  (Tinbergen  1935, 
p. 372, translated  by the  author). 

As Morgan  (1990) points  out,  in  Tinbergen’s  models:   
 

“the formation  of each individual  equation and the particular  choice of  variables were  found by iterating  between theoretical 
ideas and empirical  investigations. [...]  It should be clear that Tinbergen was not claiming  ‘statistical testing’ of his model here, 
but ‘statistical verification’”  (Morgan 1990,  p. 105). 

 

That  is,  reality  and  theory  interact  in  models,  creating  neutrality.  Therefore,  although  Tinbergen’s  (1935) 
model  had theoretical  content,  empirical  verification  was essential  for  its  practical  relevance: 
 
“The objective is to determine  the coefficients applied in the equations (indicated by Greek  letters in the text),  or to replace the 
equations by means of more  realistic coefficients and to determine  the coefficients contained in  them” (Tinbergen 1935,  p. 382, 
translated by the author). 

 
Neutrality  based on  the possibility  of modification  and the  trade-off  between  reality  and  simplificat io n 
were  so  important  in  Tinbergen’s  modeling  practice  that  those  were  the  essence  of  his  speech  for  the 
Sveriges  Riskbank  Prize  in  Economics.  Tinbergen  (1969)  named  ‘refinement’ 
the  process  of  “the 
introduction  of  many  more  variables”  into  models.  In  his  ideas,  refinement  is  absolutely  necessary  to 
guarantee  the practical  validity  of models.  However,  refinement  must  be carefully  done in  order to mainta in 
the  relation  between  models  and reality  intact.  The  practical  relevance  of models  should  not be lost  due to 
a disconnection  from  reality.  Consequently,  empirical  verification  must  occur  when  modeling. 

 

5.2)  Von Neumann 

 

Von Neumann  (1945) model  established  an innovation  inside  economic  reasoning.  While  mathematica l 
inquiries  regarding  economic  equilibrium  were  supported  “by  the  mere  counting  of  numbers  of  equations 
and unknowns”  (Von  Neumann,  1944), Von  Neumann  (1945)  exemplar  studied  equilibrium  searching  for 
the  logical  consistency  of  equilibrium  assumptions.  Therefore,  Von  Neumann  (1945) was concerned  with 
discovering  whether  equilibrium  was  logically  possible.  In order to achieve  his  objectives,  “Von  Neumann 
kept his argument  on a strictly  formal  basis and employed  twice  a non-constructive  demonstration  technique 
called  ‘indirect  proof  method”  (Giocoli  2003, p. 227). 

Thus,  Von  Neumann’s  mathematical  method  introduced  an innovation.  Instead  of normal  formulatio ns, 
Von  Neumann  based  his  inquiry  on  formalist  indirect  proofs.  According  to  Punzo  (1991):  “The  novel 
formulation  of  the  mathematical  problem  required  the  abandonment  of  the  algebraic  (even  simply 
arithmetic)  treatment  and  a  plunge  into  combinatorial  and  topological  methods...”  (Punzo  1991,  p.  9). 
Before  his  model,  axiomatics  was  almost  exclusively  used  in  the  natural  sciences.  Therefore,  Von 
Neumann’s  peculiar  mathematical  background  imported  the new  mathematical  formulation.   

Unlike  Tinbergen,  Von  Neumann  was a mathematician  and not  a physicist.  In  fact,  von  Neumann  was 
an eminent  mathematician  researching  especially  Hilbert’s  formalism.  According  to Giocoli  (2003, p. 227): 
“Hilbert  and  his  school  had  made  the  mathematical  models  somehow  autonomous  from  their  empirica l 
substrate;  this  entailed 
that  a  formalist  model  could  be  validated  only  internally,  by  proving  non-
constructively  the absence of any  inconsistency”.  As a result,  Von Neumann  produced models  in  a unique ly 
formalist  way.  However,  even  though  based  on  a  different  mathematics,  formalist  models  were  still 
simplifications  of reality.  Thus,  assumptions  were an essential  part of Von  Neumann’s  works.   

In  this  regard,  Champernowne  (1945),  when  commenting  on  Von  Neumann’s  (1945)  formulatio n, 
affirmed 
that  the  general  equilibrium  model  adopted  “extremely  artificial  assumptions”  or  “drastic 
simplifying  assumptions”.  This  abuse  of  simplifications  was  not  unnoticed.  Cabral  (2003)  highlights  that 
the model  was extremely  criticized  for its  unconscious  suppositions,  specially  for assuming  a non-monetar y 

13 

 

economy.  Still,  without  such  extreme  simplifications,  the  proof  of  consistency  would  be  constrained. 
Equilibrium  should  be transformed  into  tractable  axioms  to allow  for the  analysis  of consistency. 

As  a  result,  even  though  worried  about  the  simplifications,  Champernowne  (1945)  underlined  the 
elegance  of the mathematical  formulation.  For him,  the mathematical  quality  of the work could  compensate 
the unrealism  of the assumptions,  since  the main  objective  of Von Neumann’s  work was theoretical.  Indeed, 
Von  Neumann  (1945) purpose  was not  practical,  considering  that  Hilbert’s  pupils  were  more  interested  in 
uncovering  the  axiomatic  foundations  of  scientific  ideas  than  using  their  mathematics  in  practice.   

However,  even  though  applying  extremely  artificial  assumptions,  Von Neumann  modeling  practice  for 
economics  did  not  defend  a  complete  disconnection  from  reality.  The  context  in  which  his  model  was 
formulated  compelled  a dissension  from  Hilbert’s  drastic  non-empirical  aspirations  for formalism.  The first 
configuration  of  Von  Neumann’s  (1945)  model  appeared  as  a  quantum  mechanics  application  in  1928. 
Then,  prior  to  his  final  economical  formulation  in  1945,  the  model  was  molded  throughout  the  years 
(Kjeldsen,  2001).  During  this  maturation  process,  the  axiomatic  method  applied  by  Von  Neumann  was 
contested.  Gödel  (1931) highlighted  the  impossibility  of  proving  arithmetic’s  logical  consistency  through 
purely  logical  sets  of  axioms.   The  proof  even  led  Von  Neumann  a few  years  later  to  affirm:  “Gödel  has 
shown  that  Hilbert’s  program  is  essentially  hopeless”  (Von  Neumann  1947).  Before  Gödel’s  proof,  the 
axiomatic  method  intended  to  find  axioms  completely  destituted  from  empirical  content.  After  it,  the 
confidence  on purely  logical  axioms  devalued.   

As a consequence,  the initial  proposal  of 1928 for quantum  mechanics  had to change  to be presented 
as an economic  model  in  1945. The  empirical  basis  became  a reality  for  the  axiomatic  method.  Therefore, 
Von  Neumann  (1947),  already  accepting  a  different  kind  of  formalism,  claimed:  “As  a  mathematica l 
discipline  travels  far  from  its  empirical  source,  or  still  more,  if  it  is  a  second  or  third  generation  only 
indirectly  inspired  by ideas  coming  from  ‘reality’  it  is beset with  very  grave  dangers,  it  becomes  more and 
more  purely  aestheticizing,  more  and more  l’art pour l’art.”   

Along  these lines,  although  apparently  unreal,  Von  Neuamman’s  assumptions  were not unprovided  with 
empirical  content.  For  Rashid  (1994,  p.  289)  the  relation  with  observed  reality  was  inserted  into  Von 
Neumann’s  ideas  through  the  intuitive  derivation  of  the  axioms:  “[...]  he  [Von  Neumann]  seemed  to  feel 
very  strongly  that  in  economics,  as in  physics,  in  order to derive  meaningful  explanations  one must  know 
very  specifically  what  there  is  to  explain”  .  Still,  Rashid  (2007)  highlights  Von  Neumann  had  profound 
difficulties  in  discovering  realist  axioms  for  economic  research,  frequently  becoming  frustrated  with  the 
task. 

As  a result,  according  to  Rashid  (2007),  Von  Neumann’s  relationship  with  economics  was  not  rigid. 
Unlike  his  mathematical  and  physical  concerns,  economics  was  somewhat  a  hobby  for  Von  Neumann. 
Thus,  his  lack  of  rigidness  and  his  theoretical  concerns  eventually  dismissed  assumptions  from  being 
excessively  complicated,  allowing  the  mathematical 
ideas  to  flow  more  freely.  Still,  Von  Neumann 
discarded  models  which  could  not  be interpreted  in  real  terms.  As Gloria-Palermo  (2010) contends:   

 

“A prominent  characteristic  of hilbertian  formalism  is without  doubt the strict separation between syntax and semantics.  To 
formalize  a  theory  in  the  sense of  Hilbert  means  indeed  emptying  it  from  all  its  semantic  content and  giving  an  abstract 
representation of it.” (Gloria-Pale rmo  2010,  p. 165) 

 
For  Hilbert,  detachment  from  reality  was  essential  for  consistency  proofs  and  the  interpretation  was 
unnecessary.  The  logical  level  of  reasoning  was  Hilbert’s  only  concern.  On  the  other  hand,  for  Von 
Neumann,  after  mathematical  proofs,  axioms  and  models  should  be capable  of  being  interpreted  beyond 
logic.  Therefore,  models  should  be fulfilled  with  empirical  content  in  their  interpretations.  As  the  author 
points  out: 

 

“This means that the criterion of success for such a theory is simply  whether it can, by a simple elegant classifying and correlating 
scheme, cover very many phenomena, which without this scheme would seem complicated and heterogeneous, and whether the 
scheme  even cover  phenomena which  were  not considered or  even known  at t he time  when  the scheme was evolved” (Von  
Neumann 1947) 
 

 

 

14 

Therefore,  models  should  adapt according  to the phenomena  they  intend  to explain,  but they  also should 
be  capable  of  adapting  to  unintended  situations.  In  Formica’s  (2010,  p.  489)  words:  “the  model  has  to 
manifest  its  formal  adaptability  for further  correct extensions ”.  Thus,  the  model  has to be capable  of being 
theoretically  modified  in  a search  for different  interpretations.  Real  and unreal  assumptions  can  be used in 
this  process,  provided  that  the  interpretations  are  always  aiming  at  reality.  For  Teixeira  (2000)  this 
adaptability  allures  scientists,  once  its  possibilities  are  infinite.  The  model  can  always  become  more 
complex.   

 
6)  Frame 

 

Once observed  the  two  exemplars  of  models,  it  is  possible  to delineate  a concept  of  a model  based on 
their  evident  characteristics.  However,  as Murphy  and Medin  (1985) point  out,  to select  a set of  attributes 
based on similarity  judgments  generates  several  problems.  Similarities  are context-dependent  in  a way  that 
it  can  always  be  found  a characteristic  that  pertains  to  two  different  objects.  Chairs  and  tables  are  both 
furniture,  while  chairs  and  horses  may  both  have  four  legs.  Thus,  selecting  attributes  based  solely  on 
similarity  creates  distortions.   

According 

is  solved  through  enhancing 

to  Andersen  (2000),  this  problem 

the  importance  of 
dissimilarities.  As  a  result,  to  select  an  attribute  is  to  select  a  characteristic  both  similar  and  dissimi la r  
between  exemplars.  Remembering  the previous  example,  birds  have  beaks that  can  be pointed  or rounded.  
The  abstracting  of  this  observational  stimuli  instantiates  the  attribute  beak,  which  is  essential  for  the 
conceptualization  of  birds.  As  follows,  characteristics  for  which  dissimilarities  are  unimportant  may  be 
neglected.  In  the  case of  Tinbergen’s  and  Von  Neumann’s  works,  both  are similar  in  the  characteristic  of 
being  printable.  However,  no  clear  dissimilarity  exists  between  this  feature,  and  there  is  no  reason  for 
including 
the  following  attributes  were  chosen  based  on  the  (almost 
paradoxical)  condition  of  finding  dissimilarities  on the similarities.   

it  on  a  frame.  Consequently, 

The main  characteristics  of Tinbergen’s  (1935) model  are: (1) the model  uses mathematical  expressions 
to communicate,  specially  differential  equations  related  to classical  mechanics;  (2) the purpose of the model 
is  practical,  intended  to  be  used  as  a  tool  for  policy  analyses;  (3)  The  simplifications  are  isolations  of 
essential  aspects  of  the  problem  at  hand;  (4) the  model  is  neutral  as a result  of  its  empirical  content;  (5) 
directly  connected  to  the  fourth  characteristic, 
to  facts  and  statistica l 
verification. 

the  model  adapts  according 

In  what  concerns  Von  Neumann’s  (1945)  model,  the  following  aspects  are evident:  (1)  topology  and 
logic  are the main  forms  of reasoning;  (2) the purpose  of the model  is theoretical;  (3) artificial  assumptio ns 
are  commonly  found  in  its  formulations;  (4)  the  model  is  neutral  as  a  consequence  of  its  axiomat ic 
formulation;  (5)  the  model  adapts to different  interpretations.  When  combining  the  characteristics  of  both 
models,  the  following  frame  can  be presented: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

15 

Fig  6. The  definition  of  Economic  Model  1930 - 1950 

Source:  prepared by the author 

 

 

According  to  the  exemplars’  characteristics,  five  attributes  were  defined:  mathematical  structure; 
neutrality;  adaptability;  simplification;  and purpose. Each attribute  has two correspondent  values  connected 
to their  appearance  in  Tinbergen’s  (1935) and Von  Neumann’s  (1945) exemplars.  While  outside  the scope 
of  the  present  paper, this  definition  paves  the  ground  for  at least  four  subsequent  discussions.  First,  each 
attribute  and  value  is  a complex  frame  itself,  and  most  of  them  are widely  discussed  in  the  philosophica l 
literature  - especially  simplification,  mathematical  structure  and purpose. However,  frames  and communit y 
targeting  have  not  yet  been  used  for  defining  these  concepts.  Second,  to my  knowledge,  adaptability  and 
neutrality  are unusual  characteristics  appointed  to models,  and could  be further  discussed.   

Third,  assuming  that  the  chosen  exemplars  are prototypes  of  economic  models  imply  that  the  set  of 
attributes  may  be seen as a list  of required  and sufficient  conditions  for  a work to be considered  a model  in 
the period.  In this  view,  the attributes  define  abstractedly  what  economists  searched in  economic  reasoning 
during  the  second  quarter  of  the  XXth  century  as requirements  for  classifying  economic  models.  Values, 
thence,  specify  the  manifestation  formats  allowed  for  the  attributes.   Following  the  prototype  argument, 
works  to  be considered  models  could  manifest  their  attributes  in  mixed  compositions  of  values  and  not 
necessarily  correspond  exactly  to either  Von  Neumann’s  or Tinbergen’s  exemplars.  It  would  be possible, 
for instance,  to categorize  as a model  works using  artificial  simplifications  for practical  purposes,  provided 
that  all  the  attributes  were identifiable.  Considering  this  idea,  the  frame  could  be used  to categorize  works 
of the  period  as models  or not.  

Finally,  in  consonance  with  the main  purpose  of the previous  methodological  critique,  the selection 
of  exemplars  can  -and  probably  should  - be  contested  and  further  analyzed,  which  leaves  open  a  wide 
variety  of  questions:  Is  a  semantic-philosophical  selection  enough  for  considering  the  exemplars  the 
foundation  of  the  concept  of  economic  models?  Were  the  exemplars  significant  for  the  community  in 
question?  Have  these  attributes  and  exemplars  altered  over  time?  What  is  the  role  of  the  exemplars  in  the 
manifested  attributes?  Would  they  be different  for  distinct  exemplars?    

 

7)  Final  Remarks 

 

The  main  objective  of  the present  paper was to review  the  causes  supporting  the widening  of the  list  of 
definitions  of  scientific  models  and  present  a solution  for  the  problem  along  with  an  application.  For the 
causes, it  was demonstrated  that  conceptual  pragmatism  and its  basis on case-studies  created a hodgepodge 
of  definitions,  which  has  been  hampering  the  development  of  debates  and  frustrating  pragmatists.  In 

 

16 

summary,  the  source  of  frustrations  comes  from  the  incomparability  of  definitions  that  are  based  on 
disparate  case-studies.   

Frame-based  accounts  were  shown  as  a viable  solution  for  recreating  comparability,  considering  that 
exemplar-dependency  is  at  the  core  of  their  approaches.  Exemplar-dependency  puts  the  spotlight  at  the 
selection  of case-studies.  The recognition  of case-studies  as the main  designers  of the definition  of scientific 
concepts alert  for the necessity  of reasoned selection  of exemplars.  Following  Burian  (2001), at a minimum, 
case studies  should  be selected  according  to their  disciplines  and generatio ns.  Thus,  a reasoned  selection  of 
exemplars  should  target a specific  community.  In other words, there is no sense in defining  scientific  models 
based on disparate  exemplars  spanning  from  a wide  variety  of disciplines  and time  periods.  What is a model 
defined  by  an  engineering’s  exemplar  of  the  1930s  and  an  economics’  exemplar  of  the  1980s?  What 
scientists  of  these  paradigms  have  in  common?  Probably  some,  but  not  enough  to  justify  such  peculiar 
selection. 

In  favor  of  not  remaining  solely  at  the  level  of  methodological  criticism  - following  the  proposed 
criterion  - Tinbergen  (1935)  and  Von  Neumann  (1945)  were  chosen  as  exemplars  for  the  definition  of 
economic  models  for  the  period  going  from  1930  to  1950.  For  the  definition,  the  method  presented  by 
Barsalou  (1987; 1992) was selected.  The  analysis  of  the  case-studies  formed  a frame  with  five  attributes : 
mathematical  structure,  purpose,  neutrality,  simplification  and adaptability. 

The  proposed definition,  thus,  may  be criticized  at two different  levels,  that  of the attributes  and values 
and  that  of  the  exemplars.  As  a  result,  several  reasoned  questions  arise:  “do  the  attributes  and  values 
represent  the  characteristics  of  the  exemplars?”;  “Were  the  exemplars  significant  for  the  community  in 
question?”;  “If  other  exemplars  had  been  selected,  would  the  attributes  be  different?”;  “Have  these 
attributes  and  exemplars  altered  over  time?”  Therefore,  frame-based  definitions  create  a  base  of 
comparability  and open a whole  new  world  of  questions. 

At last, it  has to be highlighted  that  not only  frames  may  organize  the debate. The important  point  is the 
awareness  of  exemplar-dependency  in  the  definition  of  concepts.  Hence,  this  consciousness  is  far  more 
meaningful  than  the  method  itself.  The  above-cited  questions  could  emerge  only  from  being  aware  of  the 
importance  of exemplars.  Frames  were selected  especially  for  their  capacity  of  highlighting  this  point.   
 
References 
 
1.Alberts,  G.  (1994).  On  Connecting  Socialism  and  Mathematics:  Dirk  Struik,  Jan  Burgers,  and  Jan 
Tinbergen.  Historia  mathematica,  21, 280-305, 
2.Andersen,  H.  (2000).  Kuhn's  account  of  family  resemblance:  A  solution  to  the  problem  of  wide-open 
texture.  Erkenntnis,  52(3), 313-337. 
3.Andersen,  H.  ;  Barker,  P.  &  Chen,  X.  (1998).  Kuhn's  theory  of  scientific  revolutions  and  cognitive 
psychology.  Philosophical  Psychology,  11(1), 5-28. 
4.Andersen,  H.; Barker, P., & Chen, X. (2006). The cognitive  structure  of scientific  revolutions.  Cambridge : 
Cambridge  University  Press. 
5.Andersen,  H;  Barker,  P.  &  Chen,  X.  (1996).  Kuhn's  mature  philosophy  of  science  and  cognitive 
psychology.  Philosophical  Psychology,  9(3), 347-363. 
6.Bailer-Jones,  D. M. (2009). Scientific  Models  in  Philosophy  of  Science.  University  of Pittsburgh  Press. 
7.Barker, P. (2001). Kuhn,  incommensurability,  and cognitive  science.  Perspectives  on Science,  9(4), 433-
462. 
8.Barker,  P. (2011). The  Cognitive  Structure  of Scientific  Revolutions.  Erkenntnis,  75(3), 445-465. 
9.Barker,  P.;  Chen,  X.  &  Andersen,  H.  (2003).  Kuhn  on  concepts  and  categorization.  In  Nickles,  T. 
(ed.) Thomas  Kuhn  (pp. 212 – 245). Cambridge  University  Press. 
10.Barsalou,  L. W. (1987).  The  Instability  of  Graded  Structure:  Implications  for  the  Nature  of  Concepts, 
in:  Neisser,  U,  (ed.),  Concepts  and  Conceptual  Development:  Ecological  and  Intellectual  Factors  in 
Categorization  (pp. 101-140). Cambridge:  Cambridge  University  Press. 
11.Barsalou,  L.  W.  (1992).  Frames,  concepts  and  conceptual  fields.  In  Lehrer,  A  &  Kittay,  E.  (Eds.). 
Frames. 
12.Boumans,  M. (2005). How  Economists  Model  the  World into  Numbers.  London:  Routledge. 

17 

 

13.Burian,  R.  M. (2001).  The  dilemma  of  case studies  resolved:  The  virtues  of  using  case  studies  in  the 
history  and  philosophy  of science.  Perspectives  on Science,  9(4), 383-404. 
14.Cabral, M. (2003). John  Von Neumann  Contribution  to Economic  Science.  International  Social  Science 
Review,  78(3/4), 126-137.  
15.Cartwright,  N. (1983). How the Laws  of Physics  Lie.  Oxford  University  Press:  1983. 
16.Champernowne,  D.G.  (1945).  A note  on  J.  von  Neumann’s  article.  Review  of  Economic  Studies,  13, 
10-18. 
17.Chen,  X.;  Andersen,  H.  &  Barker,  P.  (1998).  Kuhn's  theory  of  scientific  revolutions  and  cognitive 
psychology.  Philosophical  Psychology,  11(1), 5-28. 
18.Contessa,  G. (2006). Scientific  models,  partial  structures  and the new received  view  of theories.  Studies 
in  History  and  Philosophy  of Science  Part A, 37(2), 370-377. 
19.Dopfer,  K. (1988). Classical  Mechanics  with  an  Ethical  Dimension:  Professor  Tinbergen's  Economic s. 
Journal  of Economic  Issues,  22(3), 675-706. 
20.Downes,  S. M. (1992). The  Importance  of Models  in  Theorizing:  A Deflationary  Semantic  View.  PSA: 
Proceedings  of  the Biennial  Meeting  of the  Philosophy  of Science  Association,  142 – 153. 
21.Feyerabend,  Paul  (1975). Against  Method. Verso. 
22.Formica,  G.  (2010).  Von  Neumann's  methodology  of  science:  From  incompleteness  theorems  to later 
foundational  reflections.  Perspectives  on Science,  18(4), 480-499. 
23.Frigg,  R. (2010). Models  and fiction.  Synthese,  172(2), 251-268. 
24.Frigg,  R., Hartmann,  S.. (2012). Models  in  Science.  In  E. N. Zalta  (ed.) The Stanford  Encyclopedia  of 
Philosophy.  Online.  Available  HTTP:  <http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/  models-science/>,  accessed 
November  21, 2012. 
25.Fumagalli,  R. (2016). Why  We Cannot  Learn  from  Minimal  Models.  Erkenntnis,  81(3), 433-455. 
26.Garbacz,  P. (2013).  Artefacts  and  Family  Resemblance.  Review  of  Philosophy  and  Psychology,  4(3), 
419-447. 
27.Garbacz,  P. (2016). Conceptual  frames  revisited.  Journal  of Applied  Non-Classical  Logics,  25(4), 287-
307. 
28.Gilboa,  I., Postlewaite,  A., Samuelson,  L. and Schmeidler,  D. (2014), Economic  Models  as Analogies. 
Econ  J, 124, F513–F533.  
29.Giocoli,  N.  (2003). Modeling  Rational  Agents:  From  Interwar  Economics 
Theory.  Cheltenham,  UK: Edward  Elgar. 
30.Gloria-Palermo,  S  (2010).  Introducing  formalism 
Neumann.  Panoeconomicus,  2,153-172. 
31.Gödel,  K.  (1931).  Über  formal  unentscheidbare  Sätze  der  Principia  Mathematica  und  verwandter 
Systeme.  Monatshefte  für  Mathematik  und  Physik,  38(1), 173-198. 
32.Godfrey-Smith,  P. (2009). Models  and fictions  in  science.  Philosophical  Studies,  143(1), 101-116. 
33.Grüne-Yanoff,  T. (2009). Learning  from  Minimal  Economic  Models.  Erkenntnis,  70(1), 81–99. 
34.Hallet,  A.  J.  H.  (1989).  Econometrics  and  the  Theory  of  Economic  Policy:  The  Tinbergen–The il 
Contributions  40 Years On. Oxford  Economic  Papers, 41(1), new  series,  189-214.  
35.Hesse, M. B. (1966). Models  and Analogies  in  Science.  University  of Notre Dame  Press. 
36.Kjeldsen,  T. H. (2001). John  von  Neumann’s  Conception  of the Minimax  Theorem:  A Journey  Through 
Different  Mathematical  Contexts.  Archives  for  the  History  of Exact  Sciences,  56, 39-68. 
37.Komatsu,  L.K. (1992). Recent  Views  of  Conceptual  Structure.  Psychological  Bulletin  112(3), 500-526 
38.Kuhn,  T. (1974). Second Thoughts  on Paradigms  In:  Kuhn,  T. The  Essential  Tension  slected  studies  in 
Scientific  Tradition  and Change.  Chicago:  The  University  of  Chicago  Press, 1974. 
39.Kuhn,  T.  (1983).  Commensurability,  comparability,  communicability.  In:  Kuhn,  T.  (2000)  The  Road 
since  the structure:  philosophical  essays,  1970 – 1993. Chicago:  The  University  of  Chicago  Press. 
40.Kuhn,  T.  (1996  [1962])The  Structure  of  Scientific  Revolutions.  Chicago:  The  University  of  Chicago 
Press.  
41.Lakatos,  I. (1978). The  methodology  of scientific  research  programs:  philosophical  papers. Vol.  1. 
Cambridge:  The Press Syndicate  of  the University  of Cambridge. 

the  growth  model  of  John  Von 

to  Early  Modern  Game 

in  economics: 

 

18 

42.Lakoff,  G. (1987). Cognitive  models  and prototype  theory.  In U. Neisser  (Ed.),  Concepts and 
conceptual  development  (pp. 63-100). New York:  Cambridge  University  Press. 
43.Laurence,  S. & Margolis,  E. (1999). Concepts  and Cognitive  Science.  In  Margolis,  E.; Laurence,  S. 
(eds.). Concepts:  Core Readings  (pp. 3-81). MIT Press. 
44.Levitin,  D. (2014). The  organized  mind:  Thinking  Straight  in  the Age  of Information  Overload.  New 
York:  Dutton. 
45.Liu,  C.  (1997).  Models  and  theories  I:  The  semantic  view  revisited.  International  Studies  in  the 
Philosophy  of Science,  11(2), 147-164. 
46.Mäki,  U (1994). Isolation,  idealization  and truth  in  economics.  Poznan  Studies  in  the  Philosophy  of the 
Sciences  and the  Humanities,  38, 147-168. 
47.Mäki,  U.  (1992).  On  the  method  of  isolation  in  economics.  Poznan  Studies  in  the  Philosophy  of  the 
Sciences  and the  Humanities,  26, 19-54. 
48.Mäki,  U. (2005). Models  are experiments,  experiments  are models.  Journal  of  Economic  Methodology, 
12(2), 303-315. 
49.Mäki,  U. (2009). MISSing  the  world.  Models  as isolations  and credible  surrogate  systems.  Erkenntnis, 
70(1), 29-43. 
50.Margolis,  E.,Laurence,  S. (eds.) (1999). Concepts:  Core Readings.  MIT  Press. 
51.Margolis,  E.; Laurence,  S. (2007). The  ontology  of concepts:  Abstract  objects or mental 
representations?  Noûs, 41 (4), 561-593. 
52.Margolis,  Eric  (1994). A reassessment  of  the shift  from  the classical  theory  of  concepts  to prototype 
theory.  Cognition,  51(1), 73-89. 
53.Medin,  D. L. (1989). Concepts and  conceptual  structure.  American  Psychologist,  44, 1469-1481. 
54.Morgan,  M. (1990). The History  of Econometric  Ideas. Cambridge:  Cambridge  University  Press. 
55.Morgan,  M. (2012).  The  world  in  the  model:  how  economists  work  and  think.  Cambridge  Univers it y 
Press. 
56.Morrison,  M. (1999).  Models  as  autonomous  agents.  In:  Morgan,  M.; Morrison,  M.  (eds.)  Models  as 
Mediators.  Ideas in  Context.  (No. 52). Cambridge:  Cambridge  University  Press. 
57.Morrison,  M.;  Morgan,  M. S. (1999). Models  of  mediating  instruments.  In:  Morgan,  M. S.; Morrison, 
M. (eds.)  Models  as Mediators:  Perspectives  on  Natural  and  Social  Science.  Ideas  in  context  No.52 (pp. 
10-37). Cambridge:  Cambridge  University  Press.   
58.Murphy,  G. L., and Medin,  D. L. (1985). The  role  of theories  in  conceptual  coherence.  Psychological 
Review,  92, 289-316. 
59.Netto, A. (2016). Transformando  o abstrato em concreto:  As raízes  históricas  da modelagem  econômica. 
Paper presented  at:  44º Encontro  de Economia  - ANPEC, Foz do Iguaçu. 
60.Odenbaugh,  J. Models.  (2007). In:  Sahotra, S. & Plutynski,  A. (eds.) A Companion  to the  Philosophy  of 
Biology.  Oxford:  Blackwell  Publishing  Ltd. 
61.Osherson,  .„  and Smith,  E. (1981). On the  Adequacy  of  Prototype  Theory  as a Theory  of Concepts. 
Cognition,  9, 35-58.  
62.Petersen,  W.  (2007).  Representation  of  concepts  as  frames.  The  Baltic  International  Yearbook  of 
Cognition,  Logic  and Communication,  2, 151-170. 
63.Pitt,  J. C. (2001). The dilemma  of case studies:  Toward a heraclitian  philosophy  of science.  Perspectives 
on Science,  9(4), 373-382. 
64.Punzo,  L. F.(1991). The  School  of  Mathematical  Formalism  and the  Viennese  Circle  of  Mathematica l 
Economists.  Journal  of The  History  of Economic  Thought,  13(1), 1-18. 
65.Ramsey,  William  (1992). Prototypes  and conceptual  analysis.  Topoi,  11(1), 59-70. 
66.Rappaport,  S. (2001). Economic  models  as mini-theories.  Journal  of  Economic  Methodology,  8(2), 
275-285. 
67.Rashid,  S. (1994). John  von Neumann,  scientific  method  and empirical  economics.  Journal  of Economic 
Methodology,  1(2), 279-294. 
68.Rashid,  S. (2007).  John  von  Neumann  and  Scientific  Method.  Journal  of  the  History  of  Ideas, 68(3), 
501-527. 

 

19 

69.Reutlinger,  A.; Hangleiter,  D. & Hartmann,  S. (forthcoming).  Understanding  (With)  Toy  Models. 
British  Journal  for the  Philosophy  of Science. 
70.Rosch,  E.  &  Mervis,  C.  B.  (1975).  Family  Resemblances:  Studies  in  the  Internal  Structures  of 
Categories.  Cognitive  Psychology,  7, 573-605. 
71.Rosch,  E. (1973). Natural  Categories.  Cognitive  Psychology,  4, 328-50.  
72.Rosch,  E. (1978). Principles  of Categorization.  In  Rosch,  E., Lloyd,  B. (Eds.),  Cognition  and 
Categorization  (pp. 27-48). Hillsdale,  NJ: Lawrence  Erlbaum  Associates.   
73.Strawson,  P. F. (1992). Analysis  and Metaphysics:  An Introduction  to Philosophy.  Oxford  University 
Press. 
74.Teixeira,  J.  R.  (2000)  O  modelo  de  Von  Neumann  e  a  fascinação  com  a  teoria  do  crescimento 
equilibrado.  Revista  de Economia  Contemporânea,  4(2),65-83. 
75.Thagard,  P. (2009). Hanne  Andersen,  Peter  Barker  and  Xian  Chen  the  cognitive  structure  of  scientific 
revolutions.  British  Journal  for the  Philosophy  of Science,  60(4), 843-847. 
76.Tinbergen,  J. (1935). Quantitative  Fragen  der Konjunkturpolitik.  Weltwirtschaftliches  Archiv,  42, 366-
399. 
77.Tinbergen,  J.  (1941).  Unstable  and  Indifferent  Equilibria  in  Economic  Systems.  Revue  De  L'Institut 
International  De Statistique  / Review  of  the International  Statistical  Institute,  9(1/2), 36-50. 
78.Tinbergen,  J.  (1992  [1969]).  The  Use  of  Models:  Experience  and  Prospects.  In:  Lindbeck,  A.  Nobel 
Lectures,  Economics  1969-1980. Singapura:  World  Scientific  Publishing  Co. 
79.Toon,  A.  (2010).  Models  as  make-believe.  In  Frigg,  R.  &  Hunter,  M.  (eds.),  Beyond  Mimesis  and 
Convention:  Representation  in  Art and Science.  Boston  Studies  in  Philosophy  of Science. 
80.Toon,  A.  (2010).  Models  as  Make-Believe:  Imagination,  Fiction,  and  Scientific  Representatio n. 
Palgrave  Macmillan. 
81.Urbaniak,  R. (2010). Capturing  Dynamic  Conceptual  Frames.  Logic  Journal  of the Igpl,  18(3), 430-455. 
82.Van  den Bogaard,  A. (1999). The  Cultural  Origins  of  the  Dutch  Economic  Modeling  Practice.  Science 
in  Context,  12(2). 
83.Von Neumann,  J. (1945). A Model  of General  Economic  Equilibrium.  Review  of Economic  Studies,  13, 
1-9. 
84.Von Neumann,  J. (1961 [1947]). The mathematician.  In:  Taub, A.H. (ed.), John von Neumann.  Collected 
Works Vol  I (pp. 1-9). Oxford:  Pergamon  Press.  
85.Von  Neumann,  J.;  Morgenstem,  O.  (1944)  Theory  of  Games  and  Economic  Behaviour,  Princeton: 
Princeton  University  Press. 
86.Votsis,  I. & Schurz,  G. (2012). A  frame-theoretic  analysis  of  two  rival  conceptions  of  heat.  Studies  in 
History  and Philosophy  of  Science  Part A, 43(1), 105-114. 
87.Weisberg,  M.  (2013).  Simulation  and  Similarity:  Using  Models  to  Understand  the  World.  Oxford 
University  Press. 
88.Winther,  R. G. (2015). The  Structure  of Scientific  Theories.  Stanford  Encyclopedia  of Philosophy. 
89.Wittgenstein,  L. (1953). Philosophical  Investigations.  Blackwell. 
90.Zenker  F. (2014) From  Features  via  Frames  to Spaces:  Modeling  Scientific  Conceptual  Change 
Without  Incommensurability  or Aprioricity.  In:  Gamerschlag  T., Gerland  D., Osswald  R., Petersen  W. 
(eds) Frames  and Concept  Types.  Studies  in  Linguistics  and  Philosophy,  vol  94. Springer,  Cham 
 

 

20 

