Fiscal Redistribution in Brazil: 2003-20151 

 

Marcelo Neri2 

Rozane Siqueira3 

José Ricardo Nogueira3 

Manuel Osorio4 

 

Abstract:  This paper assesses causes and consequences of fiscal redistribution in Brazil. The framework 
proposed  allows  evaluating  in  an  integrated  manner  the  impacts  of  government  sponsored  actions  in 
inequality and mean income changes on social welfare, addressing both static and dynamic implications. 
To  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  this  is  the  first  microsimulation  attempt  to  gauge  actual  fiscal  policy 
redistribution changes over time in Brazil. Between 2003 and 2015, the Gini index based social welfare 
grew 4.86% per year when using the disposable income concept. Thus, higher than the respective growth 
rate associated with initial income (4.36%) and final income (4.47%), but not of gross income (4.91%).  
The results suggest that official cash transfers accelerated the growth of social welfare while direct and 
indirect taxes changes operated in the opposite direction. The model outcomes show that among various 
taxes and transfers programmes, each monetary unit spent on Bolsa Familia generated a 119.7% higher 
impact on poverty than the second best targeted cash transfer programme. 
Key-Words: 1. Fiscal Redistribution; 2. Income Inequality; 3. Taxes and Transfers 
 
Resumo:  Este  artigo  avalia  as  causas  e  consequências  da  redistribuição  fiscal  no  Brasil.  O  arcabouço 
proposto permite avaliar de uma maneira integrada os impactos sobre o bem-estar social através das ações 
governamentais sobre desigualdade e renda média, endereçando tanto implicações estáticas como também 
dinâmicas.  Acreditamos  que  este  é  o  primeiro  exercício  de  microssimulação  que  calibra  o  papel  das 
políticas  fiscais  nas  mudanças  observadas  a  posteriori  na  distribuição  de  renda  brasileira.  Entre  2003  e 
2015, a função de bem-estar social associada ao índice de Gini cresceu 4,86% por ano, segundo o conceito 
de renda disponível. Taxa de crescimento maior do que aquela associada à renda inicial (4,36%) e à renda 
final (4,47%), porém menor do que para renda final (4.91%).  Os resultados sugerem que as transferências 
oficiais de renda aceleraram o crescimento do bem-estar social, enquanto os impostos diretos e indiretos 
operaram na direção contrária. Entre os diferentes tipos de impostos e transferências de renda, cada unidade 
monetária  gasta  com  o  programa  Bolsa  Família  gera  um  impacto  119,7%  maior  na  pobreza  do  que  o 
segundo programa de transferência de renda melhor focalizado. 
Palavras-chave: 1. Redistribuição Fiscal; 2. Desigualdade de Renda; 3. Impostos e Transferências 
 
Código JEL: C63; H23; I32; I38 
Área 5 - Economia do Setor Público  

 

                                                             
1This paper is part of the Brazilian chapter of the “Inequality in the Giants” project supported by UNU-Wider. We thank the 
comments provided at the conference ‘Income redistribution and the role of tax-benefit systems in Latin America’ held in Quito 
in July 2018.  
2FGV Social and FGV EPGE.  
3Federal University of Pernambuco (UFPE), Department of Economics. 
4FGV Social. Acknowledges the financial support provided by RPCAP from FGV.  

 

0 

Fiscal Redistribution in Brazil: 2003-2015 

 

1. Introduction 
After decades of the Gini coefficient sticking around 0.60, income inequality in Brazil declined every year 
from 2001 to 2014, to a Gini of 0.52. However, most recent data indicate some reversion in this trend (Neri 
2016). The objective of this study is to shed some light on the role of fiscal policy in determining inequality 
trends in Brazil. To this purpose, we estimate the redistributive effects of the fiscal system in the period 
1995-2015 using Brazilian household surveys for 1995, 2003, 2009 and 2015, microsimulation techniques, 
besides public tax and spending accounts. 
The main contribution of this paper is to cover changes occurred in two decades of fiscal policy by using 
household data and fiscal rules. A recent study released by the Brazilian Ministry of Finance, Seae/MF 
(2017), analyses the redistributive effect of fiscal policy in Brazil using household data for 2015. Previous 
works that also assess the distributional incidence of the Brazilian tax and benefit system are Nogueira, 
Siqueira and Souza (2012), Silveira et al (2013), and Higgins and Pereira (2013). These papers focus on 
the fiscal redistribution in specific points in time. To the best of our knowledge, there is no previous study 
providing a systematic analysis of the actual impact of Brazilian fiscal policy over time. This allows us to 
improve the understanding of the nature of inequality changes found in practise. 
The analysis will be  based mainly on the  yearly household survey PNAD  combined with a  tax-benefit 
microsimulation model, since PNAD neither provides information on taxes paid by households nor on some 
relevant transfers. For the four selected years, the analysis includes cash transfers and direct taxation. For 
the years for which there is complementary data from consumer expenditure surveys available, indirect 
taxation will also be taken into account. 
The paper is organized in other seven sections as follows: Section 2 describes the methodology and data 
used to estimate the redistributive effects of the fiscal policies considered in this study. Section 3 sets an 
empirical portrait for 2015 Brazilian household income distribution and available fiscal ingredients in terms 
of quintiles. Section 4 plots and analyses the concentration curves of different income concepts, taxes and 
cash transfers. Section 5 develops a framework that links mean income, inequality measured by the Gini 
index  and  respective  social  welfare  measured  in  levels  and  changes.  It  also  derives  static  and  dynamic 
targeting efficiency indicators.  Section 6 applies the framework developed in the previous section to per 
capita disposable income for 2003, 2015 and changes observed between these two years. Section 7 applies 
a poverty analysis including robustness tests, and the assessment of social benefits per fiscal unit spent of 
the main Brazilian anti-poverty programmes. The main conclusions are in section 8, followed by appendix 
information. 
2. Methodology and Data 
To assess the net redistributive effect of the government’s fiscal policy, one needs to consider a number of 
policy instruments, both in the form of benefits received and taxes paid by households. In this study, the 
incidence of cash benefits and taxes on households is estimated by combining micro data from nationally 
representative household surveys and a tax-benefit microsimulation model. The microsimulation model is 
needed since the available data does not provide information on the payment of taxes by the households 
and on most social benefits received by them. 
2.1 Data Sources 
The basic data set used in the model was built using source household micro data from Pesquisa Nacional 
por Amostra de Domicílios (PNAD) for the years 1995, 2003, 2009, and 2015. PNAD is a rural-and-urban 
household survey carried out by IBGE, the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics, covering all 
Brazilian regions, except, for the years 1995 and 2003, the rural area of the Northern region. PNAD provides 
detailed  information  on  socio-demographic  characteristics,  labour  market  status  and  income  variables 
relevant for calculating household’s benefit entitlements and direct tax liabilities. 

 

1 

As PNAD does not contain household expenditure data,  and this information is needed to simulate the 
distributional effect of indirect taxes, the two nationally representative expenditure surveys carried out in 
the period were used, Pesquisa de Orçamentos Familiares (POF) for 2002/2003 and for 2008/2009, also 
produced by IBGE. Table A in Appendix II details the main characteristics of the PNAD and POF surveys. 
2.2 Constructing the Model Data Set 
Before simulating the taxes and cash benefits, the following adjustments are implemented to the original 
PNAD income data. First, individual incomes reported as ignored in PNAD are imputed a zero value. This 
procedure is adopted for practical reasons, as it must be repeated for the four PNADs used in this study.5  
Second, where public pensions and formal labour incomes are reported in PNAD with a value less than the 
official minimum wage, the value reported is adjusted to the minimum value guaranteed by law (the official 
minimum wage). 
Third, the ‘thirteenth  wage’ and  ‘holidays bonus’, which are payments from the employer to which all 
formal workers are entitled by law, are simulated and imputed to PNAD micro data, since these incomes 
are not captured by PNAD. The ‘thirteenth wage’ is an extra monthly wage warrant to formal employees, 
in an annually basis. The ‘holidays bonus’ is an extra payment received by formal employees when on 
official holidays, with value equal to 30% of their monthly wage.  
2.2 Simulation Strategy 
A tax-benefit microsimulation model is a computational programme that applies the legal rules of each tax 
and cash benefit to nationally representative micro data sets in order to calculate the amounts of taxes paid 
and transfers received by each individual and household. In this study, the aim is to simulate the Brazilian 
tax-benefit system as close as possible to the legal rules, given the available data. However, in the event of 
significant discrepancies between the simulated results and the official statistics (usually due to leakages or 
evasion), the simulations are adjusted to better adhere to the official data.6 This section briefly describes 
the simulation strategies. A more detailed description on the programmes and their simulation procedure is 
provided in Appendix II. 
Cash Transfers 
The cash benefits considered in this study are: public pensions; three benefits paid only to formal workers, 
namely,  unemployment  benefit,  family  wage,  and  wage  bonus;  and  two  non-contributory  means-tested 
benefits, the poor elderly /disability benefit, and the conditional cash transfer programme Bolsa Família 
(Family Grant). The Family Grant is simulated only for the years 2009 and 2015. In 2003, the conditional 
cash transfer programme in force was the Bolsa Escola (School Grant), which is then simulated for that 
year. In 1995 there was no conditional cash transfer to poor households. 
Among  these  social  benefits,  PNAD’s  original  data  set  provides  direct  information  only  for  public 
pensions.7 The other five transfers programmes have to be simulated. As mentioned above, this is done by 
applying  the  legal  rules  of  the  programmes  to  each  individual  or  household  in  PNAD.    But,  in  a  few 
instances, a substitute for the legal rule is used to ensure a better adherence of the simulated results to 
administrative data. For example, in simulating the poor elderly/disability benefit, the income used by the 
model to test eligibility is the income of the elderly individual only, instead of total household income (as 
in the legal rule). This procedure is a quite good proxy to what happens in practice. 

                                                             
5 In 2015, for example, the total number of ignored income cases for the weighted sample was 1,945,847, which amounts to 
0.8% of total cases for which the income variable is applicable. Among those with ignored income, 50.7% refer to individuals 
reported as head of the household.  
6 The  microsimulation  model  used  in  this  study  is  BRAHMS  (Brazilian  Household  Microsimulation  System),  which  was 
developed by the Public Economics Research Group, Department of Economics, Universidade Federal de Pernambuco. For more 
details on its construction, see Immervoll et. al. (2009) and the appendices of the present paper. 
 
7 Concerning public pensions, only the ‘annual bonus’, which is an extra monthly pension received annually by pensioners, is 
simulated and imputed to the micro data base used by the model. 
2 

 

Direct taxes 
The  direct  taxes  simulated  by  the  model  are  employees’  social  security  contributions  and  the  personal 
income tax. Social security contribution is simulated only  for the individual who declared in PNAD to 
contribute to social security (both the general regime for private sector employees and the specific regimes 
for public sector employees, at the federal, state or municipal level). 
The personal income tax is simulated taking into consideration that individuals may choose to file either a 
simplified form or a complete form. In the first case, a standard deduction is applied. In the complete form, 
individuals have to report all deductible payments. The model assumes that individuals choose the option 
that maximizes their disposable income. It is also assumed that spouses and dependent persons earning up 
to the income exemption limit are pulled together with the head of the family, their incomes being taxed 
jointly. 
The tax allowances built into model are: dependent person expenses tax allowance, medical expenses tax 
allowance,  educational  expenses  tax  allowance,  and  social  security  contributions  tax  allowance.  Since 
PNAD does not include information on household expenditure, the health spending-related allowance built 
into the personal income tax is imputed using the average monetary values, for 17 income groups, calculated 
by  the  Brazilian  tax  authority  for  2015  (Secretaria  da  Receita  Federal,  2017).  On  the  other  hand,  the 
education expense-related allowance is simulated on the assumption that each taxpayer benefits from the 
maximum allowable amount. 
Indirect taxes 
The amount of indirect taxes paid by each household is calculated using POF’s expenditure data. In the 
estimation, we make use of effective tax rates obtained using the input-output method proposed by Scutella 
(2002), which takes account taxation of inputs, tax evasion and subsidies.  
The average tax burden for each of the twenty income groups is then estimated from the POF based data 
and imputed to the PNAD based micro data set. For PNAD 2003, the estimates are those derived from POF 
2002/2003. For PNAD 2009 and PNAD 2015, the estimates imputed are from POF 2008/2009. Thus, it is 
assumed that the level and distribution of the tax burden among households did not change between 2009 
and 2015. 
The tax burden is calculated with respect to household income. However, in the cases where income is 
lower  than  expenditure,  the  burden  is  estimated  as  a  proportion  of  expenditure.  This  is  to  avoid 
overestimating the tax burden faced by households in the lower end of the income distribution, since the 
incomes of these households are substantially underreported in POF.8  
 
2.3 Stages of Redistribution 
This study decomposes the process through which the fiscal policy affects the distribution of income among 
households  in  four  stages.  The  initial  income  derives  from  private  sources,  which  is  observed  before 
transfers from the government and the deduction of taxes. Cash transfers are added to initial income to 
obtain gross income. Personal income tax and employees’ social security contributions are deducted from 
gross  income  to  give  disposable  income.  Indirect  taxes  are  then  deducted  from  disposable  income  to 
compute final income. Figure 1 below schematically presents this process. 

 

 

                                                             
8 Indeed, for some households in the poorest fifth of the population, the tax burden would be above a 100% if estimated with 
respected to the income reported in POF. It should be highlighted that, in average, 52% of the expenditure of households in the 
poorest quintile is allocated to food and rent, which are the expenditure categories with the lowest effective tax rates (respectively, 
17% and 6%). 

 

3 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CASH 

(income from 

DISPOSABLE 

income tax and 

GROSS 
INCOME 

INITIAL 
INCOME 

DIRECT 
TAXES  
(personal 

TRANSFERS 
(public pensions 

Figure 1: Stages in the Redistribution of Income 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Results for 2015 Portrait – per capita Household Income Concept 
Table 1 shows the average monthly values of per capita household incomes, cash transfers and taxes by 
income group (quintile) of the population. The distribution of income across households in Brazil is uneven 
both before and after cash transfers and taxes. Although the net effect of taxes and transfers is equalizing, 
it is quite modest in the face of the amounts involved. In 2015, the richest fifth (those in the top income 
quintile group) had an average per capita initial (before cash transfers and taxes) household income per 
month of R$2535.4, compared with R$164.4 for the poorest fifth – a ratio of 15 to 1. After cash transfers 
and direct and indirect taxes, the per capita final income of the richest fifth of the population was still 13 
times that of the poorest fifth (R$2367.5 and R$182.9 per month respectively). 
 Table 1 - Incomes, Cash Transfers and Taxes - Average Monthly Values by Quintile of Per Capita 
Disposable Income, 2015 (R$) 

INDIRECT 
TAXES  

FINAL 
INCOME 

INCOME 

 
 
 

 

Source: PNAD 

 

4 

  

 
In 2015, cash transfers accounted, in average, for 25.5% of disposable per capita income, the bulk of this 
(21.7% of gross income) corresponding to public pension benefits (Table 2). In relative terms, the income 
group most benefited by cash transfers was the middle quintile, where transfers represented, in average, 
almost 1/3 of disposable income. This is because 42% of all pensioners are located in that quintile (most of 
them receiving the basic pension benefit). For the bottom quintile, the average share of cash transfers in 
disposable income was 29.5%, with the family grant (CCT) accounting for about half of this (13.6% of 
gross income). For households in the top quintile, cash transfers are equivalent, in average, to 23.8% of 
their disposable income, with public pensions accounting virtually for the whole of this. 
Direct taxes, in average, represented 9.8% of disposable household income, in 2015. For households in the 
top quintile, direct taxes corresponded, in average, to 14.3% of their disposable income. The majority of 
this (9.5% of disposable income) was paid in personal income tax. The average tax burden for households 
in the bottom quintile, by contrast, was 2.3% of their disposable income, comprising only social security 
contributions. In fact, personal income tax represents a significant proportion of income only for households 
in the top quintile. By their turn, indirect taxes represented, in average, 16.5% of disposable household 
income in 2015. Households in the bottom quintile paid the equivalent of 19.1% of their disposable income 
in indirect taxes, while the top quintile paid, in average, 15.5% of their disposable income. 
The effect of taxes and transfers on income inequality can be assessed by calculating the Gini coefficient 
for each measure of income.9 In 2015, Brazil’s Gini of initial income was estimated at 0.591. The difference 
between this index and the Gini of gross income was 8.9 percentage points, which represents the equalizing 
effect of cash transfers. In the same year, direct taxes led to a further reduction in the Gini coefficient of 
2.35 percentage points. By contrast, when indirect taxes were deducted from disposable income, they acted 
to increase inequality by 0.7 percentage point. Thus, in 2015, the overall net effect of cash transfers and 
direct and indirect taxes was to reduce the Gini coefficient by 10.5 percentage points (or 17.8%).  
 
Table 2 - Cash Transfers and Taxes as Proportion of Disposable Household Income by Quintile of 
Per capita Disposable Household income, 2015 (%) 

 

Source: PNAD 
 
A useful exercise in the investigation of the impact of a tax-benefit system on inequality is to perform a 
comparative analysis of  the country in question relatively to the international experience. The  Figure 2 
below illustrates such an analysis by comparing Brazil’s Gini coefficient for initial and disposable income 
with the respective Gini coefficient for a sample of other countries and with the OECD average. 

                                                             
9 The Gini coefficient is a standard measure of inequality, which varies from 0 to 1. The closer to 1 the coefficient the higher 
the level of inequality. 

 

5 

Figure 2 – Gini Coefficient of Initial and Disposable Income – Brazil and Other Countries - 2015 
 

Source: OECD 
4. Concentration Curves 
The Concentration Curves are a representation that bears similarities with the Lorenz Curve. While the 
latter refers to the distribution of a single variable throughout the population, the former are constructed 
from the distribution of two variables in the population. In fact, the Lorenz Curve can be understood as a 
particular case of the Concentration Curve where the variable used in the ordering of the population and 
the output variable coincides. Similarly, the correspondence between Gini Index and the Lorenz Curve also 
appears  in  the  relationship  between  the  Concentration  Curve  and  the  Concentration  Index.  One  key 
difference is that the Gini varies between 0 and 1 while the Concentration Index varies between -1 and 1. 
If a certain attribute is better targeted to the poor, for example conditional cash transfers, then the indicator 
is negative. 
The set of results based on the microsimulation data generated by the project covers the years of 1995, 
2003, 2009 and 2015. First, we assess the 2015 inequality portrait alone, through concentration curves for 
the different income concepts and related fiscal ingredients ordered by disposable incomes10. We start with 
the former in the Figure 3 below: 

                                                             
10  
In the income ordering we used the disposable income concept to fit the comparisons with other countries in the project. 
The same type of tabulations were also performed for gross incomes and final incomes, everything for three different periods 
(2003-2015, 2003-2009 and 2009-2015). We will focus on the whole period of 12 years. 

 

6 

Figure 3 – Concentration Curves of Income Concepts ordered by Disposable Income (2015) 

Source: PNAD 
 
In order to see more clearly we plot the differences of the concentration curves with respect to disposable 
income Lorenz Curve. As we move from initial market income to gross income incorporating the role of 
transfers,  inequality  falls.  Same  direction  as  we  incorporate  the  role  of  taxes  and  social  security 
contributions. However,  when we move from disposable income to final income incorporating the role 
played by indirect taxes, the opposite happens.  
 
Figure 4 – Concentration Curves Differences in relation to Disposable Income – (2015) 

Source: PNAD 
 

 

7 

We present in the next Figure 5 the concentration curves for different official cash transfers. Graphically, 
the most well targeted indicators for 2015 are Family Grant (PBF) and Poor Elderly/Disability benefits, 
followed by subsidies to formal employment and unemployment benefits. Public pensions’ curves show 
higher inequality and given its size are close to total cash transfers11. Both curves are closer to disposable 
income curve than targeted cash transfers are.  
 
Figure 5 – Concentration Curves of Cash Transfers ordered by Disposable Income (2015) 

Source: PNAD 
Finally, we analyse the curves for different taxes and contributions. Since it has a negative sign in the 
budget constraint, the closer to the perfect equality line the more regressive is the expense. The most 
unequal are indirect taxes followed by social security contributions and personal income taxes. 
 
 

 

                                                             

11 Although, these curves are expressed in per capita terms some of them present mass concentration in similar points 

as expressed in individual incomes curves. 
 

 

8 

Figure 6 – Concentration Curves of Income Concepts ordered by Disposable Income (2015) 
 

Source: PNAD 
 
Figure 7 below presents the evolution of the concentration curve of the Family Grant programme (PBF) 
in 2003, 2009 and 2015. As the programme expanded it became somewhat less targeted12 but as we have 
seen previously it still more inclusive than other social programmes in the final 2015 year. 
Figure 7 – Concentration Curves for the Family Grant Programme ordered by Disposable Income 
Source: PNAD 

                                                             
12There is not inequality dominance between years since the concentration curves cross.  

9 

 

 
The concentration curve allows to evaluate how progressive are different fiscal ingredients in isolation. 
However, we will build an integrated framework of the static and dynamic impacts of these components. 
The following section presents a framework to measure the social impacts of taxes and transfers that will 
be applied to Brazilian data. One advantage of this approach is to address these dimensions both in levels 
and in growth rates.  
 
5. How Progressive are Incomes, Transfers and Taxes? A Framework 
5.1 Portrait  
We depart from Tony Atkinson seminal contribution of decomposing social welfare into mean and 
inequality components applied by Amartya Sen to the case of the Gini the most popular inequality index.  

W m

=

1(

=

G

)

	(cid:2)(cid:3)              (1) 

Where G is the Gini index, which is a relative measure of inequality. E=(1-G) is a measure of equity in 
income.  
Taking logarithm of both sides of (1) gives 

(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8) = (cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:8) + (cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:8) 

 

(2) 

 
Which on taking the first difference gives  

(cid:11)∗ = (cid:11) + (cid:13)                                                  (3) 

where (cid:11)∗ = ∆(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8) is the growth rate of social welfare W, (cid:11) = ∆(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:8) is the growth rate of average 
income of the society and (cid:13) = ∆(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:8) is the social welfare growth rate, which will be positive (negative) 
if growth is pro-poor (anti-poor).  
 
Taxes and Transfers 
Suppose households draw their income from k sources with total per capita income x such that  

(cid:2) = ∑ (cid:2)(cid:16)
 

(cid:17)
(cid:16)(cid:18)(cid:19)
 

 

(4) 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
This equation can be used to estimate the contributions of each income source (component) to average 
income of the population. 100 × (cid:2)(cid:16)/(cid:2)  is the percent contribution of the ith income source or taxes to the 
total average income. 
Similarly, we can calculate the mean social welfare of the ith income source from (4) as: 

 

 

 

(cid:7) = ∑ (cid:7)(cid:16)

(cid:17)
(cid:16)(cid:18)(cid:19)

   

 

 

 

(5) 

This equation provides the contribution of each income component to total social welfare. 100 × (cid:7)(cid:16)/(cid:7) 
is the percent contribution of the ith income source to total social welfare.  
 
The mean social welfare of the ith income component in (5) can also be written as 
 

where Ci is the concentration index of the ith income component.  

(cid:7)(cid:16) = (cid:2)(cid:16)(cid:6)1 − (cid:25)(cid:16)(cid:8) = (cid:2)(cid:16)(cid:3)(cid:16) 

 

(6) 

 

10 

-
The concentration index Ci informs how the ith income component is distributed across income ranges. 
The concentration index lies between -1 and +1. Suppose the ith income component is the income 
received by beneficiaries of the Bolsa Família Programme (BFP), then for instance if the concentration 
index is 0, then all individuals in the society are equal beneficiaries, if Ci =-1, then the poorest person 
receives all the benefits of the programme and if Ci =+1, then the richest person receives all benefits. The 
concentration index is a measure of inequity of an income component. Therefore, a measure of equity of 
the ith income component is defined as (cid:3)(cid:16) = (cid:6)1 − (cid:25)(cid:16)(cid:8), so the larger the value of Ei the more equitable will 
be the ith income component. Ei equals 1 if all individuals enjoy the same ith component income. This 
could be the benchmark: as such, the ith component is equitably (inequitably) distributed if Ei is greater 
(less) than 1. 
Substituting (4) and (6) into (5) gives 
 

(cid:3) = ∑ (cid:26)(cid:27)

(cid:17)
(cid:16)(cid:18)(cid:19)

(cid:26) (cid:3)(cid:16)

                          (7) 

 
which shows that equity in total income is a weighted average of equity in each income component where 
weights are proportional to the shares of income components in the mean income. 
Taking logarithms and first differences of both sides of (6) gives  

∆(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:16)(cid:8) = ∆(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:16)(cid:8) + ∆(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:16)(cid:8) 

 

(8) 

Denoting 

which gives  

∗ = ∆(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:16)(cid:8) 
(cid:11)(cid:16)
(cid:11)(cid:16) = ∆(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:16)(cid:8) 
(cid:13)(cid:16) = ∆(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:3)(cid:16)(cid:8) 

∗ = (cid:11)(cid:16) + (cid:13)(cid:16)   
(cid:11)(cid:16)

(9) 

which shows that growth rate of social welfare for the ith component is a sum of the two growth rates: (1) 
growth rate of mean of the ith income component and (2) growth of equity index of the income 
component. We define the growth of the ith income component as pro-poor (anti-poor) if the equity index 
of the ith income component increases (decreases). Thus, the ith component is pro-poor (anti-poor) if there 
is a gain (loss) in growth rate of welfare of the ith income component. 
5.2 Fiscal Determinants of Social Welfare Growth 
This section presents a methodology to calculate the contribution of various income sources to the total 
pro-poor growth rate. For instance, it will inform how much different social welfare programmes 
contribute to the total pro-poor growth of income13.   
Suppose (cid:2)(cid:28) is the mean of per capita income in year t and (cid:2)(cid:16)(cid:28) is the mean of the ith income component in 
year t. Then based on (4) we have  

 

 
It can be shown that  

 

(cid:2)(cid:28) = ∑ (cid:2)(cid:16)(cid:28)

(cid:17)
(cid:16)(cid:18)(cid:19)

  (10) 

 

 

∆(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:28)(cid:8)~ (cid:19)
(cid:30)

∑ (cid:6)(cid:17)
(cid:16)(cid:18)(cid:19)

(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:6)(cid:31) !(cid:8)
(cid:26)(cid:6)(cid:31) !(cid:8)

+ (cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:31)
(cid:26)(cid:31)

(cid:8)∆(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:16)(cid:28)(cid:8) 

(11) 

                                                             
13 Kakwani et al. (2010) develop a dynamic analysis framework using another social welfare function. 

11 

 

which shows that the growth rate of per capita mean income is the weighted average of the growth rates 
of individual income components - the weights being proportional to the average of income shares in each 
period. This equation informs the magnitude of the contribution of each income component to the growth 
rate of per capita mean (average standard of living).  
Suppose Wt is the social welfare in year t and Wit is the social welfare of the ith income component, then 
based on (10) we have  

(cid:7)(cid:28) = ∑ (cid:7)(cid:16)(cid:28)

(cid:17)
(cid:16)(cid:18)(cid:19)

(12) 

Then it can be shown that  
 

∆(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:28)(cid:8)~ (cid:19)
(cid:30)

∑ (cid:6)(cid:17)
(cid:16)(cid:18)(cid:19)

"(cid:27)(cid:6)(cid:31) !(cid:8)
"(cid:6)(cid:31) !(cid:8)

+ "(cid:27)(cid:31)
"(cid:31)

(cid:8)∆(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:16)(cid:28)(cid:8)  (13) 

which shows which shows that the growth rate of social welfare is the weighted average of the growth 
rates of social welfare of individual income components – the weights being proportional to the average 
of social welfare shares in each period. This equation informs the magnitude of contribution of each 
income component to the growth rate of social welfare.  
The pro-poor growth rate from (3) is given by  

(cid:13)(cid:28) = ∆(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:28)(cid:8) − ∆(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:28)(cid:8) 

 

(14) 

Which in view of (16) and (18) gives the contribution of each income component to the pro-poor growth 
rate of per capita total income.  
 
5.3 Targeting Indicator 
The small contribution of Bolsa Família to inequality reduction does not imply that the programme is not 
well targeted to the lower income families. Policy making will benefit from determining the targeting 
efficiency of various income sources, which income sources contribute more to social welfare and by how 
much. An income source can be said well targeted to low income families if it contributes more to social 
welfare relative to its contribution to income. This motivates us to propose a new index: 

#(cid:16) = "(cid:27)(cid:26)
"(cid:26)(cid:27)

= 	 $(cid:27)
$

 

 

(15) 

Where Ei = (1-Ci ) is a measure of equity of the ith income component and E = (1-G) is a measure of 
equity of total income.  
If #(cid:16) is greater than 1, this implies that controlling for the income share, the ith income source contributes 
more to social welfare. This index is like a targeting index informing how well a particular income source 
is  targeted  to  the  lower  income  families.  The  targeting  indicator  for  total  income  is  1,  which  is  the 
benchmark.  An  index  value  greater  than  1  implies  that  the  particular  income  source  benefits  the  lower 
income families more than the average. The larger is the value of index, the greater the targeting efficiency.  
This same measure of equation (15) can also be analysed in a dynamic fashion comparing changes in social 
welfare and changes in the fiscal cost associated with it. 
 
 

 

 

12 

6. Measuring the Social Welfare Impacts of Taxes and Transfers over time (2003 to 2015) 
 
6.1 Social Welfare Static Decompositions 
As the methodology developed in section 5, the Table 3 below presents  mean income, inequality14 and 
social welfare levels associated with different income concepts and respective fiscal ingredients between 
them ordered by disposable income. This methodology allows us to map the contribution of different taxes 
and transfers into disposable income based mean, inequality and social welfare. 
 
Table 3 – Mean Income, Inequality and Social Welfare Levels – Disposable Income (2003 to 2015) 

 

Source: PNAD 

 

 
The following Table 4 organizes selected pieces of information on Table 3 in terms of the Social Welfare 
Benefit/Fiscal Cost ratio, which corresponds, by construction, to the complement of the Concentration 
Ratio, a term that provides how much each real of public transfers affected on average the level of social 
welfare. Implicitly, the analysis evaluate the overall impact of all the resources spent in each monetary 
transfer programme, leaving aside impacts on the margin and other desired long run impacts of each of 
these income policies on education, employment or income stability, for example. The results show that 
Family Grant is the best public policy in terms of social welfare generated by each fiscal cost. 
 
 

 

                                                             
14 A product between the concentration index of the income concept times its share in the mean disposable income. 

13 

 

Table 4 – Static Targeting Indicator of Cash Transfers: Social Welfare /Fiscal Cost Levels in 2015 
(ordered by Disposable Income) 

 

Source: PNAD 
 
6.2 Social Welfare Dynamic Decompositions 
Looking at the statistics revealed in previous Tables 3 and 4, in 2015 the social welfare for disposable 
income was below the mean due to the discount factor of 47.64% captured directly by the impact of the 
Gini coefficient. In 2003, this difference was even higher: 55.59% due to higher inequality. One can grasp 
the same impact using the Table 5 below that looks at growth rates. The annual rate of growth of social 
welfare (4.86%) was higher than of mean income (3.48%) due to the equalization effect (1.37%).  
 
Table 5 – Income, Equality and Social Welfare –Annual Growth Rates – Disposable Income  

Source: PNAD 

 

The Table 5 above shows an impressive rise in the mean income of anti-poverty policies, as the family 
grant conditional cash transfer programme (18.27%). What is the net effect of an increasing role of this 
better targeted– but increasingly less so, as we have seen in its concentration curves evolution in time - 
social programme in overall social welfare? 
 

 

14 

 

Although, the previous Table is useful, if one is interested into capturing the role of each ingredient, one 
should also take into account the weights of these ingredients. The main advantage of the decomposition 
methodology explored here is to allow moving directly from the levels of each component to its 
contribution to social welfare rates of change. Incorporating not only its growth but also its weight in each 
income concept, we deconstruct the whole effect into smaller components associated with private 
incomes, public transfers and taxes. Each of these components of the social welfare impact can be further 
decomposed into its respective mean and inequality drivers.  
 
Table 6 – Income, Equality and Social Welfare Growth - Contribution by Component – Disposable 
Income (2003 to 2015) 

 

Source: PNAD 

 
The period between 2003 and 2015 verified a decrease in inequality and an increase in the mean income 
and the social welfare of the population for all the different income concepts and their components. The 
data ordered by disposable income disclosed that inequality explained 28.4% while mean income explained 
the remainder 71.6% of a yearly social welfare growth of 4.86% in that period. 
 
Finally, we focused on the following Table 7 that presents the list of cash transfers policies to measure each 
relative  contribution  to  social  welfare  growth  in  comparison  with  their  relative  contribution  to  income 
increase during the same period. The results show that Family Grant, the main income policy designed for 
poverty alleviation in Brazil, is indeed the one better targeted to the poor, since its contribution to the rise 
of social welfare is 2.7 times the contribution to the rise of mean income. 
 
 

 

 

15 

Table 7 - Dynamic Targeting Indicator of Cash Transfers: Social Welfare/Fiscal Cost Growth – 
Relative Contribution Based on Disposable Income from 2003 to 2015 

 

Source: PNAD 

 

7. Poverty Impacts 
 
Brazil adopted an official extreme poverty line around U$S 1.25 using older Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) 
which is perhaps too low for Brazilian level of  income. We perform different  exercises using different 
international  poverty  lines,  recently  raised  from  the  use  of  the  new  Purchasing  Power  Parity  (PPP) 
estimates. 
 
Table 8 – Proportion of Poor (P0) and Poverty Gap (P1) for Disposable Income Concept and Different 
Poverty Lines - 2003 and 2015 –  

 

 Source: PNAD 

 

The first poverty related contribution of this work is to analyse the impacts of inequality on poverty changes 
using our microsimulation framework of fiscal instances. The fall of poverty in percentage points increases 
with the level of the poverty line used, which is not surprising because poverty levels are also necessarily 
higher. However, the proportional variation is monotonically higher for higher poverty aversion coefficients 
(i.e. P1 over P0) and for lower poverty lines ranging from -95.91% to -65.92% in the case of the poverty 
gap (P1).  Using as a benchmark the intermediary U$S 3.2 dollars a day line the fall in the 2003 to 2015 
period amounted to -18.8 percentage points or a reduction of 69 %. This means that poverty fell nearly 
twice more than expected in the UN first MDG in less than half of the period. 
 
We apply standard Ravallion-Datt decomposition into growth and inequality components to assess their 
relative roles using initially the concept of disposable income. The most important dimension analysed here 
is the relative share of poverty fall explained by inequality that falls monotonically in the case of P1as the 

 

16 

poverty line rises ranging from 65.44% to 40% of total poverty fall. In the case of our intermediary U$S 
3.2 dollars a day line 43 % of total P1 fall was explained by the inequality component. Almost a middle 
path driven by both distributive and growth dimensions. 
 
Table 9 – Poverty Variation between 2003 and 2015 for Disposable Income Concept 

 

Source: PNAD 
 
Anti-Poverty Programmes Efficiency 
We also developed an index to assess pro-poor policies as the ratio between the social gains obtained with 
a specific programme impact on poverty over its fiscal cost ordered by a particular income concept in a 
specific moment in time. We define the social gains as the negative variation of poverty in percentage 
points due to the programme impacts, while its fiscal cost as the programme’s participation in the mean 
income. Thus, the equation (16) would be written as follows: 

%&(cid:16) = − ∆’((cid:31)
(cid:26))(cid:27)(cid:31)

 = − *’((cid:31)+	’,
(cid:26))(cid:27)(cid:31)

((cid:31)-

                                                                                                  (16) 

Where ∆.(cid:26)(cid:28) is the difference between the actual poverty level (.) in comparison with a hypothetic 
scenario of poverty (./) where a specific programme p were not implemented and (cid:2)&(cid:16)(cid:28) is the mean 
income of this programme. Either (cid:2)&,	., ./ are defined in relation to a specific income component, for 
example, disposable income. Consequently, the mean income of the programme p can also be interpreted 
as the difference in the mean income of the specific income concept due to the existence of this 
programme. Therefore, %(cid:16) can be interpreted as the ratio between the relative participation of the 
programme p in poverty and its relative participation in the mean income. The negative symbol in 
equation (16) also implies that the larger is the value of the index, the greater the targeting efficiency.  
The next exercise is to simulate statically for 2015 the benefit in terms of poverty fall associated with each 
government cost of different anti-poverty. We compare Family Grant (BFP) and Poor Elderly/Disability 
benefits (BPC) impacts by comparing the scenarios of poverty with and without these programmes.  
 
 

 

 

17 

Table 10 – Poverty Scenarios If Main Poverty Alleviation Policies did not exist – 2015 

 

Source: PNAD 

 

The key statistic is the net benefit in terms of poverty fall per monetary unit spend as in Table 11 below. 
Except for the highest poverty line, the social benefit is higher for Family Grant for all poverty lines and 
poverty measures considered. In our benchmark (P1 with the intermediary line), this ratio is 119.73% higher 
for the Family Grant Programme (Campelo and Neri 2013; Peci and Neri 2017). 
 
Table 11 – Poverty Comparison: Reality versus Scenarios If Main Poverty Alleviation Policies did 
not exist – 2015 

 

Source: PNAD 
 
8. Conclusion  
 
This  paper  assesses  fiscal  redistribution  in  Brazil  between  2003  and  2015.  The  framework  proposed 
evaluate  in  an  integrated  manner  causes  and  consequences  of  inequality  in  terms  of  social  welfare  and 
poverty both in levels and changes over time.  
The paper develops, describes and applies an empirical methodology, including the source of micro data 
used, Brazilian institutional features, data adjustments made, simulation procedures adopted and the results 
thereupon generated. This paper had the initial objective of providing a report on the procedures adopted 
in the ongoing work concerning the fiscal redistributive impact of the Brazilian tax-benefit system. This 
work necessarily involves methodological decisions made in order to be able to model the system as close 

 

18 

as possible to its actual operation. It is thus important to have it clear in mind what are the steps followed 
to generate the information used in the analysis.  
The general approach here delineated is applied to each of the four years to be covered in this study (1995, 
2003, 2009, and 2015) to allow a compatible comparative analysis for the period considered. We compare 
different income concepts but focus here on derived per capita disposable income changes between 2003 
and 2015. Other contribution of this paper is to simulate a concept that is not readily available in Brazilian 
household  surveys.  Around  28.2%  of  per  capita  disposable  Gini  index  based  social  welfare  measure 
changes is due to pure inequality fall while the remainder is due to mean growth. Our results also suggest 
that official cash transfers accelerated the growth of social welfare while direct and indirect taxes changes 
played the opposite role. The analysis of the role played by specific fiscal instruments among various taxes 
and cash transfers programmes shows that Family Grant programme was the better targeted action in the 
2003 to 2015 period using both social welfare and poverty criteria. 
 
References 
 
Alvaredo, F. 2011. A note on the relationship between top income shares and the Gini coefficient. Economic 
Letters, Vol. 110, 274-277. 
Atkinson, A.B. 2007. Top Incomes Over the Twentieth Century: A Contrast Between European and English 
Speaking Countries. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Barreix, A., J. C. Benítez and M.Pecho. 2017. Revisiting personal income tax in Latin America: Evolution 
and impact. OECD Development Centre, WorkingPaper No. 338. 
Campello, T. Neri, M. C.; (Org.) . Programa Bolsa Família: uma década de inclusão e cidadania. 1. ed. 
Brasília: IPEA, 2013. v. 1. 494p . 
Higgins,  S.  and  C.  Pereira.  2013.  The  effects  of  Brazil’s  high  taxation  and  social  spending  on  the 
distribution of household spending. CEQ Working Paper No. 7, Tulane University.  
Immervoll,  H.,  H.  Levy,  J.  R.  B.  Nogueira,  C.  O’Donoghue,  and  R.  B.  Siqueira.  2009.  The  impact  of 
Brazil’s tax-benefit system on inequality and poverty, in S. Klasen and Nowak-Lehmann (eds.), Poverty, 
Inequality, and Policy in Latin America. Cambridge: MIT Press. 
Kakwani, N. ;  Neri, M.  C.; Son, H. .  Linkages  Between Pro-Poor Growth, Social Programs and  Labor 
Market: The Recent Brazilian Experience. World Development, v. 38, p. 881-894, 2010. 
Medeiros, M., P. H. Souza and F. A. Castro. 2015. O topo da distribuição de renda no Brasil: primeiras 
estimativas  com  dados  tributários  e  comparação  com  pesquisas  domiciliares,  2006-2012.  Revista  de 
Ciências Sociais, Vol. 58, No. 1. 
Peci, A; Neri, M. C.. Revista Brasileira de Administração Pública - Special Issue on Public Policies on 
Fighting Poverty. 00. ed. Rio de Janeiro/RJ: , 2017. v. 01. 00p . 
Seae/MF. Efeito Redistributivo da Política Fiscal no Brasil. 2017. Brasília, Secretaria de Acompanhamento 
Econômico, Ministério da Fazenda. 
Secretaria  da  Receita  Federal.  2017.  Grandes  Número  IRPF  –  Ano  Calendário  2015,  Exercício  2016. 
Brasília. 
Silveira,  F.  G.,  F.  Rezende,  J.  R.  Afonso  and  J.  Ferreira.  2013.  Fiscal  equity:  distributional  impacts  of 
taxation  and  social  spending  in  Brazil.  Working  Paper  115,  International  Policy  Centre  for  Inclusive 
Growth, Brasília. 
 

 

 

19 

