JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES BETWEEN OLD AND NEW INSTITUTIONALISM 

 

Carolina Miranda Cavalcante (UFRJ) 
Emmanoel de Oliveira Boff (UFF) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
Abstract 
 
This article considers the conceptions about convention and institutions in the thought of John
Maynard Keynes, Thorstein Veblen and Douglass North. To accomplish its goals, we seek for a
 
 
definition of institution in two institutionalist authors, namely, Veblen from the so called Old
 
 
Institutional Economics and North from the New Institutional Economics. It is argued that while
Veblen suggests an instinct-institutions approach North sustains a rationality-institutions approach,
 
 
institutions and the social world. Then we present
which implies distinct conceptions about
 
 
highlighting his ontological
Keynes's
stance,
and
 
 
 
 
 
epistemological
implications of this ontology. Finally, we bring into light the significance of
 
 
 
institutions in Keynes's thought through his notion of convention and the decision-making process.
 
 
Thus, we will be able to undertake a comparison between Keynes’s conception of convention and
 
 
the concept of institutions as habits of thought in Veblen and the idea of institutions as rules of the
 
 
game in North. 
 
Keywords:​ convention, institutions, rationality, Keynesianism, Institutionalism 
 

 
commitments
 

philosophical
 
 

general

JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES ENTRE O VELHO E O NOVO INSTITUCIONALISMO 

 
 
 

 
   

 
Resumo 
 
Este artigo trata das concepções sobre convenções e instituições no pensamento de John Maynard
Keynes, Thorstein Veblen e Douglass North. Para alcançar esse objetivo, buscamos uma definição
 
de instituição em dois autores institucionalistas, são eles: Veblen, da denominada Velha Economia
 
Institucional, e North, da Nova Economia Institucional. Argumenta-se que enquanto Veblen
 
 
trabalha com uma abordagem de instintos-instituições, North sustenta uma abordagem de
racionalidade-instituições, o que implica distintas concepções sobre as instituições e o mundo
 
social. Em seguida, apresentamos a posição filosófica de Keynes, destacando seus compromissos
 
ontológicos e as implicações epistemológicas dessa ontologia. Finalmente, trazemos para o debate o
   
significado das instituições no pensamento de Keynes através da noção de convenção e do processo
 
de tomada de decisão. Deste modo, estaremos aptos a realizar uma análise comparada da concepção
 
de convenção em Keynes e das ideias de instituições enquanto hábitos mentais em Veblen e de
 
instituições enquanto regras do jogo em North. 
 
Palavras-chave:​ convenção, instituições, racionalidade, Keynesianismo, Institucionalismo 
 
JEL: ​B15, B22, B25 
 
Introduction 
 

This article aims to present an analysis of Keynes’s overall worldview and theories so as to
 
 
check the extent to which they can be made compatible with the work of Veblen and North and with
the institutionalist tradition more generally. Although there have been studies regarding the relation
 
of complementarity or compatibility between Keynes and the institutional tradition (Mouhammed
 
1999; Peterson 1977; Wray 2007; Thabet 2008; Rutherford and DesRoches 2008), no investigation
 
has specifically focussed on the ontological and epistemological compatibility between Keynes and
 
 
institutionalists. We believe this investigation is relevant because it can shed some light both on the
entities these traditions are committed to and on the extent to which we can have justified beliefs
 

   
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

   
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
   

 
 
 
 

about such entities. The investigation of an ontological and epistemological compatibility of the
 
economics of Keynes and the institutional tradition can be of use for forging a theory of keynesian
 
 
institutionalism, something that has been hinted at by Keller (1983) and sketched by Whalen after
 
the 2008 crisis (2012). Their contributions, however, do not make a clear distinction between old
and new institutionalism and do not investigate the possibility of building a well-founded research
 
program with compatible ontologies and epistemologies. Our paper seeks to contribute in the
 
direction of finding a common ground for the economics of Keynes and that of the different strands
 
 
of institutionalists.  
 

First of all, we should stress that the old institutionalist life span covers a period from the
 
late nineteenth century roughly to the first half of the twentieth century. During this period, the
 
 
world experienced two great wars, the great depression of the 1930s, the emergence of American
hegemonic power, a succession of monetary standards and the emergence of liberalism and
 
 
globalization. We should observe as well that Thorstein Veblen (1847-1929) and Douglass North
 
 
(1920-2015) are not only part of distinct institutionalist traditions, but they also lived and wrote in
 
the Economic Science. Veblen was immersed in a society in great
 
different moments of
 
 
that
transformation and, at
time, American academy was just a replicator of economic ideas
 
 
 
developed in Europe. Thus, Veblen was not only a critique of marginalist thought in its early
 
 
elaborations, he also developed an original American economic thought. In some sense, J. M.
 
Keynes (1883-1946) lived, across the ocean, social and economic transformations even greater than
 
 
reject completely and radically
those observed by Veblen. Unlike Veblen, Keynes didn’t
 
marginalism, for he studied with Alfred Marshall, but he was critical of the state of the art of
 
 
Economic Science of his time. North`s work first appeared in the middle of the twentieth century
and reflects an Economic Science that had already defined its method and scope in the 1930’s and
 
1940’s. In this sense, North was critical of some reductionist assumptions of the established
 
 
neoclassical theory of his time. 
 

Although it is not our objective to make an analysis of the historical and intellectual roots of
 
Veblen, Keynes and North, we can notice, along the article, how these economists were influenced
 
 
by the state of the art of Economic Science and the social environment in which they lived. Veblen
 
was concerned with the construction of an evolutionary science, and his theory reflects his
 
objectives in the instinct-institutions approach, defining institutions as habits of thought. North`s
 
theoretical problems involved the understanding of the influence of institutions in economic
 
performance. His rationality-institutions approach converts institutions in rules of the game that
 
defines the boundaries of rational action. Keynes’s attention was directed to social and economic
 
crisis and the answers that previous economists had given to the malfunction of markets. The
 
concept of convention shows the authors’ disposition to understand the process of decision-making
 
beyond rationality. In not rejecting rationality completely and not committing to a theory of
 
instincts, Keynes`s approach ends up embracing some aspects of the theories of Veblen and North
 
in which concerns about the nature of human action and its relation to the economic environment
 
become salient. 

Our argument will be presented in three sections. In the first section the debate within
 
Institutional Economics will be briefly outlined. Special attention will be given to Veblen and North
 
 
theoretical proposals. It is argued that while Veblen suggests an instinct-institutions approach North
 
sustains a rationality-institutions approach. The second section will delineate Keynes’s general
philosophical stance and his ontological commitments regarding the social world, with a focus on
 
the economy, and epistemological implications of his ontology. We will then be ready to go to
 
 
section III of the article, which will furnish a framework highlighting the importance of institutions
in Keynes’s thought through his notion of convention and the decision-making process that is
 
 
compatible with the contributions of Veblen and North. Thus, in the following lines we define and
 
compare the theoretical proposals of Veblen, North and Keynes about conventions, institutions and
 
 
the individual-institutions connection. 
 

   
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

1. Institutional Economics 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

   

 
 
 

 
 
 

   
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

Institutional Economics is usually divided into two major branches, the Old Institutional
 
 
Economics (OIE) and the New Institutional Economics (NIE). Institutional Economics is a school
of thought – also designated as OIE or American Institutionalism – originally associated to the ideas
 
 
of Thorstein Veblen, a late nineteenth century American economist. The term “institutional
 
 
economics” was coined by Walton Hamilton in the article ​An Institutional Approach to Economic
 
Theory​, published in 1919 in the ​American Economic Review​. Hamilton (1919) asserts that the
 
 
appropriate subject of Economics are institutions. Some years before, in 1895, Emile Durkheim, in
 
his ​The Rules of Sociological Method​, sustained that Sociology was the science of institutions.
 
Veblen`s seminal work, ​Why is Economics not an Evolutionary Science?​, published in 1898, is a
 
 
straightforward critique to some ideas rooted in Smithian and Marxian tradition, but mainly in the
 
way of doing science put forward by the marginalist revolution. In the marginalist set of theoretical
 
 
problems and instruments, issues like institutions, history as causal events evolving over time, and
socially woven agents, were excluded from the analysis. These themes will be taken up by the NIE
 
 
a few decades later without giving up the marginalist toolbox. In this sense, the OIE was closer to a
 
   
sociological approach than to marginalism. 

 
According to Backhouse (1985), the rejection of marginalism is a determinant characteristic
of the OIE. Rutherford (1996) stresses a subdivision within the OIE: the Veblen and Ayres branch
 
(that deals with the institutional and technological way of doing things), and Commons’ branch
 
(engaged in a legal institutionalism concerned with law, property rights and organizations). We
 
might also recognize Mitchell`s contribution to OIE in the field of business cycles and economic
 
statistics, being one of the founders of the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER).
 
 
 
Although old institutionalists may not follow the same line of research, Rutherford (1996)
highlights some theoretical aspects that keeps them together like descriptivism, anti-formalism,
 
 
holism, behaviorism, interventionism, and collectivism. 

Within the NIE there are also other lines of research. Rutherford (1996) lists some subjects
 
 
considered by the new institutionalists, like property rights, common law, public choice processes,
transaction costs and game theory. Despite the diverse lines of
organizations, agency theory,
 
research, Rutherford (1996) points some defining aspects of the NIE: formalism, individualism,
 
 
reductionism, anti-interventionism and the adoption of a rationality principle. Coase and
 
 
Williamson were concerned with the theory of the firm and transaction costs, while North mixed
many of these issues in an institutionalist theory of economic performance. The NIE also embraces
 
a game theoretic approach, headed by Shubik and Schotter; and a so-called Austrian wing,
 
 
comprising authors like Hayek, Nelson and Winter, and Langlois. The distinctive aspect that departs
 
the OIE from the NIE is the adherence of the latter to marginalist approach (including the austrians)
 
and/or neoclassical theory. 

 
But what is an institution? This age-old question has no unique answer within Institutional
Economics. The literature conveys a multiplicity of concepts of institutions, some examples are
 
Neale (1987), Searle (2005), Hodgson (2006) and Lawson (2015). Neale (1987) analyzes how
 
seminal authors analyze institutions. Searle (2005) suggests a philosophical approach, asking what
 
is before building a definition of institution.It can be said that Searle`s
an institutional fact
 
 
 
framework is compatible with the nature of socioeconomic facts in Keynes. Hodgson (2006) looks
into concepts like habits, rules and norms to enlighten some conceptual imprecision in the literature.
 
 
Particularly, he establishes a dialogue with Douglass North in order to clarify concepts like
 
institutions and organizations. Lawson (2015), for his turn, applies the critical realist social
ontology to discuss the place of institutions in social structures, something that can be linked not
 
only to Searle’s view of institutions but also to Keynes’s (at least in our interpretation). In common,
 
Searle and Lawson understand institutions as some kind of social rule -- Searle specifically
 
compacts this rule in the formula “X counts as Y in the context C”. This means that a given object
 

 
 
   

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

 

 

 

 

 

(or brute fact) X is given a status-function Y in the socioeconomic context C. In the remainder of
 
this section we focus on Veblen and North conceptions about institutions. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1
 

1.1 Veblen 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
Veblen was a fierce critic of teleology, taxonomy and hedonism, suggesting a theory that
 
 
 
pictured the social world as inhabited by human beings driven by instincts that develop habits of
thought, or institutions, through their social actions. Those habits of thought, or ways of thinking
 
 
and doing things, evolve through time alongside with instincts in a complex interaction. In ​The
 
Theory of the Leisure Class​, originally published in 1899, Veblen analyses the evolution of cultural
 
traits in North-American society through an instinct-institution approach. Veblen uses a descriptive
 
method of analysis; he does not employ formalistic mathematical models to prove his theoretical
 
conclusions. He defines institutions as habits of thought - ways of doing and thinking -, as follows: 

 
   
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Any community may be viewed as an industrial or economic mechanism, the structure of which is made up
of what is called its economic institutions. These institutions are habitual methods of carrying on the
 
life process of the community in contact with the material environment in which it lives. (Veblen,
 
 
1899, p.89)  

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Moreover, Veblen sustains that the drive to human action are instincts and not rationality.
 
 
Thus, human action will strive for survival, making efforts to understand the surrounding reality,
building useful tools to handle the environment and protecting the group. Accoding to Barnett
 
(2017a), Veblenian instincts are of two types: simple instincts (like hunger, anger, gregariousness,
 
nutrition, sex etc.) and complex instincts (like the workmanship, parental bent, idle curiosity, play
 
and beauty instincts). Whereas the former are  

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

(...) closer to tropismatic sensibilities or involuntary behavioral urges (...) complex instincts are much more
 
extensive complications of organic stimuli that include various basic instincts, which have been
 
grouped together to serve a common higher-order or emergent function. (Barnett, 2017) 
 
 

In other words, instincts are drives to human action, but it is the coevolution of simple and
 
 
complex instincts in time that will produce institutions. These institutions, for their turn, will open
 
up specific possibilities by which individuals can feed themselves, protect the group, construct
 
theories about reality and build instruments to cope with the environment. As we will compare
 
 
Veblen and Keynes in the third section, the evolutionary character of institutions does not allow us
 
to make predictions about the form these institutions will take in the future. In other words, it seems
reasonable to suppose that the process of selection, mutation and replication of institutions is
 
 
 
strongly uncertain -- just like Keynes’s world is. Institutions are habits of thought; they are a
 
 
processual and temporal way of being and doing things in society. Habits of thought involve
potential behaviors and actions, conceptions about reality and behavior and action proper. Veblen
 
does not dichotomize action and behavior – actual or potential – from human conceptions about
 
 
reality, for they are intertwined in the concept of institution as habits of thought. As we will see in
 
the next section, this is compatible with an interpretation of Keynes’s view of social reality that
equally intertwines social action and collective conceptions about this reality. In this sense, humans
 
do not make rational calculations observing institutional constraints (like North thinks); their
 
behavior is rather guided and deeply embedded in habits of thought. 
 
Habits of thought with respect to the expression of life in any given direction unavoidably affect the habitual
 
 
view of what is good and right in life in other directions also. In the organic complex of habits of
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 ​Searle usually exemplifies this with money: a colored little piece of paper X counts as money (Y) in a given country 
and time (the context C), for example.  

4 

 

thought which make up the substance of an individual’s conscious life the economic interest does not
 
lie isolated and distinct from all other interests. (Veblen, 1899, p.54)  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
In Veblen`s conception, there is no dichotomy between an economic life and a social and
moral life, all human evaluations depend on what is socially considered as the adequate behavior –
 
 
the prevalent habits of thought. Thus, individual evaluation of beauty does not rely on inner
 
 
conceptions about what is intrinsically beautiful, but in what is the society sense of beauty. Social
evaluations are intrinsically connected to human practices and are usually related to social
 
 
suitability, acceptance and belonging. Sometimes it can be more powerful in guiding human
 
behavior than instincts. 
 
So far as a person, in forming a judgment of taste, takes thought and reflects that the object of beauty under
 
 
consideration is wasteful and reputable, and therefore may legitimately be accounted beautiful; so far
 
the judgment is not a ​bona fide judgment of taste and does not come up for consideration in this
 
connection. The connection which is here insisted on between the reputability and the apprehended
 
 
 
beauty of objects lies through the effect which the fact of reputability has upon the valuer’s habits of
 
thought. (Veblen, 1899, p.69)  

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
   

What Veblen is pointing out
 

is that human conceptions about reality are molded by
 
 
prevalent habits of thought. Those habits of thought are, most of the time, unconsciously embraced
 
 
 
guides for human behavior. Thus, there is limited space for a purely rational, calculative, behavior
in society. Reality and conceptions about reality are not separable in human beings. Reality is not
 
something out there and/or a mental construct, it is at the same time actual human practices and
 
human conceptions (past, present and future) about the social and the natural environment. We can
 
 
summarize Veblen’s approach to Economic Science as properly transdisciplinar -- that is, a holistic
type of knowledge whose foundation cannot be reduced to that of any separate social science. It is
 
 
“concerned with the unity of intellectual frameworks beyond the disciplinary perspectives”, as
 
Sembert (1990) explains. This Veblenian instinct-institutions approach will be replaced for a
 
rationality-institutions approach in NIE, as we shall see in North`s conceptual framework. 
 
1.2 Douglass North 
 

North adds some theoretical issues left behind by neoclassical theory, namely time and
 
institutions. The inclusion of time and institutions within a neoclassical approach was made possible
 
 
by the modification of the rationality principle. According to North (1993), in a world of incomplete
information and limited computational capacity – bounded rationality –, individuals develop norms
 
and rules to structure exchange. Furthermore, as society becomes broader, with more impersonal
 
and sporadic transactions, problems of trust and compliance emerges. In small groups with repeated
 
transactions cooperation emerges as a rational response of the individual that intends to keep doing
 
business in that market. In large groups, with non-repeated transactions, cooperation is related to
 
coercive formal rules. In the first case, it is rational not to cheat in order to stay in the market. In the
 
second case, it is rational to obey formal rules in order not to suffer punishments. In both cases,
 
following rules is a matter of rational behavior, though it is a limited rationality. 

North provides another explanation to rule following behavior
 

inner moral
 
conceptions about what is right and what is wrong, which he called ideology. The author exerts an
 
 
interdisciplinary approach to enrich his institutional theory, moving in areas of knowledge such as
Economic History, Sociology, Cognitive Science, Political Science, and others. However, this
 
interdisciplinarity consists in applying the theory of choice to other fields of social thought -- and
 
transdisciplinar as that of Veblen. As Sembert (1990) puts it,
that
 
 
interdisciplinarity presupposes an “integration of the contributions of several disciplines to a
 
problem or issue [which] is required” -- but the theory of rational choice remains as his foundation.
 

 
is why his work is not

in our
 
 
 

 
   
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

   

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

   

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

Since his works of the 1970s, North recognizes the need to go beyond neoclassical boundaries, but
 
keeping the principle of rational choice behind his theories. North (1990, p.5) states that defining
 
“institutions as the constraints that human beings impose on themselves makes the definition
 
 
complementary to the choice theoretic approach of neoclassical economic theory”. Some years
later, the author reaffirms his position: "Economics is a theory of choice - so far so good. But the
 
discipline neglects to explore the context within which choice occurs. We choose among
 
alternatives that are themselves constructions of the human mind" (North, 2005, p.11). 
 

 
If in his earlier works North was concerned with the place of institutions in economic
performance. In his writings of the 2000s he is focused on understanding the human mind and
 
 
social orders. North (1990, p.3) defined institutions as “the humanly devised constraints that shape
 
 
human interaction” -- hence the author’s movement towards Cognitive Science. The understanding
of the human mind is important to clarify the process of decision making that shapes institutions. In
 
 
his earlier work,
the author emphasized the role of institutions as an incentive structure of
 
 
 
economies, highlighting that the persistence of inefficient institutions was associated with features
 
 
of the human environment, and the way humans interpreted that environment. But North (2005,
 
p.viii) affirms that what he “did not consider in earlier studies was the character of societal change
 
and the way humans understand and act upon that understanding of societal change.”. In North
 
 
(2005), the focus are beliefs and how they interact with social reality. 

rules and beliefs to complement
 

According to North (2005), the key to human evolutionary change is the intentionality of the
 
players – individuals and organizations. But intentionality stems from individual perceptions,
 
 
molded in beliefs and sometimes also in preferences. Beliefs are theories individuals have about the
 
 
 
consequences of their actions, they “are both a positive model of the way the system works and a
 
normative model of how it should work” (North, 2005, p.2). Those beliefs come from individual
 
 
experience and past generations’ experience. According to North (2005), experiences from past
generations comprises the cumulative learning of a society embodied in language, human memory
 
and symbol storage system (beliefs, myths, ways of doing things), shaping the culture of a society. 
Unlike Veblen, North suggests that there is a gap between beliefs and reality. From an
 
ontological point of view, North seems to be committed to a cartesian view of reality, where beliefs
 
 
inside individuals may or may not correspond to the reality outside. This non-coincidence between
reality and beliefs is the origin of uncertainty. Therefore, North (2005) states that institutions are the
 
 
structures humans impose on themselves to order their environment and reduce uncertainty.
 
limited
Individuals develop formal and informal
 
computational capacity. Where rational behavior is not able to work properly, rules and beliefs
 
 
takes place to guide human action and choice. It means that choice is not always guided by a
 
 
calculative rationality, once individuals may decide based on their own beliefs, on shared culture
 
and traditions and/or on laws and constitutions – the scaffolds humans impose on themselves to
 
order their environment. 
 

In synthesis, in North’s conception, institutions are: (i) constraints to human action; (ii)
 
 
 
structure of incentives to players (individuals and organizations); (iii) rules of the game (formal and
informal rules). Organizations are groups of individuals gathered together with a common purpose.
 
 
Organizations acts as players, but they are not intentional like individuals; the organizational
 
 
process of decision making involves internal rules, procedures and hierarchies. Individuals are
rationally limited players that also have beliefs, they develop ideologies and are capable of learning.
 
Institutions are outside the human mind and are part of the social environment. Mental models
 
 
they are also part of the social
(beliefs,
 
environment. Nonetheless, there is a gap between reality itself and human beliefs, intentions and
 
 
human-made rules (institutions). In this sense, a failure to implement governmental policies are due
 
to this gap between what the world really is and the institutional framework humans develop. If an
 
individual fails in his action, it is due to an incompatibility between his or her beliefs and reality.
 
Thus, the gap between the outcomes and intentions explains why we fail in economic and social
 
policies. 

 
 
ideologies, knowledge) are inside human mind,
 

 
their
 
 

 
   
 

 
   
 

   
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

1.3 Summary 

 
Let us briefly summarize what we found regarding the ontological and epistemological

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

   

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

commitments of Veblen and North.  
   
 

Veblen is not committed to a dualistic ontology - his “habits of thought” are not reducible to
 
mental representations of reality, but are also closely interrelated to processual and habitual ways of
 
 
 
doing things. These habits of thought also evolve in time in an evolutionary fashion, producing
unpredictable results. As a result, his epistemology is transdisciplinar: he creates an altogether new
 
theory out of contributions from pragmatist philosophy, darwinian biology and sociology.  

North seems to be committed to an ontology that separates human subjective beliefs from
 
their enactment
 
in the objective world outside. Because of this separation (which creates
 
uncertainty),
 
institutions are created to constrain, structure and provide rules for rational,
 
 
maximizing action. Because the building of institutions takes into account the environment in which
 
rational actions take place, North’s endeavor must be interdisciplinary. In other words, he must
 
coherently integrate findings of other social sciences into the economic theory of choice.   
 
2. Keynes`s ontological and epistemological commitments: from uncertainty to ​the world as
 
 
an “organic unity” 
 
2.1 Roots of Keynes’s thought and his modification of Marshall’s approach 
 

 
We said in the Introduction that the theories of our authors were shaped by the time and
 
place where they lived. This is especially true for Keynes, whose thinking is related to the
unforeseen social and economic consequences generated by two World Wars and the Great
 
Depression of 1929. So, it is no news that Keynes hoped, with his ​General Theory ​(1936), to
 
 
elaborate a new way of investigating and tackling economic problems. This new way of doing
 
 
economics was fundamentally embedded, as Skidelski (2005) recounts, on a philosophy indebted to
 
 
G. E. Moore and the type of economics developed by Alfred Marshall. This means that Keynes’s
view of economics was developed both within a non-utilitarian and realist ethical framework which
 
 
aimed to reach for the Good -- here understood as states of affairs in the world that could cause in
us good “states of consciousness”, such as  the development of friendships and personal relations
 
(“the pleasures of human intercourse”), the enjoyment of beautiful objects and the pursuit of
 
knowledge. Economics, within this perspective, could be seen as the science which supplements
 
ethics in that it helps understand how the necessary means for a better, more secure life are created
 
 
and distributed.  
 

 
Until the outbreak of the first world war, Keynes saw no theoretical or practical reason to
 
depart very far from Marhsallian economics prevailing in Cambridge at that time. However, the war
-- and the long crisis that culminated in the crash of 1929 and led to the second world war -- drew
 
Keynes’s attention to the instability and uncertainty that pervaded the economic environment,
 
making him aware that the search for the Good in modern european society was in peril. Of course,
 
instability and uncertainty were nothing new, but, up to that point in time, they were seen as
 
manageable within the theoretical framework which was initiated by the first marginalists and
 
developed by Marshall’s Cambridge tradition of economics. In the english tradition of the old
 
 
welfare economists -- Marshall, Edgeworth, Pigou and Sidgwick (Backhouse 1985), pure economic
 
theory was complemented by a practical (or applied) economics that allowed economists to devise
and justify social and economic policies to damper the hardest effects of crisis (like the Great
 
Depression of the 1870 and 1880 that accompanied the changes of the second industrial revolution).
 
In regards to international economics, the price-specie flow mechanism was seen as self-correcting
 
and had survived all crisis from the 1870 onwards. That was not the case any longer in 1914.  

   
 
 

 
   

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
   

So, for Keynes it could not be assumed anymore that the Good could be attained if economic
 
policies based purely on the theoretical framework inherited from the marshallian tradition were
 
 
   
adopted. It is true that the classic smithian functions for the State -- internal and external security, a
 
system of justice, some public works and basic education -- had been complemented by the “new
liberalism” of british social reformers of the end of the 19th century (Backhouse and Nishizawa
 
2009). Working within the liberal position raised by Mandeville and developed by the Scottish
 
Enlightenment -- we cannot know all the consequences of our intended actions, so as a consequence
 
the State is not powerful enough to completely guide an extended society in the direction of any
 
given “common good” -- old welfare economists developed rationales for interventions in market
 
economies that went beyond Smith (in the case of externalities, public education and policies of
 
 
redistribution).  
 

How far could  these interventions go, though? The same problem raised by Adam Ferguson
 
in the 18th century --  of not knowing the consequences of our actions (that is, the problem of
 
 
ignorance) had been occupying Keynes’s mind since he defended his thesis on the foundations of
probability and decision theory in 1908. To what extent can we say that a given action leads to the
 
Good, if we do not know all of its consequences? As is well known, the turmoil that had swept
 
Europe from 1914 on cast doubts on the supposed self-regulating power of competitive markets in
 
 
creating an efficient economic order. Could the non centralized decisions made by economic agents
in a free market lead to a suboptimal result as a consequence? This is a question that belongs to a
 
 
subset of issues raised by Keynes’s studies on probability since the beginning of the 20th century.
 
Keynes’s point in his ​Treatise on Probability (TP 1921) was to “emphasize the existence of a
 
 
logical relation between two sets of propositions ​in cases where it is not possible to argue
 
 
demonstratively from one to the other” (1921, p. 8;  Keynes’s italics).  
 
 
The impact of the war on Keynes was such that he came to consider Marshall’s object of
 
study of economics in the ​Preliminary Survey of his ​Principles (1890) -- ​ ”the study of mankind in
 
 
 
the ordinary business of life; it examines that part of individual and social action which is most
 
 
closely connected with the attainment and with the use of the material requisites of wellbeing” --
 
 
under a different perspective. There was no doubt that after 1914 the “ordinary business of life”
could not be considered the same way as in Victorian times. The implication for the economic
 
theory later developed by Keynes was to stress parts of “individual and social action” not directly
 
linked to the “use of the material requisites of wellbeing” -- or rather, to focus not only on the
 
individual but on the ​social part of action which was being modified by the circumstances. For
 
Marshall, in his ​Principles​, it was exactly the proximity to the “material requisites of wellbeing”
 
that allowed us to think of economics as a legitimate and separate science. Because “it deals chiefly
 
 
with that part of man's action which is most under the control of measurable motives; and which
 
therefore lends itself better than any other to systematic reasoning and analysis”, economic science
 
studies human conduct with a relative precision not allowed for other branches of the study of men.
 
Marshall’s hope, of course, was that “with careful precautions money affords a fairly good measure
 
 
of the moving force of a great part of the motives by which men's lives are fashioned”.  

This sentence makes sense as long as the moving force behind people’s motives is
 
 
reasonably constant. As Hirschman (1977) and shows, the power of ​interest (or “self-love” as it
 
 
appears in Smith’s ​Wealth of Nations​) came to be the central moving force of the motives behind
 
 
human conduct. A society governed by interest gives us two advantages over other sorts of social
arrangements (like those based on faith or the search for honour): constancy and previsibility. The
 
idea of interest plays with a new way of arranging human “moving forces”, so as to turn the
 
 
motivation associated with the old sin of avarice into something like an acceptable passion.
According to Hirschman’s reconstruction, ​if avarice could be controlled by a calculative reason (so
 
 
as to make the activity of accumulation of wealth reasonably predictable and constant), it could
 
counter destructive human passions such as the desire to exert power onto others and the desire to
 
 
 
overindulge in passions of the body.  

   
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
   

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

   

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

   
 

It is not in any kind of social environment that self-interest can be taken as a “moving force
 
 
of a great part of the motives” behind people’s “individual and social action”. A situation of long
 
war and deep economic crisis turns the scales to other sorts of moving forces which may not be so
 
 
amenable to “​the outcome of a weighted average of quantitative benefits multiplied by quantitative
 
probabilities” as Keynes would describe it in the ​General Theory​, commenting exactly on the
 
influence of “animal spirits” on our decision-making.  When the social environment is such that we
 
are not sure either of the quantitative benefits or the quantitative probabilities of our actions,
 
 
decision-making has to be based on other factors other than rational calculation. A situation of
depression or of war may turn fear of violent death or fear of the future one of the main moving
 
 
forces propelling people’s individual action. In such a situation, a sort of a hobbesian state of nature
may be prevalent -- leading to a social organization not based on the self-interest of agents but on
 
the order brought about by an autocratic leader. Skidelski (2010) points that Keynes wrote to an
 
 
american correspondent in 1940 that “[f]or the first time in more than two centuries Hobbes has
 
more to tell us than Locke”. Our ability to calculate our benefits and costs for the future is always
 
 
constrained by discretionary actions of the Leviathan.  

 
   
 

 
   

 
   

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.2 Ontological and Epistemological Consequences of Keynes 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
There are two consequences of the changes caused by the events triggered by the first World
 
War on Keynes’s ontological commitments: First, when fundamental uncertainty is present,
 
 
 
economic action -- or at least the socioeconomic world -- could not be studied having as a basis
only the calculus of self-interest. Usually, post-keynesian economists (e.g, Davidson 1984) interpret
 
keynesian uncertainty as defying the hypotheses of ergodicity, uniformity of nature (homogeneity)
 
 
and stationarity of economic process adopted by traditional economics. Keynes, however, never
conducted his own research using the terms mentioned above nor did he explicitly develop concepts
 
similar to them. As a result, it is difficult to know whether Keynes would accept those concepts as
 
 
accurately describing his view of the social ​world​. What we do know is that Keyes followed the
 
liberal tradition doctrines about us being ignorant of the long term results of our intended actions.
 
This fact, however, tells us more about epistemological than ontological uncertainty.  
 
 

It is nonetheless possible to point out that his debate with Jan Tinbergen in the late 1930’s
 
 
about the ambitions of econometrics regarding multiple correlation was specific to the ​ontology of
 
 
the social world (that is, how the social world actually ​is​): for example, Keynes remarks that, unless
 
all causal factors of the phenomena investigated were taken into account, forecasting would be
 
biased (either because some causal factors are not measurable or are interdependent). Besides that,
 
 
relations between explanatory variables could be non-linear and, what is most relevant, we cannot
guarantee that “the environment in all relevant respects (...) should be uniform and homogeneous
 
over a period of time” (Keynes 1939). There seems to be no doubt that what Keynes had in mind
 
here is uncertainty in the social world (the “environment”) -- and we do not even have to postulate a
 
   
non-ergodic process to reach this conclusion (O’Donnell 2016).   

As a result, the ambitions of econometrics are severely limited because socioeconomic
 
phenomena have a multitude of varying causes (some even unidentifiable and unmeasurable). The
 
 
same point is again stressed in two letters to Roy Harrod. In the first letter, of july, 4th, 1938,
Keynes stresses that “(...) unlike the typical natural science, ​the material to which it (that is,
 
economics) is applied is​, in too many respects, not homogeneous through time” (our emphasis).
 
This has, in turn, an ​epistemological consequence, for “[w]e cannot be sure that such conditions will
 
persist in the future, even if we find them in the past”, and this obstructs our ability to predict
 
socioeconomic facts far into the future. In a second letter, dated July, 10th 1938, Keynes defends,
 
 
contra​ Tinbergen, that  
 
In chemistry and physics and other natural sciences the object of experiment is to fill in the actual values of
 
 
 
the various quantities and factors appearing in an equation or a formula; and the work when done is
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

9 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

   

   

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

   
 

once and for all. In economics that is not the case, and to convert a model into a quantitative formula
 
is to destroy its usefulness as an instrument of thought.​ (Keynes, 1938) 
 Second, the fundamental uncertainty of the world is also related to a characteristic of human
 
 
driving motives to action. An uncertain world means that the study of the economy could not
 
 
 
prescind of an investigation (or at least of the acknowledgement) of human motivations other than
 
those amenable to calculation. If the future is fundamentally uncertain, then a rational decision
 
 
could not be based on only one distribution of probability function of the events in the world. This
fact brings us back to Keynes’s central problem in his TP: how do we relate different sets of
 
propositions when there is no unique way to argue demonstratively from one set to the other? This
 
 
difficulty can also be applied to economics, when it comes down to the problem of guaranteeing
that 1. rational individuals acting on the basis of their self-interest in a competitive market (first
 
proposition) lead to 2. an aggregate result that is Pareto-efficient (second proposition). It was one
 
 
objective of Keynes’s GT to show that there is no unique way to argue demonstratively from
situations 1. to 2. above when fundamental uncertainty pervades the environment, making money
 
non-neutral and creating a preference for liquidity.  

The situation is such that rationality alone cannot give us the solution to the problem of
 
decision: the state of affairs in the actual world cannot be described by dint of “systematic reasoning
 
and analysis” alone, as Marshall would have it. It is as if our reasoning and analysis would have to
 
be made on the basis of multiple descriptions of the state of affairs in the world (our first set of
 
 
propositions) and its future tendencies (our second set of propositions). How can we be sure that the
first set lead to the second set of propositions? Only by making economics a science “(...) of
 
thinking in terms of models joined to the art of choosing models which are relevant (...)”, to quote
 
Keynes again in his letter to Roy Harrod in july of 1938. In such a situation, Keynes would have to
 
modify the part of the Marshallian doctrine that allowed for “measurable motives” and “systematic
 
 
in Marshall’s
analysis” in the separate science of economics. The idea (already present
 
 
hegelian-inspired evolutionary social philosophy) that the world was a totality and that the economy
 
 
 
 
was but a part of it would have to be modified to make economics more open to psychological,
 
social and institutional factors. Perhaps Keynes’s quip that Marshall’s system provided a “rounded
 
globe of knowledge” could only be made clear by Keynes’s theory itself.   

 
From an ontological point of view, we have seen that Keynes’s uncertainty permeates both
the world and the process of decision making of individuals, and this fact casts doubts on the status
 
of economics as a separate science. It is true that 1. if the motive of self-interest leads our actions
 
together with 2. a price mechanism, so that we could reasonably calculate costs and benefits of our
 
 
decisions, then 3. we could deploy an economic theory based on rational and maximizing behavior
 
as a good proxy to understanding the conditions of equilibrium in competitive markets. In terms of
the “classical” doctrine, the maximizing decisions of a multitude of rational agents leads to an
 
aggregate that is also efficient -- there is no opposition between the ​individual welfare associated
 
with ​individual actions and the ​aggregate welfare of society. But as is well known, Keynes’s
 
objective with the GT is to demonstrate that the argument which links the two propositions above
 
does not have enough weight, due to the fact that the economy is akin to what we nowadays call a
   
 
complex system. As a result, there is strong uncertainty both in the world and in people’s decisions.
Borrowing from G.E. Moore, the “principle of organic unity” appears in Keynes’s writings to show
 
that
the whole is different from the sum of its parts -- and thinking otherwise amounts to
 
 
committing the “fallacy of composition” (Cardoso and Lima 2008).   
 

There are controversies, however, as to what Keynes actually understood from the “principle
 
 
of organic unity”. At the end of the 1980’s, John Davis and B. W. Bateman refused the usual
 
 
the “organic unity” Keynes espoused meant a refutation of atomistic
interpretation that
 
 
methodological individualism in favor of a sort of organic interdependence. The “Davis-Bateman
 
argument” (Rotheim 1990) limits the principle of organic unities to the state of the human mind.
 
This argument is important for our article because the importance institutions will have in Keynes’s
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
   

   
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

   

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

theory will depend on the status of Keynes’s supposed atomism: for an atomistic Keynes,
 
institutions would have a secondary role to play, being akin to constraints to people’s rational
 
choices, as in North’s theory. They could, for example, diminish the uncertainty in the environment
 
so that individuals could rationally make calculations regarding the payoffs of their actions.  
 
 

This is not what happens, though, if we take into consideration that Davis (1997) presents
 
the idea of convention as central to the mature Keynes and that conventions depended not any
 
 
longer on an atomistic process of decision-making but on an “structure of interdependent
 
judgements”. Besides that, Rotheim (1989) himself makes an interesting observation regarding the
 
essay on Edgeworth by Keynes. In it, Keynes mentions “organic unity” as related to “psychics”,
 
 
that is, to the measurement of utility or ethical value, belief or probability etc. As Davis and
 
 
Bateman interpret the essay on Edgeworth, Keynes and that mathematical methods should not be
applied to this area because when we deal with the reality of the ​human mind -- of “psychics”, as
 
 
Edgeworth would say -- we stumble into problems “of organic unity, of discreteness, of
 
 
discontinuity -- the whole is not the sum of its parts, comparisons of quantity fail us, small changes
 
produce large effects, the assumption of a uniform and homogeneous continuum are not satisfied”
(Keynes 1933).  Rotheim, however, implies that Keynes is not talking ​only about the human mind,
 
 
but also “to the application of quasi-mathematical methods to the social sciences”. In other words,
Keynes is talking about the application of mathematical methods to sciences that investigate ​social
 
reality -- and this is another reason for us to believe that the structure of social reality is itself
 
 
uncertain and cannot be subsumed under a fixed set of laws, as we saw in the previous section.  

 
 
 
   

 
As in the case of uncertainty, the question of organic unity of the world can also be applied
both to the individual mind and to the world. As regards the individual mind, recent papers by
 
 
Vincent Barnett (2015, 2017b) point to the fact that the process of decision making in Keynes
 
 
cannot be made purely on a rational basis, but must take into consideration intuition (as a form of an
 
 
innate unconscious reasoning), instincts (as forms of innate or learnt tendencies or impulses that
resulted from processes of natural selection) and also animal spirits (as part of the “emotional
 
cognitive system” inherited evolutionarily by humans, which helps us choose different courses of
 
 
action in an uncertain world). As a consequence, the human mind in Keynes’s view has an organic
unity with a “cognitive architecture” (composed of rationality, intuition, instincts and animal spirits)
 
which has developed in historical time due to processes of darwinian evolution. One should remark
 
that it is the ​interaction of the four components above which could explain human action, so that the
 
 
 
mind should be seen as a unity. And, for the purpose of this paper, it is of utmost importance to
 
interact depending on the ​degree of uncertainty in the
know how these components will
 
 
environment and in our ability to make choices based on cost-benefit analysis. As long as there is a
 
   
process of social and cognitive “scaffolding” which diminishes uncertainty in the environment, we
 
can choose courses of action which are more or less amenable to calculation. As we will show in
 
 
the next section, this social and cognitive scaffolding and its formation in an evolutionary process
 
can be linked to what Keynes terms ​“useful mental habits”. 
2.3 Summary 

 
Let us again try to summarize what we found concerning Keynes’s ontological and
 
 
epistemological commitments. First of all, ontologically Keynes introduces the issue of
fundamental uncertainty and the principle of organic unity in the world and in his theory. This
 
means that the boundaries Marshall (and his father J. N. Keynes) had drawn for economic science
 
as separate and based on self-interested behavior had to change. 

Secondly, from an epistemological point of view, does that make Keynes’s economics a
 
 
transdisciplinary or interdisciplinary project for a science of economics? One can tentatively say
 
that Keynes’s endeavor stands midway between North and Veblen: it is perhaps ontologically closer
 
do Veblen but epistemologically closer to North. Let us see how in the next section.  
 

 
   
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

11 

3.  Keynes and the institutionalism of Veblen and North: What compatibility?  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

   

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

Based on the building blocks of Keynes’s ontology (fundamental uncertainty and the
 
 
principle of organic unity), is there a reasonable link one can make between Keynes and the
 
institutionalism of Veblen and North? The natural point of entrance for our discussion are
 
conventions​, which Keynes associates with a method of making decisions in uncertain financial
 
markets. For Dequech (2011), a keynesian convention is a kind of institution fundamental to
 
 
 
understanding Keynes’s analysis of decision not only in financial but in bonds, investment and
goods markets (Ferreira 2014). As Keynes states in chapter 12 of the GT, “the essence of this
 
convention (...) lies in assuming that the existing state of affairs will continue indefinitely, except in
 
 
so far as we have specific reasons to expect a change”. How are these conventions formed and what
is their relation to uncertainty and the principle of organic unity of the world? How can they be
 
interpreted in Keynes’s writings?  
 

 
Davis (1997) associates conventions with Keynes’s mature ideas, suggesting they are a
 
 
“structure of interdependent judgments” of people’s decisions in different markets. Despite Keynes
not having developed the concept, it is possible to link it to what philosophers like Searle call
 
collective intentionality, “​the power of minds to be jointly directed at objects, matters of fact, states
 
 
 
of affairs, goals, or values” (Schweikard 2013). Collective intentionality is the basis of social
reality, according to Searle: it is when we collectively attribute a status function to a natural object
 
X (like a colored piece of paper) that it becomes money (Y) in a certain social setting (the context
 
 
C). This makes social objects partially dependent on the power of human minds to be directed at
certain objects of the world. They are also dependent on a power structure that compels humans act
 
 
independent of their desires (as when we are obliged to accept currency as a means of exchange).  
 
 
 

 
It is possible to interpret Keynes’s notion of convention along these lines and his concept of
 
weight of the argument in his TP as a measure of how strong the convention -- the “structure of
 
 
interdependent judgments” -- about the expected price of an asset or the expected interest rate is (in
 
the GT). It is also possible to interpret Keynes’s reluctance in using econometrics or formal
 
 
mathematical models is due to this nature of social reality: different from brute facts (whose
existence is independent of our intentionality), social facts depend partially on our collective
 
 
intentionality. 

 
How close does this analysis of conventions in Keynes brings him closer ontologically or
epistemollogically to Veblen and North? Let us resume what we defended in the previous section.
 
We said in the previous section that Keynes had inherited from Marshall a view of the economy as a
   
part of a social whole that had evolved along darwinian lines but also encompassed a progressive
 
 
hegelian view of history. The problem of strong uncertainty has probably made Keynes reconsider
the traditional borders that the marshallian method gave to economics and other branches of
 
investigation of people and society (like history or psychology). The outbreak of the first world war,
 
 
on the other hand, would take away whatever vestige of hegelianism remaining in Keynes’s
thought. This means that both other aspects of human nature (besides self-interest) and the
 
traditional separations of markets and the state would have to be reconsidered.  

   
 

 
 
 

 
   

 
   

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3.1 Four points of comparison between Keynes, Veblen and North 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
Let us now compare how Keynes, Veblen and North see the relation between individual
 
action and institutions, how they understand efficient action, their concerns about the uncertainty of
 
 
the world in order to discuss the possibility of a latent institutionalism in Keynes.  
 

1. It is important to understand how Veblen, Keynes and North see the relations between
 
individual action (involving their commitments about human nature) and institutions (the set of
 
social rules shared by people). This relation will portray the social world view held by each one of
 
these authors. Veblen departs from the marginalist conception of rational individuals, suggesting a
   
framework in which human instincts are the moving force that withdrawn individuals from inertia
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

12 

2

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
   

and impel them to action. The social form this action will perform in the evolutionary outcome of
 
the interplay between instincts and institutions. Since the moving force to human action are
 
instincts, the process of decision making goes through a complex net of habits of thought, or
 
institutions. ​North assets that individuals are rational, but while this rationality is not complete,
 
institutions become fundamental categories of the social world. Institutions are the rules of the
 
game,
that provide an incentive structure and are uncertainty reducing mechanisms. Actual
 
 
institutional framework is the result of the decisions individuals made in the past, which lead to path
 
dependent economic trajectories. 
 

 
In Keynes's conception about human nature, both the Veblenian instinct-institution
framework and North’s conception on rationality-institution are contemplated. Keynes considers
 
intuition,
that human action is informed by four moving mechanisms, which are:
 
rationality and animal spirits. In this sense, conventions arise in situations of high uncertainty in
 
which the economic calculus is extremely difficult or even impossible. In such a situation, the status
 
functions attributed to social objects lose their consistency: the average opinion about the expected
 
 
future price of an asset or the rate of interest is not shared by agents in the market. The weight of
each argument is closer to zero, reflecting the ignorance they have about the status (or value) of the
 
object in question . As a result, the little weight attributed to the evidence at our disposal prompts us
 
to resort to intuition, instincts and animal spirits in order to make a decision about the future. In
 
such a situation, our calculations are of limited use for their weight is close to zero.  

 
 
instincts,
 

 
 
   
 

2. What is understood by efficient action? In traditional neoclassical economics efficiency is
 
 
usually defined in terms of Pareto-efficiency. The first theorem of welfare economics shows that a
 
   
perfectly competitive market leads to an allocation of factors of production and distribution of
 
outcomes which is Pareto-efficient. Our three authors criticize this view, but from different
 
perspectives.  

Veblen does not provide, within the analysed literature, a conception about economic
 
efficiency, but we may find a conception about what the criteria to an efficient social action is. The
 
emulative behavior is based on conceptions about the socially accepted ideas about what is good,
 
beautiful and appropriate. This evaluation considers the habits of thought of the higher social
 
classes. Thus, to be socially accepted and admired individuals must behave according to the habits
 
of thought defined as the good and right ones. As one can see, this view is as far from the
 
neoclassical view of efficiency as possible. 

 
that "entails a set of institutions that readily adapt

 
North moves from a Paretian conception about efficiency - allocative efficiency - to the idea
to the shocks,
of adaptive efficiency,
 
 
disturbances, and ubiquitous uncertainty that characterizes every society over time" (North, 2005,
 
 
p.78). Finally, North (2005) defines efficiency as the situation in which, given the technology and
 
the information costs, the market has the lowest transaction and production costs available. 

While Veblen was worried about efficiency of social action concerning social patterns of
 
 
acceptance, North focuses on the idea of efficiency related to market results. Keynes’s objective
with the GT can be seen as closer to North in this point. When he inserts uncertainty into the
 
socioeconomic world, he at the same time considers how humans handle this uncertainty, so that the
 
possibility of efficiency in relation to the level of uncertainty verified in the economy is related to
 
 
the extent to which real markets can grapple with the uncertainty of the world. What Keynes wants
 
to show right at the beginning of the GT is that the model of the market economy developed by the
“classics” is just a limiting case. In other words, Keynes seems to accept the results of classical
 
economics if the environment were characterized by risk and not fundamental uncertainty. As a
 
 
result, the optimizing behavior of individuals does not result in an optimal allocation of resources
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

   

   

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

2 Keynes says that the weight of the argument in chapter 6 of the TP can be understood as w = V(x/h) = Kr/(Kr+Ir), that
 
 
is the amount of relevant knowledge (Kr) in relation to the relevant knowledge (Kr) plus relevant ignorance (Ir) about
 
the fact x, given the hypothesis h about that fact x. It is easy to see that w tends to zero when we are ignorant about a
   
fact and tends to unity as we approach certainty. See Runde (1990).  

   
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

13 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

   

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
   

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
   
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

for the whole economy -- to suppose so amounts to committing the fallacy of composition, as we
 
said in the previous section. In other words, in an environment in which strong uncertainty is
 
prevalent, Pareto efficient results are not common -- we usually end up with wasted resources and
 
wasted possibilities of improvement of the life of the population in the direction of the Good.   
 

3. Concerning the relation between uncertainty and ergodicity, Veblen, Keynes and North
 
would agree that the social world is pervaded by uncertainty and might be classified as non-ergodic
 
 
(even though neither Keynes nor Veblen used the term). Veblen and Keynes refuse predetermined
laws of movement that could produce theoretical predictions about future economic outcomes, for
 
we live in an uncertain world. As Mouhammed (1999) remarked, the concept of strong uncertainty
 
 
in Keynes and in North can be associated with the Veblenian concept of the economy as a complex
 
evolutionary process of selection, mutation and replication of institutions -- “mental habits”. This
process does not have a definite end -- be it a Pareto-efficient allocation of resources, the keynesian
 
Good or the creation of surplus value. It is, in Veblen’s parlance, non-teleological. In other words,
 
its results in the future are also not amenable to a precise calculation because the complex
 
evolutionary process only gives us rules for the selection, replication and mutation of institutions,
 
not telling us what the finality of the process is in itself.  

4. Finally, is it possible to find a latent institutionalism in Keynes? If so, what sort of
 
institutionalism? We think the answer to the first question is yes, and the many papers (cited in
 
passing in the Introduction) showing how these traditions complement each other attest to this
 
affirmation. The second question is trickier, though, because there is a difference between the
 
ontological and epistemological commitments of Keynes. Let us elaborate a bit further each of these
 
questions in turn.  

First, there is a lot of textual evidence that suggests that there is a latent institutionalism in
 
Keynes. The core of the GT -- parts III (the propensity to consume) and IV (the inducement to
 
 
invest) -- are full of references to “institutions”, “conventions” “organizations”, “(social) habits”
 
and “social practice”, for example, when he explains the subjective and objective factors in the
 
propensity to consume. It is interesting to notice that he rarely uses the word “preference” or
 
“decisions” regarding consumption (“preference” is usually attached to liquidity in the GT). In other
 
words, Keynes is not talking about a formal mathematical theory of consumption as choice (in the
 
lines suggested by Lionel Robbins in 1932), but specifically of ​propensities and habits that make us
 
 
 
consume in a given way in a certain time and place. He even mentions “ostentation” and
“extravagance” as motives to consumption and that consumption depends on “habits formed by
 
 
race, education, convention, religion and current morals” -- something that fits Veblen’s theory
well. The fact that our marginal propensity to consume tends to decrease with the growth of income
 
is also due to a “psychological law”, according to Keynes.  
 

Keynes also talks about ​inducement to invest (and not simply a “decision” or “choice” along
 
Robbins’s lines). In the case of markets pervaded by uncertainty -- like financial markets -- Keynes
 
insists that agents are induced to invest (or to refrain from investing) by “whim”, “sentiment”,
 
 
“urge”, “instinct”, “psychological propensities”, “mass psychology” and also “fear” and “hope”. In
regards to the determination of the rate of interest, Keynes also says its determination is “highly
 
conventional” and is not “rooted in secure knowledge”, so that the public opinion (and not simply
 
individual decision!) can get used to changes in it fairly rapidly. Keynes also sees liquidity as
 
“changing from time to time and depending on social practices and institutions”. 

 
We do not have much space to develop our argument further, but the evidence above points
to the fact that there is a latent institutionalism in Keynes. Our second question now is, what kind of
 
institutionalism? Is it closer to the institutionalism of North or that of Veblen? 

As we said in the second section, Keynes was influenced by Marshall’s view of the
 
economy as a complex totality embedded in society and evolving through history. When Keynes
 
introduces uncertainty the frontier between economics and the other social sciences becomes
 
blurred. What are the ontological and epistemological consequences of this move?  

 
   

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

   

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

14 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

   

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

that
 
 

From an ontological point of view, one cannot say that Keynes assumes that we are dealing
 
only with maximizing individuals and that institutions are born out of transaction costs, asymmetric
 
information or inconsistencies in individual choices that lead to market failures and coordination
 
problems. As we said in our section on Keynes, his individuals are moved by instincts, intuitions
 
and animal spirits -- besides rationality. The unity of these motivations -- their “cognitive
 
architecture” -- changes in history, so that across many generations “individuals began to substitute
 
moral and rational motive as their spring of action in place of blind instinct. They must begin to do
 
so collectively” (Keynes apud Barnett 2017, p. 385).  

On the other hand,

the economic environment
 
 
 

is jointly created by collectively
 
intentionality is also changeable since economics is a moral science and its categories partially
 
 
depend on our sharing common representations of the world (if our interpretation of the
compatibility of Keynes and Searle is convincing). This makes the social world an uncertain world,
 
since the very categories of analysis (like liquidity, for example) partially depend on “social
 
 
practices and conventions”. As a result, Keynes’s analyses of the economic world open up the space
for us to jointly study the relation between the “cognitive architecture” of individuals’ motives, the
 
uncertainty associated with different market structures and the liquidity of the assets present in each
 
market. Depending on how strong and stable our collective representations (or collective valuations
 
 
of assets) are,
the uncertainty will be bigger or smaller and the decision-making process of
 
individuals will make more or less use of rational calculation (​vis-a-vis instincts, intuition or animal
 
spirits). The stability of these collective valuations (our “structure of interdependent judgements”)
 
gives us the strength of the convention behind our understanding of the world and our actions upon
 
it.  

This interpretation brings Keynes closer to Veblen than to North in ontological terms, both
 
 
because individual action cannot be reduced to rationality (and hence institutions do not come from
 
transaction costs or the like) and because the very nature of the socioeconomic world is not
 
 
separated from the conceptions individuals have of it.  

However, in epistemological terms one can say that Keynes comes closer to North. In other
 
words, his approach is more interdisciplinary than transdisciplinary and he seems to adopt a dualism
 
 
between the psychological characteristics of individuals and the social structures outside. Keynes
still has in mind in the GT the model of the market when analysing the economy. It is true that he
 
introduces uncertainty in his analysis and moves in the direction of different types of markets,
 
 
depending on the liquidity of the assets they transact and the motives for their actions. But it is also
true that Keynes says that when the economy has reached full-employment, it functions along the
 
lines proposed by the “classical school”. In other words, it is possible to say that Keynes uses
 
insights from other disciplines of his time (like psychology and psychoanalysis) or the contributions
 
 
of heretic authors (like Hobson, Gesell and Marx) but he still analyses the economy in terms of
 
 
agents making decisions in markets, much like North does.  

For example, right after he talks about how liquidity depends on social practices and
 
 
institutions at the end of chapter 17 of the GT, he adds that “the order of preference in the minds of
owners of wealth in which (...) they express their feelings about liquidity is, however, definite and is
 
all we require for our analysis (...)”. In chapter 24 of the GT Keynes stands behind individualism,
 
“if it can be purged of its defects and its abuses”, because it “is the best safeguard of personal
 
liberty in the sense that, compared with any other system, it greatly widens the field for the exercise
 
of personal choice”. Finally, Brady (2004) points to the fact that Keynes’s economics is not against
 
the use of mathematics, but against its misuse. As he says, “a ranking of alternatives, ordinal
 
measurement, was the appropriate tool to use. Such a ranking complemented Keynes’s ‘interval
 
estimate’ approach [in the TP]”. 
 
Table 1: Synthetic framework of the argument 
 

 
   
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

15 

3. Uncertainty and 

Ergodicity 

4. Institutions 

 

Veblen 

Keynes 

North 

1. Individual action 
in the social world 

based on 

instinct-institutions 

based on four moving 

mechanisms (instincts, intuition, 
animal spirits and rationality) 

based on 

rationality-institutions 

2. Efficient Action 

principle of social 

conformity 

actions within the market 

usually lead to a sub-optimal 

result in terms of Pareto 

uncertainty is not treated 
directly; social world can 

be understood as 

non-ergodic 

uncertainty is directly treated in 

the analysis; world can be 
understood as complex and 

non-ergodic 

incentive structure that leads 

to a greater product by 
means of the market 

uncertainty is directly 
included in the analysis, 

world is non-ergodic 

habits of thought, ways 
of doing and thinking in 

the social world 

(i) institutions are constraints to individual rational choice and 

mechanisms that may reduce uncertainty; (ii) action is not 

plainly rational in an uncertain world. 

(i) interactive (or evolutionary?) process of decision making; 

(ii) social reality does not obey any simple law of 

movement. 

rules of the game, formal 

and informal rules 

 
4. Conclusion 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

Throughout

the article we highlighted some aspects of Veblen, Keynes and North’s
 
 
theoretical frameworks that enabled us to build the table of the previous section. In this table, we
 
showed four elements that provided a key to understanding the relation between Keynes and
Institutional Economics. The choice of Veblen and North allowed us to observe the adherence of
 
Keynes's ideas to the two main branches of Institutional Economics, Veblen`s OIE and North`s
 
NIE. 

In a more transdisciplinary approach, Veblen pictured the social world as inhabited by
 
individuals driven by instincts that in their actions, thoughts and interaction ended up creating
 
habits of thought - ways of doing and thinking -, that is, institutions. Thus, the author held an
 
 
instinct-institutions approach. Veblen was not worried about disciplinary boundaries, not clear at
that time, which in some sense gave him freedom concerning the theoretical instruments he could
 
use and develop. He was radically against marginalism, mainly in virtue of the idea of a calculative
 
hedonistic man implied in this school of thought. 
 
 

Unlike Veblen, North does not radically deny the rational choice approach, but he intends to
 
contribute to the neoclassical research program. He does not reject the idea of a rational individual,
 
but points out the need to relax the substantive rationality assumption. WIth the hypothesis of
 
 
limited rational individuals, theoretical elements like institutions and time are made welcome into
the neoclassical research program. Therefore, North was engaged in a rationality-institutions
 
 
approach. North`s research agenda was developed inside a different academic environment, in
which Economics was already a detached discipline of the social thought and defined its hard core
 
 
instruments inspired in marginalism. The implications for North`s theoretical
and theoretical
 
 
proposal is that while he develops an interdisciplinary dialogue with other social sciences, the
 
 
unrestrict adherence to a theory of rational choice end up limiting the extent of some ontological
 
desires he may nourish beyond neoclassical hard core. 
 
 
 

Keynes had deep marshallian roots, but he tried to develop a non-utilitarian and realist
 
ethical framework. Unlike Veblen, Keynes did not radically reject Marshall’s approach, but he
 
 
 
like North, embraced the rational choice apparatus (which was available to him in
neither,
 
Robbins’s approach). He lived in a social and academic turmoil reflected in the undefined lines of
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

   

   

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

16 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

   

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

his core ideas. He seems to approach both Veblen and North in which concerns the drives do human
 
action, recognizing the role of instincts and rationality in decision-making process, adding intuition
 
and animal spirits. Concerning the concept of institution, Keynes is closer to Veblen when he states
 
 
a conception of interactive-evolutionary process of decision-making and an idea of a social
 
evolving reality that does not obey any simple law of movement. But he also aligns himself to
 
North in the recognition of institutions as constraints to individual rational choice and uncertainty
 
 
reducing mechanisms, besides the idea that action is not plainly rational in an uncertain world. The
openness of the world (or open systems, in today’s terms) seems to be an idea shared by the three
 
authors, although it is more controversial in North. 

​Two Types of
 

Instinct and the Cognitive Foundations of

 
Finally, we found elements that enable a fruitful dialogue between Keynes`s thought and the
institutionalism of Veblen and North, despite the divergences found between OIE and NIE. The use
 
 
 
of the term convention by Keynes shows that he was not blind to the role of institutions in the
economy. We hope that
this article, alongside many others dealing with keynesian and
 
 
institutionalist ideas, contributes and enrichen the debate within Keynesian Institutionalism. 
 
References 
 
BACKHOUSE, R. ​A History of Modern Economic Analysis​. New York: Basil Blackwell, 1985. 
 
BACKHOUSE, R. and NISHIZAWA, T. (Eds). No Wealth But Life: Welfare Economics and the
 
Welfare State in Britain 1880-1945. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2010.  
 
BARNETT, V. Keynes and the Psychology of Economic Behavior: From Stout and Sully toThe
 
General Theory. History of Political Economy, Duke University Press, vol. 47 (2), p. 307-33, June. 
 
BARNETT, V. Veblen’s
 
Evolutionary-Institutional Economics​, Journal of Economic Issues, 51:2, 541-562, 2017a. 
 
BRADY, M E. J. M. Keynes’s Theory of Decision Making, Induction and Analogy: The Role of
 
 
 
Interval Valued Probability in His Approach. New York: XLibris, 2004.  
 
BARNETT, V. ​Keynes, Animal Spirits, and Instinct: Reason plus Intuition is Better than Rational​.
 
Journal of the History of Economic Thought. Volume 39, Number 3, September, 2017b.  
 
CARDOSO, F. G. and LIMA, G. T. A Concepção de Keynes do Sistema Econômico como um
 
Todo Orgânico Complexo. Economia e Sociedade, Campinas, v. 17, n. 3 (34), p. 359-381, dez.
 
 
2008. 
 
 
 
CAVALIERI, Marco Antonio Ribas. O surgimento do institucionalismo norte-americano de
 
​Economia e Sociedade​, Campinas, v.22,
Throstein Veblen: economic política, tempo e lugar.
 
 
n.1(47), p.43-76, abr., 2013. 
 
DAVIDSON, P. ​Reviving Keynes’s Revolution​. Journal of Post Keynesian Economics. Volume 6,
 
 
Issue 4, 561-575, 1984.  
 
DAVIS, J. B. J. M. Keynes on History and Conventions. In: HARCOURT, G. and RIACH, P. A
 
Second Edition of the General Theory. New York: Routledge, 1997. pp. 203-221.  
 
DEQUECH, D. Financial Conventions in Keynes’s Theory: The Stock Exchange. Journal of
 
Post-Keynesian Economics, Volume 33, Issue 3, 2011, p. 469-490.  
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

17 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

DESROCHES, C. T. and RUTHERFORD, M. The Institutional Reaction to Keynesian Economics.
 
Journal of the History of Economic Thought, Volume 30, Number 1, March 2008.  
 
DURKHEIM, Èmile. ​Rules of Sociological Method.​ New York: The Free Press, 1982[1895]. 
 
FERREIRA, B. P. Convenções na Teoria Keynesiana dos Mercados Financeiros e de Bens.
 
Trabalho de Conclusão de Curso. Campinas: IE-Unicamp, 2014.  
 
HAMILTON, Walton. The Institutional Approach to Economic Theory. ​The American Economic
 
 
Review​, v.9, n.1, p.309-318, march, 1919. 
 
HIRSCHMAN, A. The Passsions and the Interests: Political Arguments for Capitalism Before Its
 
Triumph. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1977.  
 
HODGSON, Douglass. What are Institutions? ​Journal of Economic Issues, v.XL, n.1, Mar., p.1-25,
 
2006. 
 
KEYNES, J. M. A Treatise on Probability. New York: BN Publishing, 2008 [1921].  
 
KEYNES, J. M. The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. Available at:
 
https://cas2.umkc.edu/economics/people/facultypages/kregel/courses/econ645/winter2011/generalth
eory.pdf​. Access 16.06.2019.  
 
KEYNES,
J. M. Letter
 
 
1938. Available
 
http://economia.unipv.it/harrod/edition/editionstuff/rfh.346.htm#23502​. Access 16.06.2019.  
 
1938. Available
KEYNES,
 
at:
 
http://economia.unipv.it/harrod/edition/editionstuff/1938fr.htm?rfh.30e.htm~target​. Access 16.06.
 
2019.  
 
KEYNES, J. M. Professor Tinbergen’s Method. The Economic Journal, Vol. 49, No. 195 (Sep.,
 
1939), pp. 558-577.  
 
LAWSON, T. What
 
Economics​. New York: Routledge, 2015. 
 
 
MOUHAMMED, A. D. Veblen and Keynes. International Journal of Politics, Culture and Society,
Volume 13, N. 2, 1999.  
 
NEALE, W.. Institutions. ​Journal of Economic Issues,​ v.21, n.3, Sep., p.1177-1206, 1987. 
 
NORTH, Douglass. Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance. Cambridge:
 
 
Cambridge University Press, 1990. 
 
___________. What do we mean by rationality? ​Public Choice​ (1986-1998), v.77, n.1,  
sep., 1993.  
 
___________. ​Understanding the Process of Economic Change​. Princeton: Princeton University
 
Press, 2005. 
 

​Social Ontology and Modern
 

is an Institution? In: PRATTEN, Stephen.
 

to Roy Harrod,

to Roy Harrod,

J. M. Letter
 
 

dated
 

dated
 

July,
 

July,
 

10th,

4th,

at:

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

18 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

O’DONNELL, R. Third Contribution to the Ergodic-Non-Ergodic Critique: Reply to Davidson, part
2. Journal of Post-Keynesian Economics, Volume 39, Issue 2, 2016, p. 145-171.  
 
PETERSON, W. C. Institutionalism, Keynes and the Real World. Nebraska Journal of Economics
 
 
and Business, Vol. 16, No. 3 (Summer), 1977.  
 
ROTHEIM, R. J. Organicism and the Role of the Individual in Keynes’s Thought. Journal of Post
Keynesian Economics. Winter, 1989-1990. Vol. 12, n. 2.  
 
RUTHERFORD, Malcolm. ​Institutions in Economics​: the old and the new institutionalism. New
 
 
York: Cambridge University Press, 1996. 
 
SEARLE, John. What is an Institution? ​Journal of Institutional Economics​, v.1, n.1, p.1-22, 2005. 
 
SEMBERT, M. Advancing the Social Sciences Through the Interdisciplinary Enterprise. The Social
 
Science Journal, Volume 28, Issue 1, 1991, p. 1-14.  
 
SKIDELSKI, R. John Maynard Keynes (1883-1946): Economist, Philosopher, Statesman. New
York: Penguin Group, 2005.  
 
SKIDELSKI, R. John Maynard Keynes: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University
 
Press, 2010.  
 
THABET, S. Keynes and Commons: Parallel Stories, Crossed Destinies. L’Economie Politique
2008.2 (No. 38), pp. 77-100, 2008.   
 
WRAY, L. R. Veblen’s Theory of Business Enterprise and Keynes’s Monetary Theory of
 
Production. Journal of Economic Issues, Vol. XLI, n. 2, June, 2007. 
 
VEBLEN, Thorstein. Why is Economics not an Evolutionary Science? In: VEBLEN, Thorstein.
The Place of Science in Modern Civilization and Other Essays​. New York: Russel & Russel, 1961. 
 
___________.
at:
http://moglen.law.columbia.edu/LCS/theoryleisureclass.pdf​ (access: 10 May 2019)  
 

Available
 

Class​.
 

Leisure
 

Theory

1899.

​The

the
 

of
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

19 

