Human capital accumulation, income distribution and 
economic growth: A demand-led analytical framework 

 
 

Gustavo Pereira Serra 

Department of Economics 

The New School for Social Research 

pereg559@newschool.edu 

Gilberto Tadeu Lima 

Department of Economics 

University of São Paulo 

giltadeu@usp.br 

Laura Carvalho 

Department of Economics 

University of São Paulo 

lcarvalho@usp.br 

 

 
 
 

Abstract: This paper incorporates human capital accumulation through provision of universal public education by 
a  balanced-budget  government  to  a  demand-led  analytical  framework  of  distribution  and  output  growth.  Human 
capital accumulation positively impacts on workers’ productivity in output production and their bargaining power 
in wage negotiations. In the long-run equilibrium, a rise in workers’ (capitalists’) bargaining power raises (lowers) 
the pre- and after-tax wage share, which raises (lowers) the rates of physical capital utilization, employment (which 
also measures the rate of human capital utilization) and output growth. Yet a rise in the tax rate (which also denotes 
the  share  of  tax  spending  in  public  education  in  output)  lowers  the  long-run  equilibrium  values  of  the  pre-  and 
after-tax wage share and rates of physical capital utilization, employment and output growth. Counterintuitively, in 
the long-run equilibrium, a higher share of public investment in human capital in output lowers the rate of human 
capital accumulation and thereby the rate of output growth. It follows that a higher level of investment in human 
capital impacts positively (negatively) on long-run output growth when measured relatively to the current stock of 
human  capital  (flow of output). Therefore,  a strengthening  in  the  bargaining  power  of  workers  is  output  growth-
enhancing  in the  long-run  equilibrium,  given  that  it raises the rates of accumulation  of both  physical and human 
capital. 

Keywords: Human capital; income distribution; economic growth; employment. 
 

Resumo: Este artigo incorpora acumulação de capital humano através da provisão de educação pública universal 
por um governo com orçamento equilibrado a um arcabouço analíticoo de distribuição e crescimento liderado pela 
demanda. A acumulação de capital humano impacta positivamente a produtividade dos trabalhadores e seu poder 
de  barganha  nas  negociações  salariais.  No  equilíbrio  de  longo  prazo,  um  aumento  no  poder  de  barganha  dos 
trabalhadores  (capitalistas)  aumenta  (diminui)  a  participação  salarial  pré  e  pós  impostos,  o  que  eleva  (reduz)  as 
taxas  de  utilização  de  capital  físico,  emprego  (que  também  representa  a  taxa  de  utilização  do  capital  humano)  e 
crescimento  do  produto.  Entretanto,  um  aumento  de  uma  alíquota  de  imposto  uniforme  (que  também  denota  a 
participação dos  gastos com  impostos  na  educação  pública  sobre  o produto  dessa  economia) reduz  os  valores  de 
equilíbrio  de  longo  prazo  da  parcela  dos  salários  na  renda  pré  e  pós  impostos  e  as  taxas  de  utilização  de  capital 
físico,  emprego  e  crescimento.  No  equilíbrio  de  longo  prazo,  contraintuitivamente,  uma  maior  proporção  do 
investimento em capital humano no produto reduz a taxa de acumulação de capital humano e, portanto, a taxa de 
crescimento  do  produto.  De  fato,  um  nível  mais  alto  de  investimento  em  capital  humano  impacta  positivamente 
(negativamente)  o  crescimento  do  produto  no  longo  prazo  quando  medido  relativamente  ao  estoque  de  capital 
humano (fluxo de produto). Assim, um fortalecimento do poder de barganha dos trabalhadores eleva o crescimento 
do produto no equilíbrio de longo prazo, ao aumentar as taxas de acumulação de capital físico e capital humano. 

Palavras-chave: Capital humano; distribuição de renda; crescimento econômico; emprego. 
 

J.E.L. Classification Codes: E12, E24, E25, O41. 
 

Classificação Anpec: Área 6 – Crescimento, Desenvolvimento Econômico e Instituições. 

1. Introduction 

The contribution of human capital accumulation to economic growth in the long-run has been extensively 
investigated both theoretically and empirically in neoclassical growth theory. In fact, the incorporation of 
human capital accumulation was seen as an early possible solution to the failure of the Solow model to 
predict  the  observed  persistence  of  large  differences  in  income  per  capita  among  countries.  In  one 
standard approach, developed by Mankiw, Romer and Weil (1992), human capital  is  included, together 
with physical capital and labor, as an additional factor in a production function exhibiting constant returns 
to scale. It turns out that the level of output per worker depends positively on the levels of physical and 
human  capital  per  worker.  Analogously  to  the  accumulation  of  physical  capital,  the  accumulation  of 
human  capital  is  fully  and  automatically  governed  by  the  availability  of  savings.  However,  since  the 
accumulation of both physical and human capital is subject to diminishing returns, a permanent rise in the 
rate of investment in either of (or even both) these types of capital generates an increase in the level (but 
not the growth rate) of the output per worker in the long-run equilibrium. In another standard approach, 
Lucas (1988) assumes that individuals choose periodically how to allocate their non-leisure time between 
current  production  and  schooling,  with  the  latter  raising  labor  productivity  in  future  periods.  As  human 
capital  accumulation  is  assumed  to  exhibit  constant  returns,  it  arises  as  a  source  of  sustained  long-run 
growth in output per worker. 

Yet  these mainstream  approaches to  long-run capital  accumulation and economic growth, by invariably 
assuming  that  the  economy  operates  at  full  capacity  utilization  (at  least)  in  the  long  run,  mistakenly 
ignore  both  the  positive  role  of  aggregate  demand  in  growth  dynamics  and  the  positive  impact  of 
investment  in  human  capital  formation  on  aggregate  supply  and  demand.  Meanwhile,  demand-led 
approaches to capital accumulation and economic growth, including developments in the Neo-Kaleckian 
literature, have typically relegated any closer attention to human capital  formation through education or 
schooling  as  narrowly  supply-sided.  However,  this  relegation  implies  ignoring  the  potential  impacts  of 
human  capital  accumulation  on  labor  productivity,  the  bargaining  power  of  workers,  and  ultimately  the 
functional  distribution  of  income  and  components  of  aggregate  demand.  One  notable  exception  in  this 
regard is Dutt (2010), who explicitly formalizes the process of skill acquisition in a Neo-Kaleckian model 
in a way that both the number of high-skilled and low-skilled workers and their wages vary over time and 
affect the interaction between income distribution and economic growth. Relatedly, Carvalho, Lima and 
Serra  (2017),  motivated  to  some  extent  by  the  empirical  significance  of  student  loans  to  human  capital 
accumulation in the U.S., incorporate debt-financed knowledge capital formation to a demand-led, Neo-
Kaleckian  model  of  capacity  utilization  and  economic  growth.  Any  increase  rise  in  labor  productivity 
ensuing  from  knowledge  capital  accumulation  is  fully  passed  on  to  the  real  wage,  but  insufficient 
aggregate  effective  demand,  by  producing  unemployment,  results  in  underutilization  of  the  knowledge 
capital capacity. As it turns out, the stability properties and extent of financial fragility (in the Minskyan 
sense) of the long-run equilibrium depend on how the debt servicing of working households is specified. 

In fact, the very scant attention that has been paid to human capital  accumulation in the Neo-Kaleckian 
growth literature contrasts with the importance attributed to it by most probably the earliest follower and 
developer of the Neo-Kaleckian approach. Indeed, as mentioned in Guger and Walterskirchen (2012), in 
the late 1960s and early 1970s Josef Steindl wrote a book (in German) and several papers (in English) on 
education, as he argued that, ultimately, growth is limited only by the ability of a society to learn. While 
conceding that the learning process can not exceed a certain maximum pace, Steindl greatly emphasized 
education as a major engine of long-run growth. As recalled in Guger et al. (2006), Steindl once stated at 
a conference that the neglect of human capital is rather grave, as the bottlenecks for higher growth should 
be seen in qualified manpower, not in capital equipment.  In his view, scarcity of a qualified labor force 
makes it impossible for investment to increase beyond a certain point. Consonant with this view, in the 
1960s Steindl  pushed for an educational  policy in Austria by elaborating an educational  planning study 

 
 

2 

 

underlining  the  importance  of  skilled  workers  for  long-run  growth  (Steindl,  1968).1  Interestingly,  a 
similar  view  was  expressed  about  the  same  time  by  another  follower  (as  Steindl  himself)  of  Keynesian 
ideas,  namely,  Roy  Harrod.  As  aptly  described  in  Boianovsky  (2017),  in  the  1960s  and  1970s  Harrod 
shifted the emphasis of  his  research in economic dynamics from the study  of business  cycles to that of 
economic growth. And one of the main results coming out of Harrod’s shifted emphasis is the proposition 
that  the  maximum  rate  of  growth  of  qualified  workers  represents  a  more  significant  limitation  than  the 
supply of saving in  setting the maximum  rate of economic  growth  in  developing countries.  In Harrod’s 
view, the training and qualification of workers were related to education, the “most important problem in 
the whole range of development economics” (1962, p.10). 

As  in  Dutt  (2010),  the  model  set  forth  herein  also  formally  explores  theoretical  underpinnings  and 
implications  of  human  capital  accumulation  within  a  demand-led,  Neo-Kaleckian  dynamic  model  of 
growth and distribution, but it focuses on a rather different (and unexplored) set of transmission channels 
and  mechanisms.  The  model  features  human  capital  accumulation  as  a  source  of  aggregate  effective 
demand alongside with  consumption and investment in  physical  capital. The  average human  capital  (or 
productive skills) of the available labor force, which in turn impacts on the average labor productivity of 
(employed and unemployed) workers, varies positively with  the spending  on universal  public education 
by a balanced-budget government. As that the aggregate human capital stock is uniformly distributed in 
the labor force, which is always in excess supply, unemployed labor also means unutilized human capital. 
As  it  turns  out,  the  economy  operates  with  excess  productive  capacity  not  only  in  physical  capital  and 
labor  quantities,  as  typically  assumed  in  Neo-Kaleckian  models,  but  also  in  human  capital  and  hence 
labor skills. 

Moreover,  we  consider  a  conflicting  claims  framework  for  the  determination  of  the  real  wage,  with 
workers’  bargaining  power  depending  positively  and  separately  on  the  employment  rate  and  the  rate  of 
human  capital  formation.  The  latter  effect  can  be  due,  inter  alia,  to  the  growing  of  self-assurance  and 
class-consciousness  on  the  part  of  workers.  In  fact,  the  ambiguous  result  of  an  increase  in  government 
spending  on  universal  public  education  on  income  distribution  and  economic  growth  in  the  long  run 
generated  by  the  model  is  (partially)  a  reflection  of  its  specification  of  a  more  inclusive  and  complex 
relationship  between  demand-led  growth  and  the  supply  side  of  the  economy.  Clearly,  the  resolving  of 
such a theoretical ambiguity carries relevant empirical and policy implications as well. 

As  the  model  economy  operates  with  excess  capacity  in  labor  quantity  and  skills,  with  the  real  wage 
being determined by means of a conflicting-claims mechanism, this paper is likewise somehow related to 
an  expanding  literature  on  overeducation  (see,  e.g.,  Borghans  and  Grip,  2000,  and  Skott,  2006).  While 
overeducation  is  typically  described  in  this  literature  as  the  extent  to  which  an  individual  worker 
possesses a level of education in excess of that which is required for her particular job (i.e., occupational 
mismatch), in this paper one sense in which the labor force is overeducated is that not all of the aggregate 
human capital uniformly embodied in the labor force is fully utilized due to unemployment. Thus, as in 
the  literature  on  overeducation  as  occupational  mismatch,  in  the  model  herein  macroeconomic 
performance is worse than would be the case if the skills of the educated workers were fully utilized in 
output  production.  Given  that  the  literature  on  overeducation  and  occupational  mismatches  has 
implications  for  the  wage  distribution,  our  specification  of  a  conflicting  claims  contest  for  the 
determination of the average real wage, with workers’ bargaining power varying positively with the rates 

                                                 
1 According to Guger and Walterskirchen (2012), the introduction of vocational secondary schools in Austria was 
mainly  a  consequence  of  Steindl’s  1968  book  on  educational  planning.  Steindl’s  ideas  on  growth-promoting 
policies over the 1960s to the 1980s are nicely and more extensively detailed in Guger et al. (2006). In addition to 
calling for technological innovation and education policies, Steindl stressed the positive demand-side effects of the 
public sector and the contribution of lower household savings and anticyclical policies. 
 
 

3 

 

of employment and human capital accumulation, can be seen as suggesting a possible contributing factor 
for the dynamics of the labor compensation for human capital accumulation. In fact, since the wage share 
is  given by the ratio of the real  wage to  labor productivity, in  our model  such a share can be seen as a 
measure  of  the  wage  compensation  received  by  the  human  capital.  Thus,  our  conflicting-claims 
mechanism  for  the  determination  of  the  average  real  wage  implies  that  a  weakening  of  workers’ 
bargaining power due to a fall in either the rate of employment or the rate of human capital accumulation 
(or  both)  may  have  a  negative  impact  on  the  wage  compensation  that  workers  receive  for  their  human 
capital.  Recall,  however,  that  the  rates  of  capital  capacity  utilization,  employment  and  growth  are  all 
determined by aggregate demand, and changes in aggregate demand will result from changes,  inter alia, 
in  the  wage  share  and  in  the  investment  in  human  capital  through  expenditures  on  universal  public 
education  by  a  balanced-budget  government.  Meanwhile,  given  that  there  is  taxation  on  wages  and 
profits, the after-tax wage share (and consequently the after-tax wage compensation that workers receive 
for their human capital) is lower than the pre-tax wage share. 

Therefore,  as  the  accumulation  of  human  capital  is  carried  out  through  provision  of  universal  public 
education by a government running a balanced budget, this paper is also related to (and lightly draws on) 
the  literature  that  incorporates  taxation  and  public  expenditures  in  a  Neo-Kaleckian  framework  broadly 
defined,  such  as  Laramie  and  Mair  (1996,  2000,  2003),  Mair  and  Laramie  (1997),  Dutt  (2010,  2013), 
Commendatore  and  Pinto  (2011),  Commendatore,  Panico  and  Pinto  (2011),  and  Tavani  and  Zamparelli 
(2016). 

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces the model structure. Section 3 
solves  for  the  short-run  equilibrium  configuration,  assuming  that  the  productivity  of  labor,  the  nominal 
wage,  the  price  level  and  the  stocks  of  physical  and  human  capital  are  all  given.  Section  4  focuses  on 
long-run  dynamics  by  investigating  the  impact  of  a  change  in  the  bargaining  power  of  capitalists  and 
workers and in  an uniform  tax rate (and hence in the share of output dedicated to  investment  in  human 
capital) on the long-run equilibrium configuration with the wage share and the physical-to-human capital 
ratio as stationary variables. Section 5 concludes the paper. 

2. The structure of the model 

The  model  deals  with  a  closed  economy  that  produces  a  single  good/service  for  consumption  and 
investment. We assume that the government holds a balanced budget and spends all tax revenues (out of 
wage and profit income) on the provision of universal public education, which raises the average human 
capital across the labor force. Two homogeneous factors of production are used in the production of the 
single  good/service,  physical  capital  and  labor,  and  the  aggregate  stock  of  human  capital  is  assumed  to 
remain uniformly distributed in  the labor force.  These production inputs  are  combined through a  fixed-
coefficient technology: 

,  

 

 

 

 

(1) 

 is the output level, 

 is the employment level, 

 is the stock of physical capital, 

 is 
where 
the  human  capital  stock to  labor  force  ratio  (or  average  human  capital)  and 
  is  the  output  to  labor 
ratio (or labor productivity),  which varies endogenously with  the  average  human capital.  For simplicity 
and  specificity  of  focus,  the  technical  coefficient 
  is  normalized  to  one,  and  we  measure  the  rate  of 
physical capital capacity utilization, 
. In the production function in 
(1), we also assume that 
. Note that unemployed workers are as skilled 
(or human capital endowed) as employed ones, so that the rate of labor employment, which is determined 
by  aggregate  effective  demand,  also  measures  the  degree  of  human  capital  utilization.  Though  we 
consider only the situation in which aggregate effective demand is insufficient to yield full utilization of 

, by the output to capital ratio, 

 and 

, 

 
 

4 

 

u/XK,()XminKLah=XKL/hHN()ah(0)0a='()0ah''()0ahthe  existing  human  capital  capacity  at  the  ongoing  real  wage  rate,  we  abstract  from  human  capital 
depreciation and labor deskilling. 

The economy is composed of two social classes, firm-owner capitalists and workers, who earn profits and 
wages, respectively. The functional division of aggregate pre-tax income is then given by: 

,  

 

 

 

 

 

(2) 

where 
profits. From (1) and (2), the share of labor in pre-tax income, 

  is  the  pre-tax  money  wage, 

  is  the  price  level  and 

, is given by: 

  is  the  volume  of  pre-tax  aggregate 

, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(3) 

where 

 stands for the pre-tax real wage.  

Firms produce (and hire labor) according to aggregate effective demand. As we model only the situation 
in  which  excess  productive  capacity  (in  labor  and  overall  capital)  prevails,  labor  employment  is 
determined by production: 

. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(4) 

Firms operate in oligopolistic markets and set the price level as a markup factor over unit labor costs, as 
in Kalecki (1971): 

, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(5) 

 is the markup factor (one plus the markup), which is inversely related to the wage 
where 
share.  The  price  level  is  given  at  a  point  in  time.  However,  it  varies  over  time  at  a  (proportionate)  rate 
which is  equal  to  firms’  desired (proportionate) rate of  change in the price level, 
, 

within  an  alternative  (accelerationist)  framework  of  conflicting  claims  on  income.  More  precisely,  we 

postulate an instantaneous adjustment of the rate of growth of the price level, 
firms’ desired rate of growth of the price level given by: 

, to the 

, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(6) 

where 
  is  a  parameter  measuring  firm-owner  capitalists’  bargaining  power  in  the  distributive 
conflict. Therefore, the price inflation rate desired by firms is reasonably assumed to depend positively on 
the state of the product  market. A higher rate of physical capital utilization, by reflecting more buoyant 
effective demand conditions,  allows firms  to  desire a higher price inflation rate. Although there is non-
evadable taxation on wages and profits, as described shortly, which implies that taxation has a prior claim 
on income, firm-owner capitalists’ desired inflation rate in (6) does not feature the tax rate on profits as a 
separate,  directly  causal  factor.  As  will  be  seen  later,  this  specification  will  allow  us  to  draw  clear-cut 
implications regarding the impact of changes in the bargaining power of either workers or capitalists on 
the pre- and after-tax wage share, and thereby on the rates of physical capital utilization, employment and 
economic growth in the long-run equilibrium. 

The specification in (6) can be interpreted as assuming that the desired growth rate of the markup factor is 
procyclical. Even though the literature on markup determination typically features the level of the markup 
as depending on the level of economic activity as measured by different indicators, some of the provided 
 
 

5 

 

WXLRP=+R()Vah=()WPzah=1/()1zh=ˆ(/)(1/)fffPdPdtP=ˆ(/)(1/)PdPdtP=ˆfPu=0WP /VWP=()XLah=rationales  may  plausibly  apply  to  the  growth  rate  specification  assumed  here.  For  instance,  Eichner 
(1976)  argues  that  expansions  are  times  in  which  firms  may  want  to  invest  more  by  generating  higher 
internal  savings and consequently desire a higher markup. Rowthorn (1977) claims that higher capacity 
utilization  allows  firms  to  raise  prices  with  less  fear  of  being  undercut  by  (either  existing  or  potential) 
competitors,  who  would  gain  little  by  undercutting  due  to  higher  capacity  constraints.  Meanwhile, 
Gordon, Weisskopf and Bowles (1984) suggestively argue that marked-up prices are inversely related to 
the perceived price elasticity of demand, which in turn is negatively related to the industry concentration 
and  the  fraction  of  potential  competitors  that  are  perceived  to  be  quantity-constrained  and  hence  not 
engaged  in  or  responsive  to  price  competition.  In  the  downturn,  as  it  turns  out,  the  markup  will  fall 
because  the  attendant  decline  in  capacity  utilization  results  in  a  smaller  share  of  potential  competitors 
being perceived to be under capacity constraints, and therefore in an increase in the perceived elasticity of 
demand facing the firm. 

At  a  point  in  time  the  pre-  and  after-tax  money  wage  are  both  given,  and  with  labor  being  always  in 
excess  supply,  employment  is  determined  by  labor  demand  and  therefore  ultimately  by  aggregate 
effective demand. Over time, however, the pre-tax money wage varies at a rate which is equal to workers’ 

desired (proportionate) rate of change in the pre-tax money wage, 

, within such an 

alternative  framework  of  conflicting  income  claims.  More  precisely,  we  assume  an  instantaneous 

adjustment  of  the  rate  of  growth  of  the  pre-tax  nominal  wage, 
desired rate of growth of the nominal wage given by: 

,  to  the  workers’ 

,  

 

 

 

 

 

(7) 

where 

 is a parameter measuring workers’ bargaining power in the distributive conflict, 

 is 

the  rate  of  employment  and 
  is  the  rate  of  growth  of  the  average  human  capital. 
Therefore,  both  capitalists  and  workers  are  always  able  to  have  their  desired  inflation  rate  fully  and 
instantaneously  translated  into  the  respective  actual  inflation  rate  (price  inflation  rate  in  the  case  of 
capitalists,  wage  inflation  rate  in  the  case  of  workers)  within  such  an  accelerationist  conflicting-claims 
inflation  dynamics.  The  wage  inflation  rate  desired  –  and  successfully  bargained  for  –  by  workers  is 
postulated to vary positively with their bargaining power in the wage negotiations as represented by the 
parameter 
 in (7). A higher rate of either human capital accumulation or employment, given workers’ 
bargaining  power,  allows  workers  to  desire  and  obtain  a  higher  wage  inflation  rate.  Meanwhile,  the 
employment rate is linked to the state of the product market in the following way: 

,  

 

 

 

 

 

(8) 

where 

. This formal link between 

  stands  for  the  ratio  of  physical  capital  stock  to  labor  force  in  productivity  units,  that  is, 
 is necessary since the fixed-coefficient nature of the 
technology  implies  that  an  increase  in  output  in  the  short  run  will  necessarily  be  accompanied  by  an 
increase in employment. Moreover, as the aggregate human capital stock is uniformly distributed in the 
labor  force,  the  employment  rate  as  well  measures  the  degree  of  utilization  of  the  aggregate  human 
capital.  Note  in  addition  that  with  the  rates  of  employment  and  physical  capital  utilization  so  moving 
together in  the short run, the positive effect  of a  rise in  the former on wage inflation in  (7) can also be 
seen as reflecting workers’ realization that a rise in price inflation is under way. 

 and 

Firms  make decisions to  accumulate physical  capital  independently from available savings as described 
by a standard Neo-Kaleckian-Steindlian desired investment function, so that firms’ desired growth rate of 
the stock of physical capital, assuming no depreciation, is given by: 

 
 

 

 

 

 

(9) 

, 

 

6 

 

ˆ(/)(1/)wwwWdWdtW=ˆ(/)(1/)WdWdtW=ˆˆ()wWeh=+0ˆ(/)(1/)hdhdth=euk=k/(())kKNah=ue/eLN=igur=++, 

  and 

  are  all  positive  parameters, 

where 
utilization  and 
profits divided by the value of the physical capital stock at output price. The after-tax profit rate 
given by: 

  is  the  rate  of  (physical  capital)  capacity 
 is  the after-tax rate of profit on physical  capital,  which is the after-tax flow of money 
 is then 

where 

 is the tax rate on profit income. Substituting expression (10) for 

 in (9) yields: 

, 

 

 

 

 

(10) 

. 

 

 

 

            (9’) 

Given  that  we  are  dealing  with  a  single  good/service  economy,  the  ‘production’  of  human  capital  (or 
labor skills) does not constitute another production process or productive sector. Indeed, we assume here 
that the single good/service that can be used for both physical capital accumulation and consumption can 
also  be  used  for  human  capital  accumulation.  In  the  long-run  equilibrium,  therefore,  the  growth  rate  of 
output can be measured by the growth rate of either kind of capital, given that both physical and human 
capital grow at the same rate in the long-run equilibrium.2 

At  a  point  in  time,  the  technological  parameters  are  given,  having  resulted  from  previous  human  and 
physical  capital  accumulation.  Over  time,  however,  human  capital  accumulation  takes  place,  which 
results in labor productivity growing at a proportionate rate 

. Formally: 

, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(11) 

where 
 is the growth rate of the human capital to labor force ratio. For simplicity, we assume that the 
level  of  labor  productivity  has  a  one-to-one  correspondence  with  the  average  human  capital,  so  that 

  and  hence 

.  Besides,  given  (3),  the  wage  share  becomes  a  measure  of  the  wage 
compensation received by workers for their human capital: a constant wage share means that the result of 
the  distributive  conflict  between  workers  and  capitalists  is  such  that  any  increase  in  labor  productivity 
arising from human capital accumulation ends up being fully passed on to the real wage. 

Following  Kalecki  (1971),  Kaldor  (1956),  Robinson  (1956,  1962)  and  Pasinetti  (1962),  we  assume  that 
workers  and  capitalists  have  different  consumption  behavior.  Moreover,  the  costs  of  human  capital 
accumulation are entirely funded by the government through the collection of taxes levied on wage and 
profit income, with the government’s propensity to save being equal to zero. Workers provide labor and 
earn  wage  income,  which  is  taxed  at  an  exogenous  rate 
,  and  consume  a  constant  fraction  of 

their disposable income. The propensity to save out of after-tax wages is  given by 

. Although 

we  assume  that  the  available  labor  force, 
excess supply. Firm-owner capitalists receive profit income, pay an exogenous fraction 

,  is  a  constant  normalized  to  one,  workers  are  always  in 
 of it as 

                                                 
2  A  more  inclusive  Neo-Kaleckian  model  of  distribution  and  growth  with  human  capital  accumulation  could 
consider the presence of heterogeneous labor – e.g. by incorporating the distinction between low-skilled and high-
skilled workers, as in Dutt (2010). In fact, these two groups of workers could be taxed at different rates. In light of 
the connection between workers’ human capital and skill levels and their wage bargaining power established in this 
paper, heterogeneity in skill levels could be a source of heterogeneity in workers’ wage bargaining power and even 
intra-working-class conflict over wage income distribution.  In this regard, we are grateful to Fábio Freitas of the 
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, for drawing to our attention that in the classical (political economy) 
approach to occupational wage rates developed in Gleicher and Stevans (1991) more skilled workers have stronger 
wage  bargaining power than less skilled workers. However interesting a more inclusive specification along these 
lines, we leave it for future research. 
 
 

7 

 

01P[(1)(1())]ipghu=++−−()ahh=ˆˆah=01w01wsN01p/uXK=rr(1)(1())prhu=−−rˆaˆˆ()ah=ˆhtaxes, and have a higher saving propensity out of disposable income than workers. The propensity to save 
out of disposable profit income is represented by 
, which means that we further assume that 

the sum of consumption expenditures and tax payments does not exceed income for both classes, as there 
is no borrowing. 

Aggregate  investment  in  human  capital  accumulation  by  the  government  running  a  balanced  budget 
(normalized  by  the  stock  of  physical  capital)  is  consequently  fully  induced  by  wage  and  profit  income 
given the differential tax rates: 

. 

 

 

 

 

(12) 

It  is  important  to  underline  that  any  spending  in  public  education  provision  by  the  government  will 
increase  the  human  capital  endowed  by  the  entire  available  labor  force,  and  not  only  that  of  employed 
workers.3 

3. Short-run equilibrium 

The short-run is defined as the time period in which the stock of physical capital, 
capital, 
,  and  the  pre-tax  money  wage, 
taken as given. The supply-demand equilibrium in the product market can be expressed by: 

,  the  output-labor  ratio, 

,  the  price  level, 

, the stock of human 
,  can  all  be 

, 

 

 

 

 

 

(13) 

where 

  stands  for  aggregate  consumption,  and 

  and 

  for  investment  in  human  and  physical 

capital,  respectively. Therefore, human capital  accumulation is  a source of aggregate demand alongside 
with  investment  on  physical  capital  and  consumption.  The  rationale  is  that  the  provision  of  universal 
public  education  requires  government  expenditures  on  the  single  good/service  which  can  be  used  for 
consumption and investment purposes. 

Or, since aggregate taxes 

 for a balanced budget of the government, we have: 

, 

 

 

where 

 stands for aggregate savings. 

Normalizing (13’) by the physical capital stock yields: 

, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

           (13’) 

          (13”) 

where aggregate savings as a proportion of the physical capital stock is given by: 

. 

 

 

 

(14) 

Substituting 

 from (9’) and 

 from (14) into (13’’) yields: 

. 

 

(15) 

                                                 
3 A more inclusive Neo-Kaleckian model of distribution and growth with human capital accumulation could  also 
incorporate  investment  in  entrepreneurial  human  capital.  For  instance,  as  in  Ehrlich,  Li  and  Liu  (2017),  such  an 
investment  could  result  in  improvements  in  the  capitalist-entrepreneurs’  industrial  and  commercial  knowledge 
which, in this paper, could conceivably positively affect physical capital accumulation. In fact, these authors find 
empirical  evidence  that  investment  in  entrepreneurial  human  capital  may  contribute  positively  to  long-run 
economic growth. 
 
 

8 

 

01wpss(1)HwpIuK=+−(1)(1)(1)sppwwgssu=−−+−(1)(1)(1)(1)(1)ppwwpssuu−−+−=++−−KHaPWHKXCII=++CHIKIHTI=KSI=SXTC=−−isgg=igsgSince aggregate output is given by aggregate effective demand, and labor is always in excess supply, the 
rate of (physical capital) capacity utilization fully adjusts for the product market short-run equilibrium in 
(15) to obtain. The short-run equilibrium value of capacity utilization is thus given by: 

,  

 

 

(16) 

where 
equilibrium  value  of  capacity  utilization,  we  assume  that 
equivalent to a positive denominator in (16): 

 is the multiplier of autonomous investment demand. For stability of the short-run 
,  which  in  turn  is 

. 

The  substance  of  this  Keynesian  stability  condition  is  that  after-tax  saving  (out  of  wages  and  profits 
combined) must react more than after-tax investment in physical capital to changes in capacity utilization, 
so that excess demand or supply is eliminated rather than exacerbated by changes in capacity utilization. 
As in the standard Neo-Kaleckian model, the paradox of thrift holds: a rise in the propensity to save of 
workers  or  capitalists  reduces  the  level  of  economic  activity  as  measured  by  the  rate  of  capacity 
utilization in (16). As this is a one-good/service economy and the government spends all its tax revenues 
on  the  provision  of  universal  public  education,  which  in  turn  requires  government  expenditures  on  the 
single good/service, a rise in any tax rate, by raising the multiplier of autonomous demand, increases the 
rate of capacity utilization in the short run. In fact, as the running of a balanced budget by the government 
is equivalent to the latter’s propensity to spend out of tax revenues being equal to one, a rise in  any tax 
rate  lowers  effective  demand  leakages.  In  this  balanced-budget  context,  then,  taxation  can  be  seen  as  a 
mechanism of what we would dub “forced dissaving” or “forced spending”. 

The  impact  of  an  increase  in  the  wage  share  on  aggregate  effective  demand  (and  hence  on  the  rate  of 
capital capacity utilization) can be examined through the following partial derivative: 

. 

 

 

 

(17) 

Given  that 
effective demand (and hence capacity utilization) regime, 

,  the  parametric  condition  for  the  model  economy  to  operate  in  a  (pre-tax)  wage-led 

, is then given by: 

. 

Therefore, everything else constant, we need a relatively large difference between marginal propensities 
to  save  between  capitalists  and  workers  and/or  a  relatively  small  sensitivity  of  investment  in  physical 
capital to the after-tax profit rate for the economy to be in a (pre-tax) wage-led effective demand regime. 
Moreover,  everything  else  constant,  as  the  government  spends  all  its  tax  revenues  in  the  provision  of 
universal public education, if the tax rate is higher (lower) on profits than on wages, the term in brackets 
will  be  greater  (lower)  than  one,  which  will  raise  the  likelihood  of  a  pre-tax  profit-led  (wage-led) 
effective demand regime. 

Consequently, from (8), since the ratio of physical capital stock to labor force in productivity units, 
, is 
given  in  the  short  run,  a  pre-tax  wage-led  (profit-led)  effective  demand  regime  implies  that  the  rate  of 
employment (and hence the rate of human capital utilization) is (pre-tax) wage- (profit-)led as well. 

 
 

9 

 

*()(1)(1)(1)ppwwuss=−−−+−−**//uau=()(1)(1)(1)0ppwwss−−−+−−*2()(1)(1)()(1)(1)(1)ppwwppwwssuss−−−−=−−−+−−*/0u()()//sigugu01 1wpwpss−−−kFrom  (10)  and  (16),  the  short-run  equilibrium  value  of  the  after-tax  rate  of  profit  on  physical  capital  is 
then given by: 

.  

 

 

 

(18) 

The effect of increases in the wage share on the short-run equilibrium value of the after-tax rate of profit 
on physical capital is given by: 

. 

 

 

 

(19) 

It can be checked that a paradox of costs, namely a positive effect of increases in the wage share on the 
rate of profit on physical capital, may or may not hold, depending on the sign of the numerator in (19). A 
lower propensity to save by workers and a higher tax rate on wages, with the latter increasing spending in 
education, increases the likelihood of occurrence of the paradox of costs. 

4. Long-run equilibrium 

, the output to labor ratio, or labor productivity, 

In the long run we assume that the short-run equilibrium values of the variables are always attained, with 
the economy moving over time due to  changes in the stock of physical  capital, 
, the stock of human 
, and the pre-tax money 
capital, 
. Therefore, one way of following the behavior of the system over time is by examining the 
wage rate, 
dynamics of the short-run state variables 
, the wage share (and consequently its after-tax counterpart, 
,  the  ratio  of  physical  capital  to  labor  supply  in  productivity  units. 
which  is  given  by 
From the definition of these variables, and recalling that the labor force is constant, we have the following 
state transition functions: 

, the price level, 

),  and 

and 

, 

. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(20) 

(21) 

In  the  long-run  equilibrium  characterized  by 
,  therefore,  the  pre-  and  after-tax  real  wage  will 
grow at  a constant  rate  which is  equal  to  the common growth  rate of the stocks of physical  and human 
capital, which in turn is equal to the rate of growth of this one-good economy, 

. 

4.1 Long-run dynamics with analytical solutions 

In order to facilitate our analytical study of the model dynamics and steady-state properties, in this sub-
section we will make two further simplifying assumptions. First, we will assume that the exogenous tax 
, thus avoiding direct effects of changes 
rate on wages and profits is exactly the same, so that 

in  income  distribution  on  human  capital  formation.  Second,  we  will  assume  that  workers  consume  all 
their after-tax wage income, so that 
, while profit earners save all of their after-tax income, so that 

. 

Adopting  these  simplifying  assumptions  yields  the  following  new  expressions  for  the  short-run 
equilibrium level of capacity utilization in physical capital and its response to changes in the wage share, 
from (16) and (17): 

 
 

10 

 

*(1)(1)()(1)(1)(1)pppwwrss−−=−−−+−−*2(1)(1)()(1)(1)(1)pwwppwwsrss−−−=−−−+−−(1)−ˆˆˆˆˆˆWPaVh=−−=−ˆˆˆˆˆkKaKh=−=−ˆˆ0k==*gwp==KHaPWk0ws=1ps=and 

,   

 

.  

 

 

 

 

          (16’) 

           (17’) 

 is 

, and a necessary condition for a positive and stable equilibrium value for 

, it 
Since 
follows  that  the  numerator  in  (17’)  is  positive  and  physical  capital  utilization  varies  positively  with  the 
pre-tax wage share. Note, however, that an increase in the tax rate raises physical capital utilization in the 
short-run  equilibrium,  as  the  corresponding  tax  collection  is  entirely  spent  on  financing  human  capital 
accumulation. As the pre-tax wage share is given in the short run, an increase in the tax rate, which then 
implies  a  fall  in  the  after-tax  wage  share,  nonetheless  brings  about  a  rise  in  capital  capacity  utilization. 
Intuitively, since investment in human capital adds to aggregate effective demand and the tax collection 
which is fully spent on such an investment demand (public saving is zero) has a prior claim on both profit 
and  wage  income,  an  increase  in  the  tax  rate  has  a  positive  net  effect  on  effective  demand.  Thus,  it 
follows  from  (8)  that,  since 
  is  given  in  the  short  run,  the  employment  rate  (which  is  also  the  rate  of 
human  capital  utilization)  varies  positively  with  the  wage  share,  the  tax  rate  and  the  parameters  of  the 
physical capital accumulation function in (9). It turns out, then, that the rates of utilization and growth of 
the aggregate human capital stock both vary positively with the wage share and the tax rate in the short-
run equilibrium. Per (10), meanwhile, the pre-tax rate of profit on physical capital also varies positively 
with  the  tax  rate,  and  the  accompanying  impact  on  the  after-tax  value  of  such  a  rate  is  subject  to  two 
opposite forces in operation: a positive one coming through physical capital utilization and a negative one 
operating  through  the  direct  impact  of  the  tax  rate  on  the  after-tax  profit  rate  on  physical  capital. 
However, we have: 

. 

Interestingly,  therefore,  the  model  features  the  occurrence  of  another  kind  of  ‘paradox  of  costs’,  now 
applying to  the higher costs (to firm-owners capitalists)  associated with a higher tax rate. The reason is 
that the after-tax rate of profit on physical capital varies positively with the tax rate in the short-run when 
the  wage  share  and  the  physical-to-human  capital  are  given.  Later  we  will  check  whether  the  same 
positive relationship holds in the long run as well. 

Meanwhile, given (8) and (11) and the assumption that all the investment in human capital accumulation, 
, it follows 

, is carried out and funded by a government running a balanced budget, so that 

that the aggregate (and average) stock of human capital grows over time according to: 

,   

 

 

 

 

 

(22) 

 is given by (16’). Recall that the human capital stock is uniformly distributed in the labor force, 
where 
so  that  the  employment  rate  also  measures  the  rate  of  utilization  of  such  a  stock.  As  a  result,  the 
specification in (22) can be interpreted as incorporating an accelerator effect, but in this case applied to 
the  investment  in  human  capital  instead  of  physical  capital.  Recall  also  that  we  are  assuming  that  the 
stock of human capital does not depreciate due to either the passage of time or new human capital turning 
existing one obsolete. However, the expression in (22) could be interpreted as referring to the growth rate 
of the net stock of human capital in the presence of de-skilling due to unemployment. In this alternative 
interpretation, a higher rate of employment generates a higher rate of growth of the  net stock of human 
 
 

11 

 

*(1)(1)(1)u=−−−−*2(1)(1)0(1)(1)(1)u−−=−−−−k()()()()*210111r−=−−−−HIHITX==ˆheuk==u01*u1capital by causing less de-skilling (or, ‘unlearning by not doing’) of the existing labor force. Yet another 
interpretation is that human capital accumulation involves on-the-job learning externalities. 

Extending  the  simplifying  assumptions  above  to  (14),  aggregate  saving  as  a  proportion  of  the  capital 
stock is given by: 

Substitution of (14’) and (22) into (21) yields: 

. 

 

 

 

, 

 

 

 

 

           (14’) 

 

(23) 

where 
physical capital stock. 

  is  given  by  (16’),  so  that  (14’)  also  represents  the  nonetheless  demand-led  growth  rate  of  the 

Meanwhile,  substituting  from  (8)  and  (22)  into  (7),  and  from  the  ensuing  expression,  (6)  and  (22)  into 
(20), we obtain: 

, 

 

 

 

 

(24) 

where 

 is again given by (16’). 

Equations  (23)  and  (24),  after  using  (16’),  constitute  a  planar  autonomous  two-dimensional  system  of 
differential equations in which the rates of change of 
 and on 
the parameters of the system. 

 depend on the levels of 

 and 

 and 

Solving (23) for the long-run equilibrium with 
the ratio of physical capital to human capital: 

 gives a locus of points relating the wage share and 

. 

 

 

 

 

 

(25) 

The slope of this isocline can thus be computed as: 

, 

so that along the 
 locus higher ratios of physical-to-human capital are associated with lower levels 
of wage share. Moreover, the higher the tax rate, the more (less) a higher wage share (physical-to-human 
capital ratio) is associated with a lower physical-to-human capital ratio (wage share). Meanwhile, solving 
for 
  using  (24)  yields  the  following  locus  of  points  also  relating  the  wage  share  and  the  ratio  of 
physical capital to human capital: 

. 

 

 

 

 

 

(26) 

Hence, an economically meaningful positive sign for the physical-to-human capital ratio in (26) requires 
that 
that 

is  positive,  which 

its  denominator 

turn  requires 

.  Given 

that 

in 

 and 

 is a parameter measuring workers’ bargaining power in the distributive conflict, 
a positive sign for the physical-to-human capital ratio in the long-run equilibrium requires that workers’ 
bargaining power is not too low or is sufficiently high (and the higher, the higher is the tax rate, given that 
 isocline is vertical 

). Note that it follows from (26) that 

. Therefore, the 

in the 

-space and the value of the physical-to-human capital ratio in the long-run equilibrium, 

, is 

 
 

12 

 

(1)(1)sgu=−−(1)(1ˆ)kku=−−−uˆ(1)kku=+−−uˆ0k=(1)(1)k−−=()10dkd−=−ˆ0k=(1)k=+−/(1)+/(1)1+(/)0dd(/)0dkd=ˆ0=(,)k*kkkˆ0=represented  by  the  expression  in  (26).  We  can  use  (25)  and  (26)  to  solve  for  the  corresponding  unique 
value of the pre-tax wage share in the long-run equilibrium: 

where 

.  Therefore,  an  economically  meaningful  value  for  the  pre-tax  wage 

share  represented  by 

  in  (27)  (and  for  its  after-tax  counterpart, 

)  requires  that 

, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(27) 

, which is 
required for a positive sign for the physical-to-human capital ratio in (26). Meanwhile, the condition that 

 is automatically ensured by our assumption made above that 

. Note that 

 is equivalent to: 

.  

 

 

 

 

 

(28) 

Therefore,  the  minimum  magnitude  of  the  parameter  measuring  workers’  bargaining  power  required  to 
ensure a positive pre-tax wage share in the long-run equilibrium is higher than the minimum magnitude of 
the same parameter required to ensure a positive ratio of physical to human capital ratio in the long-run 
equilibrium  (and  such  a  minimum  magnitude  is  the  higher,  the  higher  is  either  the  parameter  denoting 

capitalists’  bargaining  power,  as 

,  or  the  tax  rate,  as 

).  As  a  result,  an 

, 
economically meaningful value for the unique long-run represented by 
whose substance is that workers’ bargaining power should not be too low or should be sufficiently high. 
Recall that a positive sign for the physical-to-human capital ratio in (26) requires that 
, 

 requires that 

where 

.  In  principle,  therefore,  it  seems  possible  that  the  condition  above  for  an  economically 

meaningful  value  for  the  unique  long-run  equilibrium  is  satisfied  with 

. Yet  it  seems  also 

possible  that  such  a  condition  is  only  satisfied  with 
,  which  is  clearly  a  more  stringent 
condition with respect to the required extent of workers’ bargaining power. In fact, it follows from (28) 

  (

)  if 

that 
.  Hence,  the  higher  is  capitalists’  bargaining 
power, the higher workers’ bargaining power has to be to ensure an economically meaningful value for 
the unique long-run equilibrium. Note, however, that 

 varies negatively with the tax rate. 

),  where 

  (

As shown in the Appendix, the unique long-run equilibrium represented by 
 is locally stable. Let 
us then explore the impact on such a long-run equilibrium of a change in each one of the parameters on 
which  it  depends.  This  will  allow  us  to  investigate  how  these  parametric  changes  ultimately  affect  the 
after-tax wage share (which also measures the after-tax wage compensation that workers receive for their 
human  capital)  and  the  rates  of  physical  capital  utilization,  employment  (which  also  measures  human 
capital  utilization)  and  output  growth  in  the  long-run  equilibrium.  First,  note  that  a  higher  bargaining 
power of capitalists as measured by 
) (per (27)), so 
that physical capital utilization and output growth fall. The impact of such a rise in capitalists’ bargaining 
power  on  the  rate  of  employment  in  the  long-run  equilibrium  solution,  which  is  therefore  given  by 
, is the result of two effects acting in opposite directions. 
A  rise  in  capitalists’  bargaining  power  exerts  an  upward  (a  downward)  pressure  on  the  long-run 
equilibrium employment rate by raising (lowering) the physical-to-human capital ratio (pre- and after-tax 
wage share). In fact, it follows from (27) that: 

 (per (26)) and lowers 

 raises 

 (and 

 
 

13 

 

, 

 

 

 

(29) 

*1=−/(1)[(1)]−+−*01*(1)−010111+−(/)0(/)0**(,)k/(1)+11111(1)/−**(,)k*k**(1)−*******/(/)(/)(/)eukku=+()()*011=−=−−+−so that, using (17’), we obtain that: 

. 

 

(30) 

Recall that in the long-run equilibrium characterized by 
, the pre- and after-tax real wage grows 
at a constant rate which is equal to the common growth rate of the stocks of physical and human capital, 
which  is  equal  to  the  growth  rate  of  the  economy, 
.  But  given  that  the  growth  rate  of  the  economy 
varies positively with the pre-tax wage share in the long-run equilibrium, a fall in the pre-tax wage share 
lowers the common growth rates of the stocks of physical and human capital in the long-run equilibrium. 
Meanwhile,  although  it  follows  from  (25)  that 
,  the  employment  rate  also 
varies positively with the pre-tax wage share in the long-run equilibrium: 

, 

 

 

(31) 

which confirms, upon substitution of (16’) and (25) into (22), that the growth rate of the stock of human 
capital, and hence the growth rate of output, varies positively with the pre-tax wage share in the long-run 
equilibrium: 

. 

 

 

 

 

 

(32) 

Therefore, given that the growth rate of the stock of human capital in the long-run equilibrium is given by 

, in the long-run equilibrium the employment rate varies positively with the pre-tax wage 

share and therefore negatively with the bargaining power of capitalists as measured by 

 in (6): 

.  

 

(33) 

equilibrium.  Thus, 

Second, a higher bargaining power of workers as measured by 

 (and 
) (per (27)), so that both physical capital utilization and output growth increase in the long-run 
long-run  equilibrium  employment 
rate,  given  by 
,  is  the  result  of  two  effects  that  operate  in  opposite 
directions.  An  increase  in  workers’  bargaining  power  exerts  an  upward  (a  downward)  pressure  on  the 
long-run equilibrium employment rate by lifting (lowering) the pre- and after-tax wage share (physical-
to-human capital ratio). In fact, (27) implies that: 

 (per (26)) and raises 

the  effect  on 

 lowers 

the 

so that, using (17’), we obtain that: 

, 

 

 

. 

 

 

(34) 

(35) 

Given that the growth rate of output similarly varies positively with the pre-tax wage share in the long-
run equilibrium, it follows that a  higher bargaining power of workers will also result in a higher output 

 
 

14 

 

()()()()()()()*2*11011111u−−=−−+−−−−−ˆˆ0k==*g*(/)(1)/0k=−−()()()()*****210111eukku−=+=−−−−***ˆ()0ghe==****ˆhteuk==()()()()*****201111eukku=+=−−−−−+−*k**(1)−*******/(/)(/)(/)eukku=+()()()*21011+=−=−+−()()()()()()()()*22*111011111u−−+=−+−−−−−growth in  the long-run  equilibrium. Meanwhile, as shown above, although it follows from  (25) that the 
physical-to-human capital ratio varies negatively with the pre-tax wage share in the long-run equilibrium, 
the  rate  of  employment  nonetheless  varies  positively  with  the  pre-tax  wage  share  in  the  long-run 
equilibrium.  Hence,  in  the  long-run  equilibrium  the  employment  rate  (which  also  measures  the  human 
capital utilization rate) varies positively with workers’ bargaining power as measured by 

 in (7): 

.  

 

(36) 

Finally,  let  us  explore  the  impact  of  an  increase  in  the  uniform  tax  rate  on  physical  capital  utilization, 
human capital utilization (or employment rate) and output growth. In the balanced-budget context of this 
paper,  note  that  the  tax  rate  can  be  alternatively  interpreted  as  the  share  of  tax  spending  in  public 
education  in  output  or  the  share  of  investment  in  human  capital  in  output.  Using  (26),  the  impact  of  a 
higher  tax  rate  on  the  horizontal  intercept  of  the  vertical 
  isocline,  and  therefore  on  the  long-run 
equilibrium physical-to-human capital ratio, is given by: 

.   

 

 

 

 

(37) 

Thus,  the 
direction in the case of 

  isocline  will  shift  to  the  right  (left)  if 

),  and  will  not  be  displaced  in  any 
. Meanwhile, we can make use of (25) to evaluate the impact of a higher tax 

  (

rate on the negatively sloped 

 isocline, which is given by: 

.   

 

 

 

 

 

(38) 

Thus, the negatively sloped 
 isocline shifts to the left and becomes steeper in response to an increase 
in the tax rate. It follows that if the ability of workers to translate a rise in either the employment rate or 
the growth rate of the average human capital stock into a higher rate of growth of the nominal wage is not 
, both the pre- and after-tax wage share unambiguously fall as a result of an 
sufficiently high, so that 
 isocline shifts to the left 
increase in the tax rate in the long-run equilibrium. However, even if the 
in response to an increase in the tax rate because workers’ bargaining power is relatively higher (
), it 
is still the case that both the pre- and after-tax wage share fall as a result of such an increase in the tax rate 
in the long-run equilibrium. In fact, we can use (27) to obtain that: 

.   

 

 

(39) 

Moreover, the absolute value of the negative response of the pre-tax wage share to an increase in the tax 
rate in the long-run equilibrium varies positively with workers’ bargaining power: 

. 

 

(40) 

Meanwhile, given that it follows from (27) that 
long-run equilibrium also varies negatively with the tax rate: 

, the after-tax wage share in the 

 
 

15 

 

()()()()()*****22101111eukku+=+=−−−−+−ˆ0=*2(1)[(1)]k−=+−ˆ0=111=ˆ0k=21k−=−ˆ0k=1ˆ0=1()()()()*2211011−++−=−=−−+−()()()()()()*321111(/)011−+++++−=−+−*(1)(1)(1)−=−−.   

 

 

(41) 

In  the  long-run  equilibrium,  therefore,  unlike  the  result  in  the  short-run  equilibrium  when  the  pre-tax 
wage share is given, physical capital utilization varies negatively with the tax rate: 

. 

 

 

 

(42) 

Thus, the employment rate also varies negatively with the tax rate in the long-run equilibrium: 

, 

 

 

 

 

 

(43) 

so that it follows from (14’), after using (16’) and (27), or alternatively from (22), after using (16’), (25) 
and (27), that the output growth rate also varies negatively with the tax rate in the long-run equilibrium: 

. 

 

 

 

 

(44) 

Meanwhile, the absolute value of the negative response of the output growth rate to a rise in the tax rate 
in the long-run equilibrium varies negatively with workers’ bargaining power: 

. 

 

 

 

(45) 

In the long-run equilibrium, therefore, a rise in the uniform tax rate generates a decrease in the rates of 
physical  capital  utilization,  employment  and  output  growth  regardless  of  the  strength  of  workers’ 
bargaining  power  to  translate  a  rise  in  either  the  rate  of  employment  or  the  rate  of  human  capital 
accumulation into a higher rate of growth of the nominal wage. However, per (45), the absolute value of 
the negative response of the output growth rate to a rise in the tax rate in the long-run equilibrium varies 
negatively with the bargaining power of workers. 

It  should  be  emphasized  that  the  negative  impact  of  a  higher  tax  rate  (which  is  equivalent  to  a  higher 
share of output dedicated to investment in human capital formation by the balanced-budget government) 
expressed in (44) does not mean that human capital accumulation is not output growth-enhancing in the 
long-run equilibrium. In fact, in the long-run equilibrium with a constant physical-to-human capital ratio 
the  stocks  of  physical  and  human  capital  grow  at  a  common  rate  which  is  therefore  the  growth  rate  of 
output of this one-good/service economy. Yet, since investment in human capital exerts a positive impact 
on  both  aggregate  supply  and  aggregate  demand,  it  turns  out  that  a  higher  share  of  output  dedicated  to 
investment  spending  in  human  capital  formation  reduces  the  rates  of  utilization  and  accumulation  of 
human  capital  in  the  long-run  equilibrium.  Alternatively,  a  strengthening  in  the  bargaining  power  of 
workers is output growth-enhancing in the long-run equilibrium by virtue of raising the pre- and after-tax 
wage share and thereby the rates of utilization and accumulation of physical and human capital. 

 

5. Conclusion 

This paper incorporates human capital accumulation through provision of universal public education by a 
balanced-budget  government  to  a  Neo-Kaleckian  analytical  framework  of  physical  and  human  capital 
 
 

16 

 

()()()()()**2111011−−++−=−−−+−()()()()()*22*101111u−=−−−−−+−()****210euku−=−()*201[(1)]g=−−−+−()()*3(/)1(1)01[(1)]g−+++=−−−+−utilization, income distribution and output growth. The overall level of education, as represented by the 
stock of human capital, affects positively workers’ productivity in output production and thereby arguably 
their bargaining power in the labor market. The wage share in income is therefore also a measure of the 
wage compensation that workers receive for their human capital accumulated through education. 

In the short-run equilibrium, a time span in which the stocks of physical and human capital as well as pre- 
and after-tax income distribution are all given, standard Neo-Kaleckian results arise, and the difference in 
tax  rates  on  wage  and  profit  income  has  distributive  implications  for  consumption  and  investment 
behavior and determine the demand regime of the economy. In particular, if the tax rate on profit income 
is  higher  than  that  on  wage  income,  a  (pre-tax)  wage-led  economy  may  become  (pre-tax)  profit-led. 
Assuming  a  uniform  tax  rate,  the  paper  also  investigates  the  dynamics  of  a  two-dimensional  system 
featuring  the  wage  share  and  the  physical-to-human  capital  ratio.  In  the  long-run  equilibrium,  a  rise  in 
workers’  (capitalists’)  bargaining  power  raises  (lowers)  the  pre-  and  after-tax  wage  share,  which  raises 
(reduces) the rates of physical capital utilization, employment (which measures the rate of human capital 
utilization as well) and output growth. Meanwhile, an increase in the uniform tax rate (and hence in the 
share of output dedicated to tax spending in public education) reduces the long-run equilibrium values of 
the  pre-  and  after-tax  wage  share,  which  in  turn  lowers  the  rates  of  physical  capital  utilization, 
employment and output growth. Yet the absolute magnitude of the negative response of the output growth 
rate  to  a  rise  in  the  tax  rate  in  the  long-run  equilibrium  varies  negatively  workers’  bargaining  power. 
Counterintuitively, in  the long-run equilibrium,  a higher share of public  investment  in  human capital  in 
output  lowers  the  rate  of  human  capital  accumulation  and  thereby  the  rate  of  output  growth.  It  follows 
that  a  higher  level  of  investment  in  human  capital  impacts  positively  (negatively)  on  long-run  output 
growth  when  measured  relatively  to  the  current  stock  of  human  capital  (flow  of  output).  Therefore,  a 
strengthening in the bargaining power of workers is output growth-enhancing in the long-run equilibrium, 
given that it raises the rates of accumulation of both physical and human capital. 

Given  that  the  wage  share  also  measures  the  wage  compensation  that  workers  receive  for  their  human 
capital,  a rise in  such wage compensation is  then conducive to  higher rates of human capital  utilization 
and accumulation as well as output growth in the long-run equilibrium. The wage compensation received 
by  workers  for  their  human  capital,  however,  is  established  in  a  contentious  context  of  accelerating-
inflation  conflicting  claims  on  available  income  by  workers  and  capitalists  instead  of  being  fully  and 
automatically granted to workers in a friendly wage negotiation. 

References  

Borghans, L. and Grip, A. (2000): The overeducated worker? The economics of skill utilization, Edward 

Elgar, Cheltenham. 

Boianovsky, M. (2017): “Optimum saving and growth: Harrod on dynamic welfare economics”,  Oxford 

Economic Papers, 69(4), pp. 1120–1137. 

Carvalho, L., Lima, G. T. and Serra, G. (2017): “Debt-financed knowledge capital accumulation, capacity 
utilization  and  economic  growth”,  University  of  São  Paulo,  Department  of  Economics  Working 
Paper Series 2017-32. 

Commendatore,  P.,  Panico,  C.  and  Pinto,  A.  (2011):  “The  influence  of  different  forms  of  government 

spending on distribution and growth”, Metroeconomica, 62(1), pp. 1–23. 

Commendatore, P. and Pinto, A. (2011): “Public expenditure composition  and growth:  a neo-Kaleckian 

analysis”, Cahiers D’Economie Politique, 61, pp. 187–222. 

Dutt,  A.  K.  (1984):  “Stagnation,  income  distribution  and  monopoly  power”,  Cambridge  Journal  of 

Economics, 8(1), pp. 25–40. 

 
 

17 

 

Dutt,  A.  K.  (1990):  Growth,  distribution  and  uneven  development,  Cambridge  University  Press, 

Cambridge. 

Dutt, A. K. (2010): “Keynesian growth theory in the 21st century”, in P. Arestis and M. Sawyer (Eds.): 

Twenty-first Century Keynesian Economics, Macmillan Palgrave, London. 

Dutt, A. K. (2013): “Government spending, aggregate demand and economic growth”, Review of 

Keynesian Economics 1(1), 105–119. 

Ehrlich, I., Li, D. and Liu, Z. (2017): “The role of entrepreneurial human capital as a driver of 

endogenous economic growth”, Journal of Human Capital, 11(3), pp. 310–351. 

Eichner, A. (1976): The megacorp and oligopoly, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 

Gleicher,  D.  and  Stevans,  L.  (1991):  A  classical  approach  to  occupational  wage  rates,  Praeger,  New 

York. 

Gordon,  D.,  Weisskopf,  T.  and  Bowles,  S.  (1984):  “Long-term  growth  and  the  cyclical  restoration  of 
profitability”, in R. Goodwin, M. Kruger and A. Vercelli (eds.): Nonlinear Models of Fluctuating 
Growth, Springer-Verlag, Berlin. 

Guger,  A.,  Marterbauer,  M.  and  Walterskirchen,  E.  (2006):  “Growth  policy  in  the  spirit  of  Steindl  and 

Kalecki”, Metroeconomica, 57(3), pp. 428–442. 

Guger,  A.  and  Walterskirchen,  E.  (2012):  “Josef  Steindl’s  Life  and  Work  in  Austria”,  PSL  Quarterly 

Review, 65(261), pp. 135-149. 

Harrod,  R.F.  (1962):  “Economic  development  and  Asian  regional  cooperation”,  Pakistan  Development 

Review, 2(1), pp. 1–22. 

Kaldor, N. (1956): “Alternative theories of distribution”, Review of Economic Studies, 23(2), pp. 83–100. 

Kalecki,  M.  (1971):  Selected  essays  on  the  dynamics  of  the  capitalist  economy,  Cambridge  University 

Press, Cambridge. 

Laramie,  A.  J.  (1991):  “Taxation  and  Kalecki’s  distribution  factors”,  Journal  of  Post  Keynesian 

Economics, 13(4), pp. 583–594. 

Laramie,  A,  and  Mair,  D.  (1996):  “Taxation  and  Kalecki’s  theory  of  the  business  cycle”,  Cambridge 

Journal of Economics, 20(4), pp. 451–465. 

Laramie,  A.  and  Mair,  D.  (2003):  “The  effects  of  taxation  in  a  Kaleckian  growth  model”, 

Metroeconomica, 54(2-3), pp. 326–345. 

Lucas,  R.  E.  (1988):  “On  the  mechanics  of  economic  development”,  Journal  of  Monetary  Economics, 

22(1), pp. 3–42. 

Mair,  D.  and  Laramie,  A.  (1997):  “A  Kaleckian  theory  of  taxation”,  International  Papers  in  Political 

Economy, 4(1), pp. 1–43. 

Mankiw, G., Romer, D. and Weil, D. (1992): “A contribution to the empirics of economic growth”,  The 

Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(2), pp. 407–437. 

Pasinetti,  L.  (1962):  “The  rate  of  profit  and  income  distribution  in  relation  to  the  rate  of  economic 

growth”, Review of Economic Studies, 29, pp. 267–79. 

Robinson, J. (1956): The accumulation of capital, Macmillan, London. 

Robinson, J. (1962): Essays in the theory of economic growth, Macmillan, London. 

 
 

18 

 

Rowthorn, B. (1977): “Conflict, inflation and money”, Cambridge Journal of Economics, 1(3), pp. 215–

39. 

Skott,  P.  (2006):  “Wage  inequality  and  overeducation  in  a  model  with  efficiency  wage”,  Canadian 

Journal of Economics, 39(1), pp. 94–123. 

Steindl, J. (1968): “Educational Planning and Economic Growth”, in OECD (ed.):  Policy and Planning, 

Austria, Clr. III, Paris, OECD. 

Tavani, D. and Zamparelli, L. (2016): “Public capital, redistribution and growth in a two-class economy”, 

Metroeconomica, 67(2), pp. 458–476. 

 
 

19 

 

The Jacobian matrix of partial derivatives for the two-dimensional dynamic system composed by (23) and 
(24), when evaluated at the unique long-run equilibrium (

) by using (16’’), is given by: 

APPENDIX 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(A-1) 

(A-2) 

(A-3) 

(A-4) 

All of these partial derivatives can be unambiguously signed. The sign of 

 is negative: the growth rate 

of the ratio of physical capital stock to labor supply in productivity units varies negatively with its level. 
The reason is that although a change in this level leaves the growth rate of physical capital unchanged, it 
impacts  positively  on  the  employment  rate  and  thereby  on  the  growth  rate  of  the  human  capital  stock. 
Meanwhile,  a  change  in  the  wage  share  seems  to  have  an  ambiguous  impact  on  the  growth  rate  of  the 
ratio  of  physical  capital  to  labor  supply  in  productivity  units,  as  it  varies  the  growth  rates  of  the  two 
stocks of capital in the same direction. However, given (25), the term in brackets in (A-2) is equal to zero, 

so that 

 is negative. In fact, it follows from (25) that the slope of the 

 locus is negative, and given 

that such a slope can be expressed as 

, it turns out that 

 is negative. Recall that the term in 

brackets in (A-3) has to be positive to ensure an economically meaningful positive sign for the physical-
 is positive. Finally, 
to-human capital ratio in the long-run equilibrium, which implies that the sign of 

given  that  the  term  in  brackets  in  (A-4)  is  equal  to  zero,  given  (26),  it  follows  that 

.  Therefore, 

given  that  the  trace  of  the  Jacobian  matrix  in  (A-1)-(A-4),  which  is  represented  by 

,  is 

negative,  whereas  the  respective  determinant,  which  is  given  by 

,  is  positive,  it 

follows that the unique long-run equilibrium (

) represented by (26)-(27) is locally stable. 

One  noteworthy  feature  of  this  result  regarding  the  existence,  uniqueness  and  stability  of  a  long-run 
equilibrium  is  that  it  does  not  depend  on  how  the  rates  of  physical  capital  utilization,  employment  and 
output growth vary with the pre- or after-tax wage share. In fact, the long-run equilibrium values of the 
pre- and after-tax wage share and the physical-to-human capital ratio given by (27) and (26), respectively, 
depend uniquely on the parameters which measure workers’ and capitalists’ bargaining power and the tax 
rate. However, the ultimate impact of a change in any of these parameters on the rates of physical capital 
utilization,  human  capital  utilization  (or  rate  of  employment)  and  output  growth  in  the  unique  long-run 
equilibrium does depend on how these demand-led macroeconomic variables respond to a change in the 
pre- or after-tax distribution of income. 

 
 

20 

 

**,k*11ˆ0kJuk=−=****12*(1)()1ˆ1()kuJuk==−−+−−−*21ˆ(1)uJk==+−***22*ˆ(1)uJkk==−+−11J12Jˆ0k=1112–/JJ12J21J220J=1122()TrJJJ=+11221221()DetJJJJJ=−**,k