 

Economic development and inflation: a theoretical and empirical analysis 

1 

André Roncaglia de Carvalho1 
Rafael Ribeiro2 
André M. Marques3 

Resumo 

O presente artigo analisa a relação entre inflação e desenvolvimento econômico. A literatura sobre o tema 
tem  silenciado  sobre  a  noção  empírica  de  que  países  em  desenvolvimento  apresentam  inflação  média 
mais  elevada  do  que  economias  desenvolvidas,  ignorando  portanto  a  existência  de  uma  vasta  gama  de 
forças relacionadas ao desenvolvimento que afetam o nível da inflação. Apresenta-se um modelo teórico 
simples ligando a inflação a uma antiga tradição de economia do desenvolvimento, na linha de Kaldor e 
Kalecki, a qual orientou a seleção das variáveis sensíveis ao desenvolvimento. Evidência empírica é então 
levantada para testar a hipótese de que o desenvolvimento econômico implica um viés baixista às taxas de 
inflação,  o  que  é  feito  utilizando  um  estimador  do  tipo  feasible-GLS  a  uma  amostra  de  65  países  com 
dados referentes ao período entre 2001 e 2011. O estudo encontrou uma correlação inversa entre os níveis 
de  inflação  e  o  conteúdo  tecnológico  das  economias,  medido  pela  participação  de  exportações  de  alta 
tecnologia,  capital  humano  e  desemprego  cíclico,  enquanto  o  grau  de  persistência  inflacionaria,  o 
crescimento  dos  termos  de  troca  e  o  grau  de  abertura  da  economia  afetaram  positivamente  a  inflação. 
Nossos resultados também detectaram uma baixa e negativa correlação entre persistência inflacionária e 
desenvolvimento econômico, apontando para outras causas da inflação, a serem analisadas futuramente, 
tais como aspectos regionais, culturais e institucionais que geram maior memória inflacionaria no sistema. 

Palavras-chave: desenvolvimento econômico; inflação; estimador FGLS. 

Abstract 

This paper studies the relation between inflation and economic development. The literature is still largely 
silent  regarding  the  empirical  notion  that  developing  countries  endure  higher  average  inflation  than 
developed  economies,  thus  overlooking  the  existence  of  a  vast  array  of  development-related  forces 
accounting for different inflationary behaviors. We set out a simple theoretical model linking the inflation 
phenomenon to a long-standing tradition of development economics, in the likes of Kaldor and Kalecki, 
which  provided  the  development-sensitive  variables.  Empirical  evidence  is  then  garnered  to  test  the 
hypothesis  that  economic  development  engenders  a  downward  bias  to  inflation  rates.  Through  the 
feasible-GLS  estimator  in  a  panel  of  65  countries  from  2001  to  2011  the  study  found  an  inverse 
correlation between inflation levels and the technological content of the economy measured by share of 
high-tech  exports,  human  capital  and  cyclical  unemployment,  whilst  directly  related  to  the  degree  of 
inflation  persistence  and  terms  of  trade  growth.  Our  results  also  show  an  inverse  and  low  correlation 
between inflation persistence and economic development, which points to other determinants of inflation 
persistence,  to  be  dealt  with  in  future  research,  such  as  regional,  cultural  and  institutional  aspects  that 
instill greater inflationary memory into the system. 

Keywords: Economic Development; Inflation; FGLS estimator. 

JEL: N16, O54. 

Área 4 (ANPEC): Macroeconomia, Economia Monetária e Finanças 

                                                           

1  Department  of  Economics  at  Federal  University  of  São  Paulo  (UNIFESP).  Contact:  andre.roncaglia.carvalho@usp.br 
Remaining errors are our own. This is a draft version. Please do not cite without express permission by all authors. 
2 Department of Land Economy, University of Cambridge, UK. Contact: rsmribeiro@gmail.com  
3 Department of Economics at Federal University of Paraiba. Contact: 00094751@ufrgs.br 

2 

 

1 Introduction 

After long-lasting theoretical debates between the early 1970s and late 1990s, the academic literature on 
inflation  has  reached  a  fair  range  of  consensus.  Despite  some  dissent  regarding  the  specific  causes  and 
channels through which inflation is worked out into the system, it is  generally accepted that inflation is 
caused  by  three  primal  causes.  First,  excess  aggregate  demand  over  supply  is  a  typical  feature  of 
overheated  economies  enjoying  full-employment  of  productive  resources.  Second,  the  cost-push 
component results from one-time or systematic shortages of productive resources - due to droughts, wars, 
etc.  -  or  from  market  power  enjoyed  by  monopolies  and  oligopolies,  labor  unions  and  carry-trade 
speculators,  thereby  swelling  costs  that  are  transmitted  to  prices  of  consumption  goods.  Finally,  the 
inertial inflation component reflexively fuels inflation by way of an autoregressive mechanism imbued in 
distributional  conflicts  among  social  groups;  persisting  conflict  is  likely  to  crystalize  in  economic 
institutions  practices  such  as  indexation  and  other  systematic  revisions  of  prices,  wages  and  rents  that 
incorporate  occasional  shocks  to  inflation  trends.  Therefore  understanding,  predicting  and  taming 
inflation usually involve a weighted combination of these three central forces. Conventional policies are 
biased  toward  a  demand-based  diagnostics  of  rising  prices  whilst  heterodox  policy-prescriptions  are 
mostly  grounded  on  cost-related  and  institutional  forces  due  to  the  recognition  that  firms  in  modern 
economies operate with excess capacity.  

  Notwithstanding  this  established  wisdom,  one  might  wonder  about  the  extent  to  which  these  forces 
explain inflation in different economies. Are local features fully captured by the magnitude of parameters 
mediating  between  these  inflationary  forces  and  the  response  by  price  indexes?  Or  does  historical  and 
institutional  variety  imply  qualitative  differences  among  countries  as  to  the  behavior  of  inflation?  As 
illustration  of  this  point,  one  could  recall  that  cost  structures  vary  widely  across  the  development 
spectrum due to specific and complex inter-related elasticities of supply, labor market regulations, State 
intervention  in  economically  strategic  markets  (such  as  infrastructure),  exchange-rate  volatility  and  so 
forth. These are questions not easily addressed in simple and reductionist frameworks. However daunting 
may be such a challenge, their implications are clear and should provide enough motivation for any effort 
in  this  direction,  namely:  policy  could  be  improved  by  taking  heed  of  disregarded  nuances  and 
mechanisms,  should  other  forces  prove  significant  in  accounting  for  inflation.  Simply  stated:  inflation 
control is  likely to  require more than vigilant  and rigorous monetary policy.  By potentially overlooking 
the  existence  of  a  broader  array  of  development-related  forces  accounting  for  different  inflationary 
behaviors, current academic knowledge is likely to poorly inform both the public and policymakers who 
hold a stake in this matter.4 

                                                           

4  One  topic  only  superficially  touched  upon  in  this  paper  refers  to  persistence  of  inflation.  Often  associated  with  lack  of 
government  willingness  to  cut  demand  in  poorly  managed  undeveloped  economies,  this  phenomenon  is  no  stranger  to 
developed  economies,  having  been  fairly  well  documented  in  time  series  data  for  OECD  countries  in  the  post-War  era  (see 
Fuhrer  2009).  In  fact,  the  European  Central  Bank  has  set  up  its  own  institutional  branch  to  oversee  the  phenomenon:  the 
Eurosystem  Inflation  Persistence  Network  (see  Marques  2004  and  O’Reilly  &  Whelan  2004).  Persistence  itself  is  quite 
encompassing and leaves few economies unaffected. It is thus a matter of degree on which we ponder: is there any relationship 
between the level of economic development and the observed level of inflation across countries? In addition to the monetarist 
narrative of a helicopter dropping money on the population, persistent inflation requires some level of price, wage, structural 
and  institutional  rigidity.  A  downwardly  rigid  behavior  of  prices  may  be  related  to  a  variety  of  causes,  amongst  which  we 
could cite: informational asymmetries and other market imperfections, as well as a permanently expansionary fiscal, credit and 
monetary  policies  due  to  inadequate  policy  regimes  (e.g.  fixed  exchange  rates  or  inefficient  taxation  schemes).  On  the 
institutional  realm,  we  can  cite  the  widespread  formal  and  informal  indexation  of  contracts  and  prices,  Government  control 
over specific prices, such as the minimum wage and certain public utilities services, and, finally, the action of labor unions to 
tie  wage  revisions  to  the  pace  of  lagged  inflation.  These  rigidities  are  likely  to  amplify  the  impacts  of  random  shocks,  both 
internal  and  external,  which  may  render  some  key  macroeconomic  prices  more  volatile  -  such  as  the  exchange  rate  or  the 
interest rate -, thereby allowing transient impacts to be absorbed by inflation trends. Extensions of the presente effort will lead 
to more thorough investigations of the relation between persistence and development, a connection that is conditionned upon 
the existence of correlation between development and level of inflation. 

3 

 

  This paper tackles these questions - albeit preliminarily - by formalizing and testing the existence of a 
relation between economic development and inflation. The literature has been largely silent on this issue, 
despite  the  fact  that  simple  descriptive  statistical  analysis  supports  the  empirical  notion  that  developing 
countries endure higher average inflation than developed economies. The argument is organized in four 
sections  beyond  this  introduction.  The  second  discusses  the  relation  between  inflation  and  economic 
development. Section  3 presents the theoretical  model undergirding the  empirical  analysis, which is  the 
object  of  section  4.  The  last  section  concludes  the  paper  pointing  out  limitations  and  a  future  research 
agenda on this topic. 

2 Economic Development and Inflation: bad policies or hidden connections? 

The  recent  empirical  literature  on  development  economics  has  been  timid  about  the  connection  under 
scrutiny  here.  Most  studies  undertake  the  task  of  verifying  correlations  between  inflation  and  growth. 
Even so, the only study on the matter seems to be Bruno and Easterly (1998), which have found no such 
correlations  between  growth  rates  and  inflation  in  a  sample  of  countries,  although  they  were  mostly 
focused on high inflation experiences.5 The fact that the majority of countries managed to curb inflation 
in the 1990s - and to keep it under control ever since - paved the way to the notion that an era of “Great 
Moderation” had finally begun (Rogoff 2004). The problem of inflation became indelibly detached from 
development concerns.  

 

Figure 1 - Inflation Rates for Country Groups classified according to income levels  – 1996-2013. Source: World 
Bank. 

As a result, no empirical study, to the best of our knowledge, has been able to account for what 
simple  descriptive  statistics  reveal,  namely,  that  low-  and  middle-income  countries  are  prone  to  have 
higher inflation scores than high-income countries (see Figure 1). One possible explanation for such a gap 
in the literature may be the difficulty in deriving general statements from country-specific empirical data. 
This  is  hardly  any  surprise.  There  is  a  high  variance  of  inflation  scores  within  these  low-  and  middle-
income sub-samples, which clearly owes to their heterogeneous institutional and productive frameworks.   

Difference  in  inflation  rates  among  countries  is  then  frequently  –  and  squarely  -  ascribed  to 
credibility  of  governments,  the  quality  of  institutions  of  monetary  policy,  practical  arrangements  in 

                                                           

5  Two  papers  back  in  the  late  1950s  undertook  this  task.  Wai  (1959)  and  Bhátia  (1960)  also  found  no  clear  relationship 
between economic growth and inflation. Both were also constrained by the idea that development was a synonym with growth, 
a very common connotation at the time.  

4 

 

Central Banking and technical aspects of inflation indices. Notwithstanding the truth they convey, these 
elements  overlook  shared  economic  and  structural  features  related  to  each  country’s  stage  of 
development.  The  empirical  divide  regarding  the  inflationary  behavior  between  high  income  and  upper 
middle-income countries observed in the data is a real phenomenon yet in search of a theory.6 However, 
the difficulties in building one are quite daunting, for it must take heed of the productive structure, degree 
of  openness,  distributive  profiles  (policy-induced  and  otherwise),  as  well  as  several  institutional  and 
historical  specificities.  These  aspects  taken  together  may  reveal  deep-seated  sources  of  downward 
inflexibility of prices, which add up to -  and enhance  - the more close-to-surface mechanisms affecting 
the level of inflation. 

The  determinants  of  price  patterns  are  intricate  and  thus  do  not  subject  easily  to  empirical 
decomposition  into  separate  and  independent  components.  Supply  and  demand  schedules  undergo 
simultaneous determination, leading to the empirical problem of identifying an instrumental variable that 
can provide some information about the pricing process. Furthermore, during a process of development, 
the  productive  structure  undergoes  sharp  changes  in  relative  prices.  The  practical  impossibility  of 
enhancing productivity simultaneously in all sectors implies that some sectors present more elastic supply 
than others, which engenders a dual productive system (see Chenery 1975).  

Economic development invites permanent changes in the composition of aggregate supply and in the 
relative prices of tradable and non-tradable goods; if sectional prices are downwardly inflexible, inflation 
must  rise  to  restore  consistency  to  the  system.  Under  such  a  process,  inflation  may  prove  resistant  to 
conventional  demand-management  policies.  An  inflation-free  development  process  has  two  basic 
conditions:  i)  Favorable  terms  of  foreign  trade  guarantee  balanced  external  accounts,  which  precludes 
excessive  currency  devaluation  and  subsequent  rising  inflation  due  to  the  exchange-rate  pass-through 
mechanism; ii) A technology-driven dynamic compatibility between the profiles of supply and demand to 
prevent  sector-related  price  pressures  from  becoming  widespread.  The  literature  termed  this  process  a 
“cost  disease”,  following  Baumol  (2012),  when  related  to  developed  economies´  trend  of  services-
dominated  productive  structure.  However,  when  a  premature  process  of  deindustrialization  affects  low-
income  countries,  it  is  expected  to  diminish  not  only  the  flexibility  of  aggregate  supply  to  changes  in 
aggregate demand but also the share of high-tech goods and services in total exports value. Hence, self-
sustaining  cost-shift  inflation  can  be  explained  on  the  basis  of  structural  changes  swaying  the  economy 
towards  labor-intensive  sectors.  The  latters’  sluggish  innovating  thrust  sets  limits  to  increases  in  labor 
productivity, while labor market inter-sector dynamics and widespread indexation render prices inflexible 
downwards. 

In a seminal influential paper, Olivera (1964, p. 325) spelled out the consequences of a relative price 
variation upon the money price level. He further underlined that, in the presence of any degree of nominal 
price inflexibility, such changes in the general price level are not reversible. This means that, following a 
displacement of equilibrium relative prices, restoring the previous position will not wipe off the increase 
in the price level brought about by an alteration of that situation. In fact, a movement aiming to reset the 
previous configuration of relative prices would most likely cause an additional increase in money prices. 
Thus, if adjustments are carried out in oscillating patterns, the total increase in the latter is bound to be 
much greater, depending on the amplitude and frequency of the intervening fluctuations. Olivera divided 
the economy between the technologically backward agricultural sector and the industrializing sectors. As 
rising  wages  in  the  industrial  sectors  met  a  rigid  food  supply,  relative  prices  could  only  be  made 
consistent with the productivity differentials between these two sectors by way of higher inflation. Once 
industrialization  was  fairly  advanced,  technological  spillover  effects  would  increase  the  productivity  of 
agriculture and these rigidities were likely to succumb (see also Greenwald & Stiglitz 2006). Influenced 

                                                           

6  Underlying  our  working  hypothesis  is  the  assumption  that  the  relation  between  inflation  and  the  level  of  development  is  a 
group phenomenon, where some common set of forces sustains inflation rates in developing countries above those endured by 
high-income  countries.  Countries  classified  within  the  same  range  of  development  may  still  display  distinct  inflation  trends, 
while being bound by a shared structural “inflation floor”. 

5 

 

by the challenges faced by developing economies in the 1960s and by the focus of catching-up policies, 
the  Latin  American  structuralist  school  failed  to  anticipate  the  development  problems  faced  by  fully 
industrialized countries, namely: the process of deindustrialization. 

In  that  regard,  Colin  Clark’s  (1957)  and  Fuchs’s  (1968)  influential  hypothesis  stated  that  an 
industrialized  economy  progresses  by  shifting  aggregate  demand  from  manufacturing  towards  services 
sector. Rowthorn & Rasmawamy (1999, p. 19-20) have suggested that deindustrialization should not be 
readily construed as a symptom of a country’s failure in nurturing a competitive manufacturing structure, 
but inkling of a country’s economic maturity, usually linked to rising standards of living. This “natural” 
trend  is  caused,  the  authors  argue,  by  North-south  dynamics  led  to  a  displacement  of  manufacturing 
employment towards labor-abundant developing economies.7  

One  of  the  implications  of  this  structural  change  is  the  shifting  of  resources  from  technologically 
progressive sectors (mostly manufacturing) to those typically more labor-intensive (services in general), 
which face downwardly rigid cost structures. Baumol (1967 and 2012) and Baumol, Blackman & Wolff 
(1985)  indicated  that  wages  in  the  service  sectors  tend  to  change  according  to  productivity  rates  in  the 
technologically  progressive  sectors,  independently  of  the  former’s  own  productivity  scores.  Developed 
economies undergoing this process are thus more prone to  suffer from a “cost disease”, that is, a rising 
pressure on the general level of prices owing to an increasingly more costly provision of services, which 
can only be curbed by raising productivity - or diminishing costs - in non-manufacturing sectors.  

Matters are much blurrier when it comes to developing economies, where the catching-up process led 
to  the  settlement  of  industry  but  not  necessarily  to  the  establishment  of  innovation-producing  sectors. 
This  shortcoming  implies  that  deindustrialization  is  likely  to  come  at  the  cost  of  having  a  more 
commodity-concentrated  export  profile  and  a  hypertrophied  services  sector.8  The  economic  structure 
becomes more rigid and more susceptible to external shocks, both underlying forces acting upon inflation; 
in short: random shocks are coupled with highly absorptive inflation trends.  

The  link  between  inflation  and  structural  changes  has  not  been,  thus  far,  framed  in  a  uniform 
theoretical  approach.  Our  attempt  here  seeks  to  contribute  to  this  latter  endeavor  by  suggesting  the 
channels  through  which  the  development  process  (see  Rodrik  2015)  affects  the  economy’s  price-output 
dynamics and, therefore, its inflation patterns. In what follows, we provide a basic theoretical framework 
that will guide us through the cross-country empirical evidence. 

3 The model 

The price index 

We assume that the domestic price index (  ) is given by 
( )                                
where          and      are tradables, services and state-managed prices, respectively. 

                                                           

7 The authors found that deindustrialization in developed economies was caused primarily by “interactions among shifts in the 
pattern  of  demand  between  manufactures  and  services,  the  faster  growth  in  productivity  of  manufacturing  as  compared  to 
services, and the associated fall in the relative price of manufactures”. The increase in the share of services in the composition 
of  output  has  thus  been  understood  as  a  “natural”  outcome  of  a  successful  process  of  economic  development  (p.  14).  The 
paper’s focus is set on the Asian countries, particularly China, South Korea and India, sidestepping the heterogeneity among 
the countries composing the Global South.  

8  A  spawning  literature  has  dealt  with  the  various  dimensions  of  the  problem.  We  refer  the  reader  to  Dasgupta  &  Singh 
(2006), Cimoli, Fleitas & Porcile (2013) and Canuto, Fleischhaker & Schellekens (2015). On a more positive approach towards 
services-related structural change, Nordås & Kim (2013) find that in low-income countries, that “better services contribute to 
moving up the value chain in industries where a country already has technological capacity and comparative advantage, but 
better services alone may not stimulate product differentiation in sectors where a country is far from the competitive edge – at 
least not in the short run”.  

6 

 

In rates of change we obtain 

( )                                      
where    denotes domestic inflation,      is  the tradables inflation,      stands for the  services  inflation, 
      is  the  inflation  of  state-managed  goods  and  services,             ⁄ ,             ⁄   and       
       ⁄ . Next, we define each component of the inflation rate separately.  

Tradables inflation 

First,  we  describe  the  tradables  inflation.  Industrialized  goods  are  commercialized  in  foreign  markets. 
Hence, tradable goods have their prices determined in the foreign trade, as follows 

(3)                       

where      is  the  growth  of  the  nominal  exchange  rate  measured  as  foreign  prices  in  terms  of  domestic 
currency;    is the foreign inflation rate. We assume        to save notation. 

It is also assumed that the growth of the nominal exchange rate    is inversely related to the domestic 
nominal interest rate    and depends positively on the foreign interest rate    and the country risk premium 
 . The behavioural specification of    is given by 

( )               (           ) 

where         is  a  parameter  that  measures  the  speed  of  adjustment  of  the  domestic  interest  rate  to  the 
foreign interest rate. Also, by definition, we have 

( )                       
where    is the real interest rate. 

Services inflation 

Second, we examine the services inflation. This sector sets prices based on the standard mark-up pricing 
equation, as follows 

( )                             
where    is the growth rate of the mark-up factor,    is the growth rate of nominal wages and     is the 
growth rate of labor productivity in the service sector.  

We  assume  that  the  mark-up  factor  is  positively  related  to  the  real  interest  rate,  as  a  raising  interest 
also  increases overhead  costs of firms  and hence forces firms  to  set  higher margins  over prime costs of 
production (Hein, 2008). Then, we have 

( )              (         ) 
where       is a parameter that measures the speed of adjustment of interest rates over time. Herein we 
also assume that the nominal wages are indexed to the expected inflation rate (    ) and also depend on 
the unemployment rate (  ), as follows 

( )                          
where   is a constant that measures the degree of indexation of wages,   denotes a constant. Equation (8) 
shows that the growth of nominal wages depends directly on the persistence of past inflation. The rate of 
change of nominal wages is also positively related to the bargaining power of workers in the process of 
wage settlements which, in turn, is assumed to depend negatively on the unemployment rate. That is, the 
lower the unemployment rate, the better the conditions for workers to bargain for higher wages. Hence, 
we  draw  upon  the  works  of  Marx  and  Kalecki  and  take  into  account  the  institutional  framework  of  the 

7 

 

economy that intermediates the conflicting claims on income between workers and capitalists in the wage 
decision-making process. 

  Lastly,  we  define  the  growth  rate  of  labor  productivity.  In  equilibrium,  the  growth  rate  of  labor 
productivity must be equal in all sectors of the economy, we can say that                      , where 
             and      are the growth of total labor productivity and the growth of labor productivity in the 
tradables, services and state-managed sectors,  respectively (see  appendix 1). Hence, we can replace      
by    in equation (6) and analyse the determinants of the growth of labor productivity of the economy, as 
follows 

( )               (                   ) 
Proponents  of  the  endogenous  growth  theory  argue  that  increasing  human  capital  (  ),  which  can  be 
proxied by  years of schooling of the labor force, for example, also raises productivity (Lucas, 1988); in 
other  words,  the  higher  the  share  of  population  with  a  college  degree  or  above,  the  higher  the  level  of 
collective  skills  and  the  creation  of  value  per  worker.  Endogenous  growth  theory  also  states  that  the 
process  of  capital  deepening  creates  positive  externalities  through  learning-by-doing,  which  affects 
positively  the  growth  of  productivity  (Romer,  1986),  whereas  from  a  Kaldorian  perspective,  output 
growth  is  one  of  the  main  determinants  of  labor  productivity.  Kaldor  (1966)  highlights  the  concept  of 
endogenous technological progress driven by demand (this is the widely known Verdoorn’s Law). 

This  law states the statistical  relationship  between the growth of labour productivity and manufacturing 
output; empirical evidence for the same relationship between these two variables seems to be very weak 
for the other sectors of the economy (McCombie and Thirlwall, 1994). Lastly, another major determinant 
of the growth of labor productivity is the level of innovative activity (    ). Innovation leads to a higher 
degree of product differentiation and quality and hence increases productivity (León-Ledesma, 2002). 

State-managed prices 

Third,  the  State-managed  prices  are  set  by  contracts  heavily  influenced  by  the  expected  inflation  rate. 
Thus, in formal terms, we have 

(  )                    
where   is the degree of indexation of the contracts from the public utilities services. 

The general model 

Substituting equations (3)-(10) into (2), and assuming for convenience that          , after a great deal of 
manipulation we obtain the general equation that describes the domestic inflation 

(  )                      

where       (       ) [        (     )       ]    
  

⁄

       (           )     (        )     

The stability condition of the inflationary process specified by equation (11) is | |    . The equilibrium 
inflation rate is given by 

(  )         ̅  

 

     

 

Assuming that in equilibrium the inflation rate must be strictly positive we have that      . Note that by 
equation  (11)  the  inflationary  dynamics  can  still  be  unstable  if        .  Figure  2  below  shows  how 
current inflation rate converges towards the equilibrium inflation rate  ̅. In terms of the formal model we 
have     | |    . 

 

 

8 

Figure 2 - Stable inflation rate 

 

On the other hand, if | |    , then the inflation rate is unstable. In Figure 3 we illustrate the scenario in 
which | |    . In this case, the actual inflation rate veers off from the equilibrium inflation rate  ̅. Given 
that        (       ) [        (     )       ]
,  the  inflationary  dynamics  is  more  likely  to  become 
unstable when the mark-up sensitivity to nominal interest rate variation,  , is sufficiently high. A higher 
capacity of workers to incorporate expected inflation into the growth of nominal wages,  , also increases 
the likelihood of price instability. We can also observe that a higher sensitivity of State-managed prices to 
expected inflation raises the absolute value of  . 

⁄

  Additionally,  a  higher  share  of  the  tradable  goods  sector      (which  can  be  seen  as  a  proxy  for  the 
degree of openness of an economy to foreign trade) associated with a more significant responsiveness of 
the growth of nominal exchange rate    increases price stability;  a higher     enhances the capacity of 
central banks to control inflation through an inflation targeting regime, for instance. 

Figure 3 - Unstable inflationary dynamics 

 

Inflation in developed and undeveloped countries: a static comparative analysis 

Now we discuss the reason why inflation tends to be higher in undeveloped countries than in developed 
countries, that is  ̅       ̅   . By equation (12) the equilibrium inflation rate is positively related to the 
degree of indexation   and exogenous factors described by  . Figure 4 below shows how a higher value 
of    shifts the inflation  curve upwards.  Given        (           )     (        )    , undeveloped 
countries  tend  to  have  higher  inflation  due  to  higher  rates  of  currency  devaluation,  since,  by  (4),      

 

 (           );  country risk premium    and the foreign interest  rate     are positively  related to     and, 
consequently, to  ̅, whereas a higher real interest rate    reduces   and  ̅.  
  We  can  also  deduce  that  increased  labor  productivity      reduces  unit  labor  costs  and  hence  controls 
inflation.  Once  again,  the  higher     ,  the  higher  the  capacity  of  central  banks  to  reduce  inflation  by 
raising interest rates. Lastly, buoyant demand conditions, which is inversely related to the unemployment 
rate   , also tends to raise inflation as excess capacity utilisation decreases. 

9 

Figure 4 - Static comparative analysis 

 

4 Methodology and empirical framework 

4.1 Description of the data 

In this study we are interested in analyzing the strength of the relation between the level of inflation and 
the degree of development, explaining in what conditions the level of inflation is dependent upon of the 
level of development in a heterogeneous sample which includes developed and less developed countries. 

Holding other conditions constant, we expect an inverse correlation between the level of inflation and 
the  degree  of  economic  development.  The  question  posed  in  these  terms  means  that  some  factors  that 
often affects per capita GNI, like human capital level, does not necessarily affects the inflation rate. We 
are  assuming  that  is  possible  to  isolate  marginally  some  supply  or  cost  conditions  related  with 
productivity and degree of technological development which affect inflation from demand conditions, like 
unemployment rate and overall level of economic activity. Both types of influence may be proxied by an 
adequate number of macro variables listed below.  

The dependent variable of the study is the level inflation rate, measured as variation in the consumer 
price index (%) and the degree of development is measured by level of per capita Gross National Income 
(constant 2011, in US$). We adopt a set of additional variables which intend to represent a set of factors 
which may help to explain in what conditions the behavior of inflation in high and low income countries 
is  affected  by  that  postulated  relation.  From  our  previous  theoretical  discussion  the  main  variables 
available  on the World  Bank  database to  be  related in  an econometric  model are shown in  the Table 1. 
Along with the variables, we set the theoretical expected sign of the correlation between inflation and that 
variable in the last column of the Table. 

The relation between inflation (INFL) and the degree of development (GNI) have an expected negative 
sign. Other factors held constant, the higher level of development lower the level of inflation rates. This is 
so  because  in  a  mature  economy  the  degree  of  inflation  persistence  and  the  propagation  of  shocks  are 
expected  to  be  low.  The  technological  capability  of  a  mature  economy  tends  to  be  higher  than  a  less 
developed  country,  which  contributes  to  higher  TFP  growth  and  lower  inflation  making  the  supply 
smooth in relation to demand conditions.  

Moreover,  the  cost  conditions  of  undeveloped  economy  are  somewhat  different  from  a  developed 
country,  implying  great  differences  in  productivity.  The  issue  of  income  distribution  may  play  some 

 

important  factor  as  well,  because  the  indexation  of  wage  and  inflation  resulting  in  some  rigidities  to 
reduce and maintain inflation in lower levels in less developed economies. These features imply that for a 
set  of  lower  income  countries  the  persistence  of  inflation  is  expected  to  be  higher  and  then  the 
propagation of shocks are expected to be high. Accordingly, higher the level of economic development, 
lower the level of inflation persistence to be observed. 

10 

Table 1 - Description of the variables used in the study 

Variable  Description 

INFL 

GNI 

Variation in the consumer price index (%) 

Level of per capita GNI (purchasing power standard, constant 2011, US$) 

TRADE 

Sum of exports and imports of goods and services measured as a share of gross domestic 
product (%). 

XTEC 

GTT 

HC 

UR 

High-technology exports (% of manufactured exports). 

Growth of terms of trade (%). The net barter terms of trade index is calculated as the 
percentage ratio of the export unit value indexes to the import unit value indexes, 
measured relative to the base year (2000 = 100). 

Index of human capital per person, based on years of schooling (Barro/Lee, 2012) and 
returns to education. 

Unemployment rate (%) to account business cycle intensity. 

Expected sign 

--------- 

- 

-/+ 

- 

+ 

- 

- 

 

 

Source: Authors’ elaboration from the World Bank dataset and Barro/Lee Homepage for HC. 

TRADE  was  included  to  measure  the  degree  of  openness  and  its  influence  on  domestic  prices.    Its 
expected sign is unclear, since this channel of influence may produce a lower inflation domestically when 
international  competition  prevails.  This  may  occur  in  an  environment  of  flexible  markup  and  cost 
conditions,  however,  otherwise,  it  may  result  in  a  rise  in  inflation  by  when  it  reduce  the  supply  of 
domestic commodities in relation to changes in demand. 

The high-technology exports (XTEC) was included to account for the influence of more sophisticated 
exports,  as  a  proxy  for  technological  development  of  supply  conditions  of  the  countries  and  a  negative 
influence  on  the  level  of  inflation  is  expected  because  the  technological  upgrading  are  related  to  TFP 
growth and it produces spillover effects of technology upon other sectors (diffusion). This may reflect big 
changes toward a more sophisticated and technological advanced sectors of the economy allowing a high 
growth rate of demand and low unemployment be sustained in an environment of stable and low inflation, 
where  the  China  is  the  best  example  (from  a  commodity  export  based  to  the  largest  exporter  of  high-
technology products in the world, see Woo (2012) for a detailed study and Blanchard and Johnson (2013) 
for a description). Growth of terms of trade (GTT) represents the price effect of a change in export prices 
relative to import prices on domestic inflation: if a developing country experienced an upward trend in oil 
price or agricultural products which is its basic product for exports, we assume that this is associated with 
higher domestic relative prices because the direct and income effects of terms of trade may predominate 
over substitution effects in a float exchange rate regime. A rise in terms of trade is less inflationary when 
the exchange rate is floating than when the exchange rate is fixed. This is so because  the existence of a 
flexible exchange rate reduces the direct effect on prices, the income and substitution effects leading to a 
less inflationary effect (Gruen and Dwyer, 1995).  

The  index  of  human  capital  per  person  is  associated  with  the  abilities  to  work  and  produce  more 
efficiently.  Since  there  is  some  sort  of  influence  on  skills  of  labor,  we  expect  a  negative  effect  of  this 
measure  of  the  ability  of  workers  on  the  inflation  rate  because  of  the  ability  to  learn  and  produce  with 
higher productivity. As well known in the literature of FDI on output growth, the technological diffusion 
process  requires  a  minimum  threshold  of  labor  force  qualification  to  produce  some  positive  effect  on 

11 

 

productivity  and  real  income  of  a  country  (Woo,  2012).  The  important  mechanisms  of  technology 
diffusion  lie  in  imports  of  capital  and  intermediate  commodities  that  embodies  technologies.  However, 
the  assimilation  in  domestic  processes  requires  a  minimum  of  ability  of  product  and  labour  markets, 
beyond  the  government,  trade  and  competition  policies.  Lastly,  to  account  the  intensity  of  the  business 
cycle  and demand conditions  (recessions and expansions) and its effects  on product  and labour markets 
we used the annual variation in the unemployment rate, whose expected effect on inflation is negative.  

All computations and plots were done in R (R Core Team 2015) and the database was organized for a 
sample of 65 countries ranging from 2001 to 2011 (T = 11 years) according to availability of information 
from  World  Bank  dataset,  in  a  context  of  swings  in  economic  activity.  The  complete  list  of  sample 
countries used in the study is put on the Appendix. At the end we have N = 65 * 11 = 715 complete data 
points. 

4.2 Empirical Framework 

In  order  to  verify  whether  there  is  significant  relation  between  the  behaviors  of  inflation  rates 

according to the degree of development, we specify the following basic model, 

(13)    

 

 

 

 

 

;  

  

 

 

where 

 

is  the  annual  inflation  rate  in  the  country  i  at  time  t,  and 

  is  the  time  effect,  included  to 

account  business  cycle  movements  which  simultaneously  affects  all  countries. 

  is  the  idiosyncratic 

error which we assume is well-behaved and independent of regressors. The model above can be extended 
to account the degree of persistence in inflation rates by adding an autoregressive component, 

(14)   

 

 

 

 

 

 , 

   

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

The  inclusion  of  lagged  dependent  variable  beyond  to  account  persistence  of  inflation  also  help  to 
control for omitted variable bias. The use of time series, cross-section panel data allows employing both 
the  cross-section  and  time  series  dimension  leading  to  a  large  number  of  observations,  increasing  the 
degree  of  freedom  and  reducing  the  collinearity  among  explanatory  variables.  Beyond  that,  this 
methodology allows to control for country-specific, time-invariant ‘fixed effects’, beyond the inclusion of 
the  dynamic  lagged  dependent  variable.  However,  the  estimation  of  individual  ‘fixed-effects’  implies  a 
large  loss  in  degrees  of  freedom,  since  there  are  n  additional  parameters  to  be  estimated.  Thus,  the 
assumption  above  is  that  the  country-specific,  time-invariant  ‘fixed  effects’  do  not  exist  in  these  data. 
This means that our hypothesis is that the best model to describe these sample countries is a Pooled OLS. 
This assumption is tested and the results are presented below. As explained above, the model (14) above 
can be expanded by a number of  additional factors which help to explain in what conditions there is an 
expected negative relation between the level of inflation and the level of development of countries, thus 
the complete model reads, 

(15)   

   

 

For  reasons  of  efficiency,  after  testing  for  heteroskedasticity  we  adopt  the  general  FGLS  based  on  a 
  are  used  to 

two-step  estimation  process:  first  an  OLS  model  is  estimated,  and  then  its  residuals 

estimate a more general error covariance matrix given by, 

(16)    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

In which, 

(17)    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

,00itittityGNI1,2,...,;iN1,2,...,.tT,itytit0,10ititittityyGNI10,1012345itititititititityyGNITRADEHCXTECGTTURitˆˆˆnIVniTititn1ˆˆˆ12 

 

To obtain more efficient estimator given by, 

(18)    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

where  y  is  the  dependent  and  X  a  matrix  of  independent  variables.  Lastly,  we  extend  the  model  (15) 
beyond  that  independent  variables  to  estimate  an  AR(1)  coefficient  for  each  individual  country  to 
measure  the  persistence  of  inflation  in  each  particular  country  and  to  search  an  inverse  correlation 
between initial per capita income and the degree of persistence of inflation. 

4.3 Results and discussion 

Before  presenting  the  results  for  all  specified  models  (13)-(15)  we  have  performed  the  pre-tests  for 
nonstationary panel data along with the semiparametric test for the null of absence of unobserved effects 
suggested by Wooldridge (2002, 10.4.4). In this case, the test is designed to verify whether there are no 
unobserved  effects  in  the  residuals.  The  statistic  of  the  test  is  asymptotically  distributed  as  a  standard 
Normal  regardless  of  the  distribution  of  the  errors  and  it  also  not  rely  on  homoscedasticity.  The  no 
rejection of null favors pooled OLS model. 

Table 2 - Results for the null of absence of unobserved individual effects 

Model 

Basic 

Extended with lagged inflation rate 

Extended with lagged inflation rate and all variables 

 

 

 

Source: Authors’ elaboration. 

  Note: *** statistically significance at P = 0.01 level. 

z-statistic 

2.6928*** 

0.3630 

0.3277 

p-value 

0.0071 

0.7166 

0.7432 

The  results  for  the  unit  root  tests  in  the  heterogeneous  panels  are  shown  in  the  Table  8  in  the 
Appendix. From those results we are able to reject the null of unit root in all cases. Important to notice, 
we  apply  the  unit  root  test  for  heterogeneous  panels  introduced  by  Im  et.  al.  (2003)  because  its  main 
advantage  is  that  it  accommodates  heterogeneity  across  groups  such  as  individual  specific  effects  and 
different  patterns of residual serial  correlations.  This  test produces a more reliable inference. As  can be 
inferred from the results exposed in the Table 3, once we allow for a more general version of the basic 
relation  between  inflation  and  the  degree  of  development,  no  evidence  of  individual  effects  in  the 
residuals was found.  

Table 3 - Results for the basic model with lagged dependent variable  

Dependent variable: Inflation rate 

Constant 

Lagged Inflation Rate 

Per capita GNI 

Observations 
R2 
F-statistic 

Source: Authors’ elaboration. 

Pooled OLS 
7.0114*** 
(26.7980) 
----------- 
----------- 
-0.000113*** 
(-11.502) 
 715 
0.15651 
132.302*** 

Pooled OLS 
3.1393*** 
(11.2793) 
0.5585*** 
(20.0630) 
-0.000051*** 
(-6.3675) 
 650 
0.4987 
321.826*** 

Pooled FGLS 
3.4582*** 
(6.6758) 
0.4893*** 
(6.6450) 
-0.000055*** 
(-6.8482) 
 650 
0.49335 
---------- 

Notes: (i)  ***  statistically significance at  P = 0.01 level. (ii) To  obtain the results for last column  we used the  estimation in two steps by 
FGLS (Wooldridge, 2002, 10.4.3 and 10.5.5); (iii) the t-statistic between brackets in case of pooled regression and z-statistic in case of FGLS 
estimates. We included the time dummies in all regressions. 

  Since all variables may be considered stationary and there is no evidence of fixed-effects in these data, 
for the last two versions of the extended model (14)-(15) we adopt a Pooled OLS regression and later the 

yVXXVXTT111ˆˆˆ13 

 

FGLS estimator to account for heteroskedasticity. To get a first approximation, we first estimate the more 
basic  model  without  and  with  lagged  dependent  variable,  to  generate  information  without  our  selected 
controls.  

  From the  results exposed in  the Table 3, three  main conclusions can be drawn.  First,  all coefficients 
have  the  expected  signs  and  are  statistically  significant  at  conventional  levels  of  probability.  Second, 
there is a negative and significant relation between the degree of development and the inflation rate in the 
sample of countries. Third, when the lagged dependent variable is present the sign and the significance of 
the  first  relation  remains,  but  the  absolute  magnitude  of  its  coefficient  is  lower.  Additionally,  the 
goodness-of-fit of the model has increased by more than three times when that variable is included. 

  The results for the more complete version of the estimated model are shown in the Table 4 by using 
Pooled OLS and two steps FGLS estimators following the suggestion of Wooldridge (2002), since results 
for  the  former  estimator  indicate  rejection  of  the  null  of  absence  of  heteroskedasticity  in  the  residuals. 
From  Table  4,  when  we  account  for  heteroskedasticity  with  more  efficient  estimator,  we  can  also  infer 
that  lower  dispersion  for  coefficients  is  found,  but  their  magnitude  and  signs  still  remain  unaffected, 
except for human capital, which no significant influence was found before.  

  The first conclusion to be drawn is that the magnitude and sign of per capita income and its influence 
on  inflation  rates  are  similar  to  the  first  result  presented  before.  When  we  analyze  the  results  from  the 
more  efficient  estimator,  we  note  that  only  human  capital  does  not  exert  significant  influence  on  the 
inflation rates. All estimated coefficients present the theoretically expected signs and are all significant at 
0.01 level of probability. Additionally, we observe that there is a significant interaction between the level 
of persistence of inflation and degree of economic development. 

Table 4 - Results for extended model 

Dependent variable: Inflation rate 
Constant 

Lagged Inflation Rate 

Per capita GNI 

Terms of trade growth 

Human capital 

Trade 

Technological exports 

Unemployment growth 

Lagged Inflation*GNI 

Observations 
B P test for heteroskedasticity 
R2 
F-statistic 

Source: Authors’ elaboration. 

Pooled OLS 
3.3417*** 
(4.2739) 
0.5255*** 
(11.5436) 
-0.00005*** 
(-4.1847) 
0.0218 
(1.0756) 
-0.1952 
(-0.6322) 
0.0052** 
(2.4587) 
-0.0176* 
(-1.7024) 
-0.3143*** 
(-3.8051) 
0.000004 
(1.1984) 
 650 
540.9916*** 
0.5169 
85.7306 

Pooled FGLS 
2.4695*** 
(5.2459) 
0.5018*** 
(43.6552) 
-0.00005*** 
(-18.6286) 
0.0207*** 
(40.7786) 
0.01940 
(0.1873) 
0.0067*** 
(7.3667) 
-0.0145*** 
(-11.0856) 
-0.3150*** 
(-55.2897) 
0.000004*** 
(32.7076) 
 650 
--------- 
0.51161 
---------- 

Notes: (i) *** statistically significance at P = 0.01 level. (ii) For the models (14) and (15) we used the estimation in two steps by FGLS 
(Wooldridge, 2002, 10.4.3 and 10.5.5); (iii) the t-statistic between brackets in case of pooled regression and z-statistic in case of FGLS 
estimates. We included the time dummies in all regressions.  

14 

 

  To  further  explore  this  result,  we  estimated  the  model  (15)  with  all  variables  applying  the  panel 
regression with AR(1) Prais-Winsten correction and panel weighted least squares in which each country 
has  an  estimates  of  the  individual  degree  of  persistence  of  inflation,  measured  by  the  individual 
autoregressive coefficient of lagged inflation rate. The results are plotted in the Figure 5 below where the 
initial income is related to the degree of persistence of inflation in each country. This last result is used at 
end  by  correlating  the  individual  autoregressive  coefficient  with  the  initial  degree  of  development.  The 
correlation  coefficient  estimates  are  show  in  the  table  5,  in  which  a  negative  and  low  correlation  was 
detected. Table 5 also presents the results of three main correlation coefficients to infer about the relation 
between the initial degree of development and the inflation persistence. The main conclusion is that, we 
find a low but negative association in all correlation sample statistics. 

Type of correlation coefficient 

Initial income and AR(1) coefficient 

Table 5 

Pearson 

Spearman 

Kendal 

Source: Authors’ elaboration. 

-0.0491 

-0.0723 

-0.0433 

The explanation for that lies in those circumstances by which this correlation was determined, mainly 
the degree of technological  content of the economy,  degree of openness  and terms  of trade, beyond the 
state of demand. In spite all these factors are been controlled for, from the Figure 1 below there seems to 
be a regional or institutional component that tied the degree of persistence of inflation with income in a 
group-level phenomenon. We speculate that the most probable reason for this low correlation may be the 
absence of proper controls, like the regional and institutional controls for a grouping effect in the sample 
countries.  

Figure 1 - Dispersion between the inflation persistence and the initial per capita income, US$. 

 

15 

 

  Finally,  the  Figure  1  above  plots  the  correlation  between  the  initial  degree  of  development  and  the 
inflation persistence. The curve line is a smoothed nonlinear function adjusted to the data, and the  right 
line is the trend line of the regression, in which persistence is explained by the initial level of income plus 
a constant. From the above results, we may conclude that there are sound reasons helping to explain why 
a  number  of  countries  may  endure  a  higher  level  of  inflation  which  is  dependent  upon  its  degree  of 
development  and  their  technical  supply  conditions,  held  constant  demand  aspects.  These  theoretical 
expected results were partially corroborated by a detailed empirical examination through a cross-section, 
panel data analysis. 

5 Concluding Remarks 

This  paper  studied  the  relation  between  economic  development  and  level  of  inflation  and  found  a 
statistically  significant  inverse  correlation  between  them.  Our  panel  comprised  data  for  65  countries 
between  2001  and  2011  and  revealed  that  inflation  levels  are  affected  by  development-related  factors. 
Results indicate that our theoretical model adequately portrayed the problems at hand, whereby expected 
signs were all vindicated by empirical tests, namely: the persistence of inflation, growth of terms of trade, 
degree  of  openness  to  trade  were  positively  related  to  inflation,  whereas  heightened  levels  of  economic 
prosperity  (per  capita  income),  of  the  share  of  high-tech  exports  and  of  unemployment  growth 
corresponded  to  lower  inflation  rates.  The  connection  between  human  capital  and  inflation  was  not 
statistically significant,  probably due to  the former’s long-term nature, falling short of revealing a more 
clear effect in time range defined by our data sample. Further improvements are required to empirically 
unearth the impacts of productivity on inflation rates in cross-country data samples. 

  Moreover,  the  fact  that  per  capita  income  maintained  some  explanatory  power  over  inflation  rates 
suggests  that  our  model  did  not  exhaust  the  set  of  development-related  forces  affecting  inflation. 
Although this is partly frustrating, it opens up possibilities for further investigations. For instance,  there 
seems  to  be  a  regional  or  institutional  component  tying  the  degree  of  persistence  of  inflation  with  per 
capita  income  in  a  group-level  phenomenon.  We  speculate  that  the  most  probable  reason  for  this  low 
correlation  may  be  the  absence  of  proper  controls,  like  the  regional  and  institutional  controls  for  a 
grouping effect in the sample countries. We intend to delve into these matters in subsequent studies.  

 
In spite of these shortcomings, the paper offers  valuable insight  regarding the complex nature of  the 
drivers behind inflation in different countries. Its relevance is twofold. First, it addresses a deficiency in 
the  academic  literature  on  inflation,  which  has  strikingly  ignored  the  empirical  fact  that  developing 
countries are subject to higher inflation levels on average than developed economies. This issue is seldom 
mentioned  and,  when  it  is,  arguments  are  superficial  and  attribute  these  differentials  to  circumstantial 
aspects  of  monetary  policy  rigor  and  institutional  detail,  such  as  Central  Bank  independence  or  the 
adoption  of  some  variant  of  the  inflation-targeting  regime.  Under  this  hastened  approach,  inflation  is 
stripped of its long-term forces, which are brought in whenever convenience dictates. This point leads to 
our second contribution, that is, its policy implications.  

  However preliminary, our conclusions question the widely held understanding that inflation control is 
but a matter of Central Bank’s credibility and willful austerity in daily management of aggregate demand. 
Our narrative supports the long-standing structuralist views (both Latin American and Anglo-Saxon) that 
long-term  development-related  features  act  upon  the  level  of  inflation  a  country  is  likely  to  endure,  no 
matter  how  determined  and  stern  its  central  bankers  prove  to  be.  This  is  not  to  say  that  a  vigilant 
monetary policy cannot  be effective in curtailing inflation; it only means it  is likely to leave the latter’s 
original  causes  unaffected  or,  which  is  worse,  reinforce  them  through  adverse  –  because  overlooked  - 
channels. As  a result, we claim  inflation control should not  be  construed as the realm of sole monetary 
policy  but  a  part  of  a  broader  development  policy,  whose  primary  objective  is  to  enhance  a  country’s 
capabilities of catching up with those already developed whilst disciplining the distribution of income and 
wealth accrued from the collective effort of production. Not taking heed of these forces is bound to render 
moot the most sincere determination by policymakers engaged in inflation control. 

16 

 

References 

ADLER,  G.;  MAGUD,  N.  E.  (2015)  “Four  decades  of  terms-of-trade  booms:  a  metric  of  income 

windfall”, Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 55, p. 162-192. 

BAUMOL, W. J. (1967) “Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy of Urban Crisis”. The 

American Economic Review, Vol. 57, No. 3 (June), pp. 415-426. 

BAUMOL, W. J. (2012) (ORG.) The Cost Disease: why computers get cheaper and health care doesn’t. 

New Haven: Yale University Press. 

BAUMOL,  W.  J.,  BLACKMAN,  S.  A.  B.  &  WOLFF,  E.  N.  (1989)  Productivity  and  American 

Leadership: The Long View, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 

BHATIA, Rattan J. (1960)  Inflation, Deflation, and Economic Development. Staff Papers (International 

Monetary Fund), n. 8, p. 101–114. 

BLANCHARD, O.; JOHNSON, D. R. (2013) Macroeconomics, New York, Pearson Education. 

BRUNO,  Michael  &  EASTERLY,  William  (1998)  Inflation  crises  and  long-run  growth, Journal  of 

Monetary Economics, Elsevier, vol. 41(1), pages 3-26, February. 

CANUTO, Otaviano, FLEISCHHAKER, Cornelius & SCHELLEKENS, Philip (2015) The Curious Case 
of  Brazil's  Closedness  to  Trade.  World  Bank  Policy  Research  Working  Paper  No.  7228.  (April  2). 
Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2589726. 

CHENERY,  Hollis  B.  (1975)  “The  Structuralist  Approach  to  Development  Policy”.  The  American 
Economic Review, Vol.  65, No. 2, Papers and Proceedings of the Eighty-seventh  Annual  Meeting of 
the American Economic Association (May), pp. 310-316. 

CIMOLI,  M,  FLEITAS,  S.  e  PORCILE,  G.  (2013)  “Technological  intensity  of  the  export  structure  and 

the real Exchange rate”. Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 22:4, 353-372.  

CLARK, Colin (1957) The Conditions of Economic Progress, London: Macmillan. 

DASGUPTA,  S.;  SINGH,  A.  (2006)  “Manufacturing,  Services  and  Premature  Deindustrialization  in 
Developing  Countries:  A  Kaldorian  Analysis”.  Working  Papers  RP2006/49,  World  Institute  for 
Development Economic Research (UNU-WIDER). 

FISCHER,  S.  (1993)  “The  role  of  macroeconomic  factors  in  growth”,  NBER  Working  Paper  4565, 

December, National Bureau of Economic Research. 

FUCHS,  Victor  R.  (1968)  The  Service  Economy.    New  York:  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research, 

Columbia University Press. 

GREENWALD, Bruce & STIGLITZ, Joseph (2006).  “Helping Infant Economies Grow: Foundations of 
Trade Policies for Developing Countries”. The American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 
May. 

GRUEN,  D.;  DWYER,  J.  (1995)  “Are  terms  of  trade  rises  inflationary?”,  Research  Discussion  Paper 

9508, Reserve Bank of Australia. 

KALDOR,  N.  (1966)  The  Causes  of  the  Slow  Rate  of  Economic  Growth  of  the  United  Kingdom. 

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

LÉON-LEDESMA,  M.  A.  (2002)  “Accumulation,  innovation  and  catching-up:  an  extended  cumulative 

growth model”, Cambridge Journal of Economics, vol. 26, p. 201–216  

LEVINE,  R.;  ZERVOS,  S.  (1993)  “Looking  at  the  facts:  what  we  know  about  policy  and  growth  from 
Cross-Country  Analysis”,  Policy  Research  Department,  Working  Paper  Series  115,  March,  World 
Bank. 

LUCAS, R. E. (1988) “On the Mechanics of Economic Development”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 

22, 3–42.   

MARQUES,  Carlos  Robalo  (2004)  “Inflation  persistence:  facts  or  artefacts?”  European  Central  Bank  - 

Working Paper Series, no. 371, June. 

17 

 

MCCOMBIE,  J.  S.  L.;  THIRLWALL,  A  P.  (1994)  Economic  Growth  and  the  Balance-of-Payments 

Constraint. New York: St. Martin’s. 

NORDAS,  H.  K.  and  Y.  Kim  (2013),  “The  Role  of  Services  for  Competitiveness  in  Manufacturing”, 
OECD Trade Policy Papers, No. 148, OECD Publishing. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5k484xb7cx6b-en. 

OLIVERA, J. H. (1964). “On Structural Inflation and Latin-American Structuralism”. Oxford Economic 

Papers, Vol. 16, N° 3, pp. 321-332.  

OLIVERA, J.H. (1967). “Aspectos dinámicos de la inflación estructural,” Desarrollo Económico, vol. 7, 

No. 27. 

O’REILLY, Gerard & WHELAN, Karl (2004) “Has Euro-area inflation persistence changed over time?” 

European Central Bank - Working Paper Series, no. 335, April. 

RODRIK, Dani (2015) “Premature Deindustrialization”. NBER Working Paper, No. 20935, February. 

ROGOFF,  Kenneth  (2004)  “Globalization  and  Global  Disinflation”  In:  Monetary  Policy  and 

Uncertainity: Adapting to a Changing Economy, 77-112. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 

ROWTHORN,  Robert  &  RASMAWAMY,  Ramana  (1999)  “Growth,  Trade,  and  Deindustrialization”. 

IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 46, No. 1 (March). 

ROMER, P. M. (1986) “Increasing returns and long-run growth”, Journal of Political Economy, vol. 94, 

pp. 1002-1037. 

WOOLDRIDGE, J. M. (2002) Econometric Analysis of Cross-section and Panel Data, MIT PRESS. 

IM, K. S.; PESARAN, M. H.; SHIN, Y. (2003) “Testing for unit roots in heterogeneous panels”, Journal 

of Econometrics, vol. 115, pp. 53-74. 

R  CORE  TEAM  (2015).  R:  A  language  and  environment  for  statistical  computing.  R  Foundation  for 

Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL http://www.R-project.org/ 

TAYLOR, A. M.; TAYLOR, M. P. (2004) “The purchasing power parity debate”, Journal of Economic 

Perspectives, vol. 18(4), pp. 135-158. 

BOERO,  G.;  MAVROMANITS,  K.;  TAYLOR,  M.  P.  (2015)  “Real  exchange  rates  and  transition 

economies”, Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 56, pp. 23-35. 

WAI, U. Tun (1959) “The Relation between Inflation and Economic Development: A Statistical Inductive 

Study”. Staff Papers (International Monetary Fund), Vol. 7, No. 2 (Oct., 1959), pp. 302-317. 

WOO, J. (2012) “Technological upgrading in China and India: what  do we know?”, Working Paper no. 

308, OECD Development Centre.   

 

 

 

18 

 

Appendix 1 

Total labor productivity is given by 

                     

where the upper-case letter   denotes the level of labor productivity in all sectors. In rates of change we 
obtain 

                            

where           ⁄ ,           ⁄  and             ⁄ . In other words, the parameter   stands for the share 
of labor productivity of each sector in the total labor productivity.   In  equilibrium,  the  values  of    ,     
and       must  be  constant  otherwise  there  is  a  growing  sectoral  imbalance  in  the  economy.  More 
formally, if the shares    are constant, then the labor productivity of  all sectors are  growing  at  the same 
rate as the total labor productivity of the economy, that is                      . 

 

Appendix 2 

Table  6  below  describes  the  sample  countries  used  in  the  study.  The  table  7  we  present  the  summary 
statistics of variables and the table 8 presents the results for unit root tests on variables. 

1. Albania 

2. Armenia 

3. Australia 

4. Austria 

5. Benin 

6. Botswana 

7. Bulgaria 

8. Cambodia 

9. Canada 

Table 6 - Sample of Countries 

14. Czech Republic 

27. India 

15. Denmark 

28. Indonesia 

16. Egypt, Arab Rep. 

29. Ireland 

40. Mexico 

41. Moldova 

42. Morocco 

53. South Africa 

54. Spain 

55. Sweden 

17. El Salvador 

18. Estonia 

19. Finland 

20. France 

30. Israel 

31. Italy 

32. Japan 

33. Jordan 

43. Mozambique 

56. Switzerland 

44. Netherlands 

57. Tanzania 

45. New Zealand 

58. Thailand 

46. Norway 

21. Gambia, The 

34. Kazakhstan 

47. Paquistan 

22. Germany 

35. Korea, Rep. 

48. Philippines 

59. Tunisia 

60. Turkey 

61. Uganda 

62. Ukraine 

10. Central African Republic 

23. Greece 

36. Kyrgyz Republic 

49. Portugal 

11. Costa Rica 

24. Guatemala 

37. Latvia 

50.Russian Federation 

63.United Kingdom 

12. Croatia 

13. Cyprus 

25.  Hong  Kong  SAR, 
China 

26. Hungary 

38. Lithuania 

39. Malaysia 

51. Senegal 

64. United States 

52. Singapore 

65. Vietnam 

Source: authors’ elaboration. 

 

Table 7 - Summary statistics 

 

INFL 

TRADE 

XTEC 

UR  

GTT 

GNI 

HC 

Minimum 

25% quantile 

Median 

75% quantile 

Maximum 

-4.480 

20.260 

0.0283 

-12.000 

-29.040 

571.800 

1.157 

1.980 

56.200 

4.394 

-0.600 

-2.304 

3.370 

74.640 

9.85339 

-0.100 

-0.3450 

6.251 

105.650 

19.444 

0.400 

2.0402 

54.400 

447.060 

74.178 

17.000 

33.8462 

6,322.400 

16,111.300 

35,660.300 

73,239.400 

2.263 

2.823 

3.095 

3.619 

Source: Authors’ elaboration from the World Bank and Barro/Lee homepage for HC. 

19 

 

Variable 

INFL 

TRADE 

XTEC 

UR 

GTT 

GNI 

HC 

Table 8 - Results for the null of unit root test in all variables. 

Individual intercept 

Individual intercept and trend 

-16.3129*** 

-10.1962*** 

-11.1306*** 

-22.6547*** 

-24.3078*** 

-6.8648*** 

-50.1291*** 

-39.0166*** 

-32.0534*** 

-49.672*** 

-50.9553*** 

-69.741*** 

-140.6304*** 

-56.2144*** 

Source: authors’ elaboration. 

Notes: (i) *** statistically significance at P = 0.01 level; (ii) the best lag length was obtained by using the AIC criterion and fixing the p max 
= 3 following the suggestion of Im et. al. (2003, p. 71). 

