Investment Decision Under Inﬂation Targeting in Emerging Market Economies

Ricardo B. L. M. Oscara, Douglas Silveirab, Silvinha Vasconcelosb, Claudio R. F. Vasconcelosb

aDepartment of Economics, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.

bDepartment of Economics, Federal University of Juiz de Fora, Brazil.

Abstract
This article is aimed at understanding in which conditions emerging market economies (EMEs) can ﬁnd themselves
with a high level of investment, given the announced inﬂation target rate. Thus, we extend the game proposed by
Asako et al. (2017) and introduce a stochastic learning rule through an Agent-based Computational Economics (ACE)
model. Entrepreneurs and workers iteratively play a stage game to make investment decisions.
Investments are
assumed to be complementary and more than one evolutionary equilibria can emerge as a solution. Thereby, the
conditions for successfully guiding the EMEs toward the long-run equilibrium in which all players invest at the target
inﬂation rate are: (i) investment must be demand-creating innovation; (ii) Central Bank must have credibility on the
announced target inﬂation rate to increase players’ expected proﬁts. The main contributions of our EGT and ACE
learning models are twofold: (a) a reﬁnement of dynamic equilibrium to determine the level of investment in the
economy for a given inﬂation targeting rate; (b) greater accuracy on the proportion of agents willing to invest in both
physical and human capital, optimizing the implementation of the economic policy.

Keywords: Target inﬂation rate, Perfect-foresight and best-response dynamics, Demand-creating innovation
JEL classiﬁcation: E52 · E58 · E22 · C73· C62
Resumo
Este artigo tem como objetivo compreender em que condições as economias de mercado emergentes (EMEs) podem
se encontrar com um alto nível de investimento em regimes de metas de inﬂação. Estendemos o jogo proposto por
Asako et al. (2017) e introduzimos uma regra de aprendizagem estocástica por meio de um modelo de Economia
Computacional (ACE) baseado em Agente. Empresários e trabalhadores participam iterativamente de um jogo evolu-
cionário para tomar decisões de investimento. Os investimentos são considerados complementares. Desse modo, as
condições para que as EMEs convirjam para o equilíbrio de longo prazo no qual todos os participantes investem,
dada a meta de inﬂação anunciada: (i) o investimento deve ser em inovação e expansão de demanda; (ii) O Banco
Central deve ter credibilidade na meta de inﬂação anunciada. Nossas contribuições são duplas: (a) um reﬁnamento
do equilíbrio dinâmico para determinar o nível investimento na economia para uma dada taxa de inﬂação; (b) maior
precisão na proporção de agentes dispostos a investir em capital físico e humano, otimizando a implementação das
políticas econômicas.

Palavras-chave: Metas de Inﬂação, dinâmica de melhor resposta, expansão de demanda
Área 4 - Macroeconomia, Economia Monetária e Finanças

1. Introduction

The inﬂation-targeting (IT) mechanism has played a key role in macroeconomic stabilization in many emerging
market economies (EMEs) and, in spite of large inﬂationary shocks, the inﬂation rate has been kept at a low level

Email addresses: ricardo.blm.oscar@gmail.com (Ricardo B. L. M. Oscar), douglas.sadsilveira@gmail.com (Douglas Silveira),

silvinha.vasconcelos@ufjf.edu.br (Silvinha Vasconcelos), claudio.foffano@ufjf.edu.br (Claudio R. F. Vasconcelos)

URL: http://www.ufjf.br/poseconomia/ (Douglas Silveira)

Preprint submitted to o 47º Encontro Nacional de Economia (ANPEC)

June 23, 2019

(Gonçalves & Salles, 2008; Lin & Ye, 2009; de Mendonça & Souza, 2012; Ayres et al., 2014). Aguir et al. (2015)
concluded that IT in EMEs has been a more challenging task than in developed economies. The conduct of monetary
policy has to build credibility and reduce inﬂation rate levels, and deal simultaneously with a greater vulnerability
to shocks . Besides that, de Mendonça (2018) stated that, to improvement monetary policy transmission channels,
signaling and transparency is a relevant issue for the Central Bank in order to anchor inﬂationary expectations.

In fact, one task of Central Banks of EMEs has been to build credibility as a monetary authority committed to price
stability in the context of large inﬂationary volatility. Mukherjee & Bhattacharya (2011) showed that changes in the
short-term interest rate are related to the credibility of the monetary authority. There is a considerable set of variables
capable of inﬂuencing investment decisions and the level of employment: real costs of capital, credit, exchange rate,
wealth and expectations of entrepreneurs. As the ﬂuctuations in real interest rates lead to signiﬁcant changes in the
costs of capital, it might reduce investments.

In other words, faced with an increase in the interest rate and higher prices volatility, there is a deterioration in
the entrepreneurs’ expectations; therefore, they set back the investment decision. Another concern of some central
banks of EMEs derives from the low rate of interest practiced by the so-called developed economies. This may lead
to an increase in the ﬂow of risky capital to emerging economies, as shown by Bruno & Shin (2015). The authors
stressed that the most eﬀective way for the central bank to face this issue is to ensure a monetary policy transmission
mechanism capable of signaling the commitment to a low interest rate. Once this path is clear and well delimited,
the monetary authority can inﬂuence long term rates such as mortgage rates, corporate lending rates, as well as other
prices that aﬀect consumption and investment decisions.

According to Fraga et al. (2003), this requires actions consistent with the IT framework combined with high levels
of transparency and communication with the public. An important element for the slowdown in the rate of inﬂation
in Brazil1, which is still building its credibility and is one of the most important EMEs countries that have adopted
inﬂation targeting (since June 1999), is the feasibility and credibility of the inﬂation targeting rate (de Mendonça
& Souza, 2009). The outcomes suggest that, despite small interest rate changes, when agents face a more credible
environment, there is greater reliance on investing. Another interesting ﬁndings is showed in Barajas et al. (2014),
which proposed a Markov-Switching methodology in order to evaluate the implementation of IT in Latin America2.
Central banks pursued an inﬂation objective using a standard Taylor rule and by doing interventions in the foreign
exchange market. Based on quarterly data on 16 EMEs under IT regime, Kempf (2018) adopted a panel data approach
to show that IT helps creating a low and stable inﬂation environment, that favors a higher level of investment in the
economy. The results were robust for Latin, Central European and some African countries. Ito & Hayashi (2004)
details the IT frameworks adopted by Asian3 countries and compares them to the established frameworks in the United
Kingdom and New Zealand, concluding that IT has contributed to economic recovery by anchoring expectations.

In the face of what has been discussed so far, this paper is aimed at examining the necessary conditions for the
EMEs to maintain inﬂation within its limits, and discussing the transmission mechanisms able to generate incentives
in order to achieve a growth path with a high level of investment in the economy. More precisely, we intend to
investigate the necessary conditions for the EMEs central banks to establish credibility on the inﬂation target rate.

In order to reach our results, we are aimed at developing a dynamic and stochastic learning rule based on Evo-
lutionary Game Theory (EGT)4, in accordance with Smith & Price (1973). Moreover, the selection from multiple

1On this matter, there is an extensive literature that evaluates the eﬀects of the inﬂation targeting system in Brazil. Arestis et al. (2011) examine
some features of the Brazilian experience with IT regime by asking whether it makes a diﬀerence in the ﬁght against inﬂation if a country has
adopted IT or not. de Mendonca (2007) analyses the use of the basic interest rate after the adoption of inﬂation targeting in Brazil and the
credibility of this monetary regime through two indexes that consider the Cukierman & Meltzer (1986) deﬁnition for credibility. de Mendonça
& Lima (2011) showed that the credibility of IT reduced the uncertainty in the economic environment and has led to a positive and statistically
signiﬁcant eﬀect on private investment.

2Céspedes et al. (2014) review the recent experience of a group of Latin American (IT) nations, and have found that the restrictions on interna-

tional capital movements and other non-conventional policy tools, especially changes in reserve requirements, have come into common use.

3Filardo et al. (2010) examined monetary policy institutional changes in Asia toward greater central bank focus on inﬂation control, institutional
independence and transparency and concludes that IT is an important mechanism for delivering price stability. Prasertnukul et al. (2010) examines
how IT inﬂuenced exchange rate pass-through and volatility in many Asian countries and shows that it caused a decline in exchange rate volatility.
4It is important to inform the reader that game theory models have been largely used in macroeconomics since the 1980’s. For example,
we can cite Vickers (1986), that proposes a game in order to capture the eﬀects of signaling in a model of monetary policy with incomplete
information. Morris & Shin (1998) demonstrate the uniqueness of equilibrium when speculators face a small amount of noise in their signals about
the fundamentals and how they deal with the quantity of hot money in circulation and the costs of speculative trading. A global game modeling

2

equilibrium is made without considering the transition dynamics of the economy. Thus, we propose an Agent-based
Computational Economics (ACE) approach to complement the EGT framework, as it allows an inference about the
current state and the transition dynamics of the EMEs until the long-run equilibrium is reached. The transition mech-
anism of the EMEs will be analyzed based on both the best-response dynamics (Gilboa & Matsui, 1991), and the
perfect-foresight dynamics (Matsui & Matsuyama, 1995). Thus, we can understand the adaptive expectations as a
dynamic best-response and the equilibrium under rational expectations as a perfect-foresight dynamics.

As far as we know, this paper is pioneer in combining EGT and ACE models to evaluate the EMEs monetary
policy issue. Strictly speaking, this is an approach that allows us to circumvent the problem of multiple long-run
equilibria. Thus, it may provide a better understanding of the formation of expectations of the economic agents, since
the consumption pattern and investment decisions in emerging economies have been changed. In this way, the Central
Bank can measure how the inﬂation targeting can inﬂuence the investment made by entrepreneurs and workers.

Therefore, the main contributions of our EGT and ACE learning models are twofold: (a) a reﬁnement of dynamic
equilibrium analysis through both analytical derivation and numerical simulation to determine the trajectory of the
level of investment in the economy for a given inﬂation targeting rate; (b) a more precise dimensioning of the pro-
portion of agents willing to invest in demand expansion rather than cost reduction, optimizing the implementation of
the economic policy by the central planner. In this sense, we extend the analysis provided by Asako et al. (2017) to
evaluate the EMEs monetary policy. Thus, the game model is composed of two players5 that are facing a market under
monopolistic competition: (1) entrepreneurs and (2) workers. Let each entrepreneur be the owner of a ﬁrm and sup-
pose that they hires a worker to produce a good. In sequence, the stage game is dynamically played by entrepreneurs
and workers.

The available strategies are to (i) invest6 and (ii) not to invest. These investments combine demand-creating and
cost-reducing innovations (Gilbert, 2006). As a further matter, we consider that there is complementarity between
entrepreneurs’ and workers’ investments and is in line with the complementarity between physical and human capital
investments discussed in Blundell et al. (1999) and with the capital-skill complementarity analyzed by Krusell et al.
(2000). For simplicity, our study does not take into account the accumulation of physical and human capitals. In
accordance with Acemoglu (1997), due to the presence of complementarity, the following outcomes are expected: all
players invest or all players do not invest. In these equilibria, it is not guaranteed that the inﬂation rate converges into
its target. Nevertheless, when all players are investing, inﬂation is expected to converge into its target.

To achieve a long-run equilibrium at the target inﬂation rate, the following conditions are necessary: (i) en-
trepreneurs are willing to invest in demand-creating innovation rather than cost-reducing innovation. When en-
trepreneurs invest in cost-reducing innovation, the economy might observe a decline in inﬂation, once cost-reducing
innovation leads to ﬁerce competition among ﬁrms by decreasing prices and increasing their market shares. Therefore,
when the investment is in cost-reducing innovation, in the long term, no player views the inﬂation target as credible;
(ii) according to the analysis with the best-response dynamics, the share of entrepreneurs and workers investing is
large enough. If only a few players are willing to invest in the current state of the economy, then the investment
counterpart will decrease. As a consequence, the proﬁts from their investment are expected to be lower.

In addition, the economy continues in its long-term equilibrium path, given by a scenario that combines lack of
investment and absence of inﬂation. Under these circumstances, the inﬂation target is not credible and the target
inﬂation rate is not achievable. These two conditions are needed. In this sense, policies to stimulate investments in
demand-creating innovation are required to guide the economy successfully towards its long run equilibrium in which
all players invest, and the inﬂation rate is at its target. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
shows the game model baseline. The Evolutionary Game and Agent-based Computational Economics algorithm is in
Section 3. Section 4 discusses the outcomes of the stage game and evaluates the dynamics of the strategies using the
EGT and ACE approaches. Section 5 shows the ﬁnal remarks.

approach was proposed by Carlsson & Van Damme (1993), Morris & Shin (1998), and Katagiri et al. (2016). In this type of game, an equilibrium
is determined solely on the basis of signals about future fundamentals regardless of the current state of the economy.

5In the model, only players have bounded rationality about the decision of the level of investment to be made in the economy. The Central

Bank, in turn, always makes its decision in an optimal way.

it is reasonable to interpret these situations as workers’ investments.

6As workers incur costs to acquire general or ﬁrm-speciﬁc skills or make more eﬀort to increase demand for goods or reduce production costs,

3

2. The Model

In order to better prompt the discussion in the previous section, we will show the bases of the strategic decision
on the investment to be made by entrepreneurs and workers, in view of the inﬂation targeting rate announced by the
Central Bank. Thus, we extend the model proposed by Asako et al. (2017) for EMEs and complement our analysis
with the application of an ACE algorithm. In this sense, there is a population of workers interacting strategically with
a population of entrepreneurs. It can be represented in a continuum space of mass equal to one. One player from each
population is randomly selected to play the stage game. In this sense, the two-period stage game is played iteratively
for an inﬁnite number of rounds denoted by τ ∈ [0,∞).

Stage Game Decision on investment (t0)

Entrepreneur

physical capital k

Proﬁts (t1)
(1 − β)π

βπ

Worker

Firm

human capital h

production and sales x0

production and sales x1

Table 1: The Stage Game. At time t0, Entrepreneur and Worker invest in innovation activities. At time t1, ﬁrms total proﬁt, π, is paired between
worker, who receive the payment (βπ) and entrepreneur, who earns the portion (1 − β)π of the Firm’s total proﬁt π.

Table 1 shows the amount of investment chosen by the worker (entrepreneur) in human (physical) capital at time
t0, denoted by h (k) ∈ R+. The ﬁrm chooses the level of production in t0 and t1, which is given by the pair (x0, x1) ∈ R2
+.
Both entrepreneur and worker make their decisions on the investment at the same time (t0). Taking into account the
current information available, the amount produced by the ﬁrm, x1, in period t1 may vary. At the instant of time
denoted by t1, the entrepreneur rewards the worker a fraction β ∈ (0, 1) of the total proﬁt earned by the ﬁrm after the
production of the ﬁnal good. The total real proﬁt earned by the ﬁrm is represented by:

p0 − υ0

γ

x0 +

1

1 + r

p1 − υ1
γ1

x1,

π =

where the pair (p0, p1) ∈ R2
++ corresponds to the prices of the goods produced by the ﬁrm in t = 0, 1. The variable
cost of production7 is given by (υ0, υ1) ∈ R2
++ and the real
interest rate is represented by r ∈ R. The term γ1 remains unobservable until the end of t1. Each player sets γ1 = ˜γ1.
To calculate the value of ˜γ1, players use the price level observed at t = 0, γ0 and the inﬂation target rate announced by
the central bank. This assumption is in line with Sims (2003), being related to the implications of rational inattention
issue. The agents are risk neutral. Thus, the payoﬀs earned by a representative entrepreneur and by a representative
worker are given by (1 − β)π − k and βπ − h, respectively. The demand functions for the good in t = 0, 1 are:

+. The price levels observed in the economy are (γ0, γ1) ∈ R2

xt = dt − (pt − γt).

Note that if pt = γt, then dt ∈ R++ corresponds to the demand for the good, and  ∈ R++ is the elasticity of demand
with respect to the relative price (pt − γt). In accordance with what has been exposed so far, equations (1) and (2)
represent the inverse demand functions for the pair (p0, p1), respectively:

7Other costs than the payments to the workers.

p0 = γ0 +

p1 = γ1 +

(d0 − x0),

(d1 − x1).

1

1


4

(1)

(2)

We can linearly decompose these inverse demand functions into the price-competition eﬀect (γ0, γ1) and the goods-
property eﬀect (d0/, d1/). By (2), the expected price in t = 1, when the stage game is in t = 0, is given as follows:

E[p1] = ˜γ1 +

(E[d1] − x1).

1


(3)

The worker’s and entrepreneur’s investments are assumed to be both comprised of demand-creating innovation
and cost-reducing innovation. By doing so, the entrepreneurs face a continuous interval of innovation types ω ∈ [0, 1]
to choose from. At the time t = 0, the pair (d0, υ0), which represents the fundamental demand and the variable
cost, respectively, are constants. On the other hand, when t = 1, (d1, υ1) are random variables whose distributions
are conditional to the amount of investments k and h. In addition, by assuming that when the amount of each of
the possible forms of investment is greater than the respective threshold value k ∈ R+ or h ∈ R+, the investment
stochastically leads to a decrease in the variable cost and to an increase in the fundamental demand. In other words,
the pair (dI, υI) corresponds to the expected fundamental demand and the variable cost when both players decide to
invest, respectively. Otherwise, when both players decide not to invest, we have the pair (dN, υN).

2.1. The Equilibrium Conditions of the Game

In order to ﬁnd the equilibrium conditions, we must evaluate players’ best response. By doing so, we will analyze
separately the optimization problem of the entrepreneurs and the workers. The problems of each entrepreneur and
each worker are consistent with the maximization problem of indirect utility functions derived from the log utility8.

2.1.1. The Entrepreneur’s Best Response

A representative entrepreneur faces the following maximization problem:

(cid:32) p0 − υ0

γ0

(1 − β)

max
x0,x1,k

x0 +

1

1 + r

E

(cid:104) p1 − υ1

(cid:105)

˜γ1

(cid:33)

− k.

x1

As the optimal values attributed to x0, x1, and k can be deﬁned independently, it is possible to separate this problem
into three parts. First, the value of x∗
x0, which gives equation (4):

0 ≡ arg maxx0
(cid:32)
0 (optimal) is determined so that x∗
1
[d0 + (γ0 − υ0)].
2

(d0 − x0) − υ0
γ0

1
γ0

x0 =

1 +

p0−υ0
γ0

(cid:33)

arg max
x0

(4)

By replacing (1) with (4) we have:

p∗

0

=

1
2

(cid:33)

+ γ0 + υ0

.

(cid:32) d0



Assuming an equilibrium in which all players from each population adopt the same strategy, p∗
Therefore, p∗
the optimal amount (x∗

= γ0 must hold.
= γ0 = (d0 + υ0)/. Knowing that ˜γ1 is exogenously determined and (d1, ˜γ1); (υ1, ˜γ1) are independent,

1) produced in t1 is given by:

0

0

Which yields equation (5)

arg max
x1

(cid:32)

1 +

1
 ˜γ1

(E[d1] − x1) − E[υ1]
˜γ1

x1 =

[E[d1] + ( ˜γ1 − E[υ1])].

1
2

(5)

arg max
x1

E

x1.

(cid:35)

(cid:34) p1 − υ1
(cid:33)

˜γ1

8A detailed discussion is shown in Asako et al. (2017).

5

By inserting the result of (5) into (2), we have:

E[p∗

1] =

1
2

(cid:32) E[d1]



(cid:33)

+ ˜γ1 + E[υ1]

.

Notice that, although k assumes continuous values, its optimal choice is binary, i.e., k ∈ (0, k). When k = 0, it
strictly dominates any given k ∈ (0, k), as the level of investment does not aﬀect d1, and the entrepreneur has to pay
k. Likewise, k ∈ (k,∞) is strictly dominated by k = k. Thereby, considering the binary choice k ∈ (0, k) is suﬃcient.
Analogously, each worker faces the choice h ∈ (0, h). Let π1 be the real proﬁt of the ﬁrm at time t = 1, and we have:

(cid:34) p1 − υ1

(cid:35)

˜γ1

E[π1|k, h] ≡ 1
1 + r

E

x1 =

1

4 ˜γ1(1 + r)

( ˜γ1 + E[d1|k, h] − E[υ1|k, h])2

To facilitate the economic understanding, we will deﬁne A and B as below:

A ≡ E[π1|k = k, h ∈ [0, h)] − E[π1|k = 0, h ∈ [0, h)]

α[(dI − υI) − (dN − υN)]

=

4 ˜γ1(1 + r)

[2 ˜γ1 + α(dI − υI) + (2 − α)(dN − υN)],

B ≡ E[π1|k = k, h ∈ [h,∞)] − E[π1|k = 0, h ∈ [h,∞)]

(1 − α)[(dI − υI) − (dN − υN)]

=

4 ˜γ1(1 + r)

[2 ˜γ1 + (1 + α)(dI − υI) + (1 − α)(dN − υN)].

The expression A provides the increase of the ﬁrm’s expected proﬁt as an eﬀect of the entrepreneur’s investment
when h ∈ [0, h), which is positive if (1 − β)A > k and negative if (1 − β)A < k. The value of B represents that increase
when h ∈ [h,∞), which is positive if(1− β)B > k and negative if (1− β)B < k. Assuming α9 ∈ (0, 1/2), we have B > A
by the following expression:

B > A

⇔ 1 − α

α

2 ˜γ1 + α[(dI − υI) − (dN − υN)] + 2(dN − υN)

2 ˜γ1 + α[(dI − υI) − (dN − υN)] + [(dI − υI) + (dN − υN)]

>

as the left side of the inequality is greater than one and the right side is less than one.

For (1 − β)A < k < (1 − β)B, the entrepreneur will choose k = k if the worker chooses h ∈ [h,∞). Otherwise, the
entrepreneur sets k = 0. There is still the possibility for entrepreneurs to adopt a mixed strategy in which k = k with
the probability σe ∈ [0, 1] and k = 0 otherwise. Similarly, the worker may choose a mixed strategy in which h = h
with the probability σw ∈ [0, 1] and h = 0 otherwise.

2.1.2. The Worker’s Best Response

A representative worker faces a problem given by

(cid:32) p0 − υ0

γ0

(cid:104) p1 − υ1

(cid:105)

˜γ1

(cid:33)

x1

− h.

x0 +

1

1 + r

E

max

h

β

(cid:16) p0−υ0

(cid:17)

When t = 0, the term β

made by the workers, if k ∈ [0, k), then the expected increase in ﬁrms’ proﬁt is denoted by:

γ0

x0 could be ignored since it is not aﬀected by h. For a given amount of investment

E[π1|k ∈ [0, k), h = h] − E[π1|k ∈ [0, k), h = 0] = A;

9The term α measure the degree of complementarity between players’ investment. Thus, by assigning a low value to α, a greater degree of
complementarity between the investment made by each of the players is obtained. In this sense, we consider that α ∈ (0, 1/2). In the situation in
which only one of the players invests, the fundamental demand reacts with a rather timid growth, while the variable cost decreases marginally. It is
only possible to observe substantial changes in these variables when both players invest.

6

when k ∈ [k,∞), we have

E[π1|k ∈ [k,∞), h = h] − E[π1|k ∈ [k,∞), h = 0] = B.

When k ∈ [0, k) and if βA > h, the increase in the worker’s expected payoﬀ is positive. On the other hand, if βA < h,
it is negative. Following this intuition, if k ∈ [k,∞), the increase is positive if βB > h and is negative if βB < h. If we
consider that βA < h < βB, the worker’s best response is conditional to the entrepreneur’s mixed strategy.

2.2. The Nash Equilibria

Making the conjecture on the best response of each of the players, we summarize in table 2 the Nash equilibria of
the game10. When workers and entrepreneurs decide to invest (A and B) and the marginal increases in the expected
payoﬀs are suﬃciently high, the best response for both players is to invest. On the other hand, if the value of both
investments is low, players do not invest. If A < k/(1 − β) < B and A < h/β < B, then a multiple equilibria solution
arises and the complementarity between investments of both players is critical to determine the outcome of the game.

Nash Equilibria
h < βA

A < h/β < B

k < (1 − β)A
A < k/(1 − β) < B
k > (1 − β)B

(k, h)
(k, h)
(0, h)

(k, h), (0, 0), (σ∗

e, σ∗
w)

(k, h)

(0, 0)

h > βB

(k, 0)
(0, 0)
(0, 0)

Table 2: The Nash Equilibria outcomes.

2.3. The Eﬀects of Innovation on the Inﬂation Rate at the Equilibrium

To evaluate the observed eﬀect of each type of innovation on the inﬂation rate we must recall that (d1, υ1) = (dI, υI)
is the equilibrium outcome for the pair (k∗, h∗) = (k, h) and that (d1, υ1) = (dN, υN) is the equilibrium outcome for the
pair (k∗, h∗) = (0, 0). So, ( ˜γ1+dI /+υI)
is the expected price level in the ﬁrst equilibrium. In the second equilibrium, we
have that ( ˜γ1+dN /+υN)
. For the case in which workers and entrepreneurs invest in the economy, the expected price level
should be equivalent to that in the situation where the expectations are rational:

2

2

The expected price level in the economy for the case in which players do not invest is:

˜γ1 =

dI + υI



.

dN + υN

.

˜γ1 =



Taking into account the possibility of the players to choose diﬀerent strategies, ˜γ1 should be deﬁned in the range

(cid:27)(cid:21)
In this sense, the expected inﬂation rate between t = 0 and t = 1, ( ˜γ1/γ0) − 1, corresponds to

dI + υI

dI + υI

min





,

.

˜γ1 ∈(cid:20)
− 1 ∈(cid:20)

min

(cid:26) dN + υN
(cid:26) dN + υN



d0 + υ0

˜γ1
γ0

,

dI + υI
d0 + υ0

, max

(cid:27)
(cid:27) − 1, max

(cid:26) dN + υN
(cid:26) dN + υN



,

d0 + υ0

(cid:27) − 1

(cid:21)

.

,

dI + υI
d0 + υ0

10See Asako et al. (2017) for the proof of each equilibrium. The case where A < k/(1 − β) < B and A < h/β < B will be discussed in Section 3.

7

In order to better understand how the types of innovation and the target inﬂation rate determine equilibrium
>  holds. At the equilibrium with k∗ = k and h∗ = h

conditions, let us suppose the following cases:
Case I: If ﬁrms choose demand-creating innovation, then d1−d0
υ0−υ1
a positive inﬂation rate is observed. Thus, the target inﬂation rate is assumed to be credible;
Case II: If ﬁrms choose cost-reducing innovation, then d1−d0
υ0−υ1
both equilibria. Thus, no player views the target inﬂation rate as credible.
In other words, when entrepreneurs invest in demand-creating innovation in place of cost-reducing innovation, the
high value of dI guarantees the inequality dI − d0 > (υ0 − υI) and the announced target inﬂation rate is said to be
credible. Otherwise, when entrepreneurs choose the cost-reduction innovation, the low value of υI guarantees that
dI − d0 < (υ0 − υI) and no player views the target inﬂation rate as credible. This is because in this case the upper
bound of ˜γ1 is equal to zero. The condition dN + υN ≤ d0 + υ0 always holds based on the assumptions dN ≤ d0 and
υN ≤ υ0. In such case, the policymaker must encourage investments in demand-creating innovation, such as structural
reforms, tax incentives and subsidies.

<  holds. Therefore, we do not observe inﬂation in

When the elasticity of demand () increases, ﬁrms are more prone to cost-reducing innovations. This happens
because if the demand for a good is elastic, a reduction in price causes revenue to increase, which provides an incentive
for the entrepreneurs to makes cost reduction. When demand is inelastic, entrepreneurs may increase prices and
observe an increase in demand for their products through demand-creating innovation (Kamien & Schwartz, 1970;
Spence, 1975). When  is low11, entrepreneurs have an incentive to choose demand-creating innovation. Otherwise,
policies to raise the value of d∗ could hold the condition given by d∗ − dN > (υN − υ∗).

3. Evolutionary Game and Agent-based Computational Economics (ACE)

According to Smith & Price (1973), evolutionary games imply a convergence to the dominant long-run equilib-
rium. In this equilibrium, achieved after a period of dynamic interaction, players must have adopted an evolutionary
stable strategy (ESS) that is a strategy where players have no incentive to abandon, unless some external force disturbs
the underlying conditions of the game. Then, if classical game theory can be deﬁned as the science that studies strate-
gic behavior, with the theory of evolutionary games it takes a step forward, since we now have the science that studies
the robustness of strategic behavior. In order to achieve this robustness, in subsection 3.1, we present the Replicator
Dynamics (RD) analysis, obtained from a non-linear diﬀerential equation system, and complement the study with an
Agent-based Computational Economics (ACE) model, presented in subsection 3.2, which implements a stochastic
component in the evolutionary dynamics of the game.

3.1. The Replicator Dynamics

In an evolutionary game, a bounded rationality, a large population, n, of players (n → ∞) and an implicit recog-
nition that agents learn are assumed. Every period, a player is randomly matched with another player and they play a
two-player game. Each agent is assigned a strategy and they cannot choose it. In other words, they are “programmed”
to play a strategy in the initial period (t = 0) and it may not maximize their utility function. However, the systematic
interaction with other agents will lead them to modify or update their behavior over time by choosing a given strategy.
Thus, one player can imitate other players’ strategies.

So, in this section, the evolutionary dynamics of the players’ strategies between investment and non-investment is
evaluated by using the perfect-foresight dynamics according to the same approach used by Gilboa & Matsui (1991)
and Matsui & Matsuyama (1995). By doing so, players are assumed to be forward-looking. The best-response
dynamics approach is also applied. Here, we focus on the best-response dynamics because, according to Asako et al.
(2017) there is a lack of understanding on how an economy, given its initial condition12, will evolve to the long-term
equilibrium. Thence, our ACE model remedies some of these drawbacks.

Our approach follows the literature that compares results under rational and adaptive expectations. The ﬁrst
one has been largely used, although it is sustained by the strong assumption that economic agents use all the set of
information available in order to build their expectations. We highlight and follow the intuition of Woodford (2002),

11A suﬃciently low  is a necessary condition for positive inﬂation in an equilibrium.
12The initial state corresponds to the period of the stage game right after the implementation of a policy.

8

Mankiw & Reis (2002) and Sims (2003), who evaluate the macroeconomic environment by considering the fact that
agents may deviate from rational expectations. On this matter, knowing that the target inﬂation rate could not be
achievable in the long term, there is a clear diﬀerence between the perfect-foresight and the best-response dynamics
behavior for guiding the economic agents into the equilibrium. When considering the perfect-foresight approach, the
long-term equilibrium is never aﬀected by the current state of the economy. On the other hand, the current state of the
economy, as well as the equilibrium conditions are aﬀected when considering the best-response dynamics.

In order to derive the ESS, we ﬁrst determine πH, πM and πL as follows:

πH =

πM =

πL =

1

4 ˜γ1(1 + r)

1

4 ˜γ1(1 + r)

1

4 ˜γ1(1 + r)

( ˜γ1 + dI − υI)2;
[ ˜γ1 + α(dI − υI) + (1 − α)(dN − υN)]2;
( ˜γ1 + dN − υN)2.

πH corresponds to the expected total proﬁt when workers and entrepreneurs decide to invest.
If only one player
decides to invest, the expected total proﬁt is given by πM, and if no player invests they receive πL. The payoﬀ matrix
of the stage game13 is presented in (6), and we introduce the following parameters φ ≡ (πH − πM) and θ ≡ (πL − πM).
This procedure will not aﬀect the best response structure of the game and will simplify the analysis. Following the
evolutionary algorithm, players are randomly matched and compete against each other and a one-shot game is played.
The level of aggregate strategies of the populations does not change all at once. In fact, they continuously update their
strategic behavior over time.

(cid:32)

I(h = h)

(1 − β)φ − k; βφ − h

NI(h = 0)

0; 0

(cid:33)

I(k = k)
NI(k = 0)

0; 0

(1 − β)θ + k; βθ + h

(6)
Let sw ∈ [0, 1] be the share of workers using strategy I, so the share of workers adopting NI is 1− sw. Analogously,
for the population of entrepreneurs, the share of players using strategies I and NI are se ∈ [0, 1] and 1−se, respectively.
The observed variations in the proportion of players adopting each one of the strategies reﬂects their evolutionary
process within each population. Note that this relative frequency can be understood as the probability that a player
will play a given strategy. Both the evolution of the game and the strategic behavior of the ﬁrms is conditioned to the
ﬁtness of their strategies. The ﬁtness, according to Binmore & Samuelson (1992) and Samuelson (2002), depends on
the player’s payoﬀ of a given strategy and on the relative frequency of the strategies observed in both populations.
That is, players make decisions based on the expected utility of their payoﬀs.
From the normalized payoﬀ matrix (6) and considering (1 − β)φ > k and βθ > h, there are simultaneously three

w)(cid:9). Using the values of πH, πM and πL, the mixed-strategy

e, σ∗
equilibrium is given by (σ∗
. ΘNE represents the set of Nash equilibria of the game. The
following questions arise: departing from an initial game condition, which equilibrium will be reached? In fact,
which is the game played? Without loss of generality, to answer these questions, we ﬁrst analyze the evolution and
the robustness of the players’ strategic behavior with the analytic solution of the RD system proposed by Taylor &
Jonker (1978), which is a very general ordinary diﬀerential equation (ODE) system in the evolutionary game theory.
As shown in Hirth (2014), in a dynamic system, the growth rate ˙se/se equals the strategy I’s ﬁtness e1A(sw, 1 − sw)T
less the average ﬁtness (se, 1 − se)A(sw, 1 − sw)T of population of entrepreneurs, where ˙se = dse/dt and e1 = (1, 0)
represents that all entrepreneurs from the population choose the pure strategy I(k = k).

Nash equilibria for the game: ΘNE =(cid:8)(k, h); (0, 0); (σ∗
(cid:33)

 be the payoﬀ matrix of a representative entrepreneur. After some trivial

 (1 − β)φ − k

0

(1 − β)θ + k

matrix algebra, the replicator dynamic equation for the population of entrepreneurs is ˙se = se((e1−(se, 1− se))A(sw, 1−

Let A =

k/(1−β)+θ

h/β+θ
φ+θ ,

e, σ∗

w) =

(cid:32)

φ+θ

0

13For further details, see Asako et al. (2017).

9

(7)

sw)T . Substituting the values of A (payoﬀs earned by the representative entrepreneur), in order to derive the dynamic
replicator system for the population of entrepreneurs e and workers w:

(cid:110)
˙se = se(1 − se)

(cid:104)
(1 − β)φ − k
(cid:110)
(cid:104)
βφ − h
˙sw = sw(1 − sw)

(cid:104)
(cid:105) − (1 − sw)
(1 − β)θ + k
(cid:105)(cid:111)
(cid:105) − (1 − se)
(cid:104)

βθ + h

sw

se

(cid:105)(cid:111)

(8)
˙se and ˙sw represent the growth rate of the proportion of entrepreneurs and workers that adopt the ﬁrst pure strategy
I within each population. The stability of the system is a coordinate (se, sw) ∈ [0, 1] × [0, 1], in which ˙se = ˙sw = 0 is a
necessary condition for the stationarity of (7) and (8). To check the stability of the points candidates for an ESS, i.e.,
an asymptotically stable steady state for the two-population game, we must use the Jacobian matrix (Ω). Thus, for the
(cid:35)
system (7) and (8):

(cid:34) (1 − 2se){sw[(1 − β)φ − k] − (1 − sw)[(1 − β)θ + k]}

se(1 − se)[(1 − β)(θ + φ)]

sw(1 − sw)[β(θ + φ)]

(1 − 2sw){se[βφ − h] − (1 − se)[βθ + h]}

.

Ω(se, sw) =

For the stationary point to be asymptotically stable, the eigenvalues λ1,2 of the matrix (Ω) evaluated at points that
hold the condition ˙se = 0 and ˙sw = 0 must have negative real parts. Thus, the phase space becomes the unit square
[0, 1] × [0, 1] ∈ R2 and the stationary points are the corners of the phase space (se, sw) = {(0, 0), (0, 1), (1, 0), (1, 1)} as
well as the interior stationary point (s∗
. Analyzing the linearized system in the neighborhood
of the stationary points, the eigenvalues of Ω(se, sw) evaluated at the corners of the phase space are λ1 = ∂ ˙se
and
∂se
λ2 = ∂ ˙sw
∂sw

. For the coordinates (0,0);(0,1);(1,0) and (1,1) the partial derivatives are, respectively:

(cid:26) βθ+h

(1−β)θ+k
(1−β)(θ+φ)

e, s∗

β(θ+φ) ,

w) =

(cid:27)

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(0,0)
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(1,0)

∂ ˙se
∂se

∂ ˙se
∂se

= −[(1 − β)θ + k];

∂ ˙sw
∂sw

= −{−1[(1 − β)θ + k]};

∂ ˙sw
∂sw

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(0,0)

= −(βθ + h);

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(1,0)

= (βφ − h);

∂ ˙se
∂se

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(0,1)
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(1,1)

∂ ˙se
∂se

= [(1 − β)φ − k];

∂ ˙sw
∂sw

= −[(1 − β)φ − k];

Observe that the eigenvalues at the corners of the phase space are both negative at (0,0) and (1,1) and both positive
are

at (0,1) and (1,0). On the other hand, the eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix evaluated at

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(0,1)

∂ ˙sw
∂sw

= −[−1(βθ + h)];

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(1,1)
(cid:26) βθ+h

β(θ+φ) ,

= −(βφ − h).
(cid:27)

(1−β)θ+k
(1−β)(θ+φ)

λ1,2 = ±(cid:113) [(1−β)θ+k][(1−β)φ−k](βθ+h)(βφ−h)

β(1−β)(θ+φ)2

. Thus, the later is a saddle point, (1,0) and (0,1) are unstable points and (0,0)

and (1,1) are attractor points. On this matter, it is possible to infer that a coordination game is formed.

The analytical solution presented here suggests that in the long run a rise in the expected inﬂation may lead to
an increase in the nominal interest rate. However, these results remain unchanged as long as it is assumed that the
nominal interest rate is ﬁxed for a while. Once the economy embarks on the path toward the equilibrium with an
inﬂation rate closer to the target, they still moves closer to the equilibrium over time.

Therefore, even if the nominal interest rate rises and entrepreneurs and workers expect payoﬀs to decline in the
long run, the economy should still evolve to the equilibrium with a higher inﬂation rate, because players expect the
probability of successful coordination between entrepreneurs and workers to be high.

Figure 1 summarizes the standard strategic behavior. As mentioned, a coordination game is formed. Therefore,
what varies between nations is the eﬀort that each Central Bank will have to make in order to reach the equilibrium
in which both workers and entrepreneurs invest in the economy. In Figure 1b, for instance, based on the information
provided by Table 3 and assuming that the Central Bank of South Korea will be intolerant of any positive value for
the inﬂation rate, the eﬀort to achieve the steady state given by the strategies (I, I) is greater than that made by the
Central Bank of Mexico to reach the inﬂation target announced. This is due to the basins of attraction and the intensity
of the eigenvectors in the vicinity of the interior stationary (saddle) point in the phase diagrams. Thus, following the
economic intuition of our model, to achieve the balance in which both players invest, the initial fraction of players
investing should be greater in South Korea than in Mexico. Moreover, it is important to capture precisely this order of
magnitude to assess and compare the eﬀect of the inﬂation targeting regimes on the investment decision in EMEs.

10

(a) Pure coordination game

(b) f ezero; f wzero - South Korea

(c) f eIT ; f wIT - Mexico

Figure 1: Evolutionary dynamics according to the announced inﬂation target. In Figure 1a we show the phase diagram with the typical dynamics
of a pure coordination game. In Figure 1b the phase diagram shows the dynamics when the monetary authority of South Korea seeks zero inﬂation
rate. The dynamics of the game when the Central Bank of Mexico pursue the inﬂation target rate is shown in Figure 1c. The white (black) dots
represents the unstable (stable) stationary points. To generate the dynamics in Figure 1b we use the following values:  = 1, d0 = 100, dI =
325, dN = 100, υ0 = 9900, υI = 9800, υN = 9900, α = 0.45, β = 0.49, 1+i
= 1.0125, k = 2, h = 2. To generate the dynamics in Figure 1c, we use
˜γ1/γ0
the following values:  = 1, d0 = 100, dI = 900, dN = 100, υ0 = 9900, υI = 9800, υN = 9900, α = 0.45, β = 0.49, 1+i
= 1.04, k = 10.5, h = 10.5.
˜γ1/γ0

Nevertheless, once the stability of the strategic coordination on the investment decision made by workers and
entrepreneurs has been demonstrated analytically, it is important to move forward and evaluate how the credibility of
signaling by the EMEs central bank can increase the level of investment in the economic system. For this purpose,
the next subsection brings the numerical simulation model, which will allow us to infer about the fraction of ﬁrms
and workers willing to invest in many EMEs, given the inﬂation target announced by the central bank. The countries
selected to evaluate this issue are: Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Peru, Mexico, Russia, India, South Africa, South Korea,
the Philippines and Thailand. Based on the results obtained for these eleven countries, we aim to ﬁnd a pattern of
investment behavior by the agents. This qualitative evaluation is important, since it allows the central planner of the
EMEs to understand the mechanisms of monetary policy transmission that will guarantee a steady state in which there
is a low and stable inﬂation rate and a high level of investments.

3.2. The ACE Algorithm: Modelling the Economic System

A stochastic component is implemented14 in the analysis of evolutionary equilibrium using the ACE method. In
general, Agent-based Modeling has been largely used in the understanding of the evolution of cooperative behavior
in social dilemmas, as can be seen in Chan et al. (2013) and Da Silva Rocha (2017). In this section, an algorithm to
complement the evolutionary game and to guide the dynamic interaction among players is presented. We consider the
competition in which the two populations are distributed in a well-mixed network. A well-mixed arrangement may be
consistent with our framework, once we assume that all players have access to the same level of information and that
there is no local constraint capable of generating some exogenous noise in the communication between policymaker
and entrepreneurs or workers. To implement the computational simulation, the intuition presented by Da Silva Rocha
(2017) is followed. In this sense, at a time t = 0, we establish an initial proportion of entrepreneurs and workers,
(se, sw), that plays the (I) strategy.

Evolutionary dynamics are introduced in sequence and at each Monte Carlo time Step (MCS), a Focal Agent i,
which can update15 its strategy, is chosen randomly. This occurs simultaneously in both populations. Focal Agent
i, in turn, plays against a random opponent from the rival population and starts the game presented in (6). Thus,
Focal Agent i will obtain a payoﬀ Vi. At the same time, an agent j is randomly chosen as a Reference Agent, which

14To implement the algorithm, we used the Java programming language.
15The update mechanisms used in ACE models are synchronous and asynchronous. Here, we use the second, since it allows the overlapping

generations interactions. See Hauert (2002) and Chan et al. (2013).

11

INIINIINIINIINIINIrandomly plays against an opponent from the rival population and obtains a payoﬀ V j. Notice that focal and reference
players belong to the same population. The Focal Agent i compares Vi and V j to analyze the possibility of updating
his strategy in two stages as stated ahead: (i) If Vi ≥ V j, focal player keeps his strategy; (ii) If Vi < V j, the focal player
might update his strategy to the one adopted by the reference player with a probability given by the variable η:

V j − Vi

max.payo f f − min.payo f f

η =

(9)

The maximum and minimum payoﬀs are obtained from the game matrix in (6). By doing this procedure, we
guarantee that η ∈ (0, 1). To establish a decision criterion whether Focal Agent i updates his strategy or not, we use
a random number generator named rnd ∈ (0, 1). In this way, a stochastic component on the dynamics of the game is
implemented. Focal Agent i compares rnd with the probability η, so that: (iii) If η ≥ rnd, Focal Agent i updates his
strategy and imitates the Reference Agent j; (iv) If η < rnd, Focal Agent i does not update his strategy.

At every MCS, randomly selected individuals from both populations have the opportunity to change strategy at
least once, on average, comparing their payoﬀs with the Reference Agent j. We say that, on average, individuals can
update strategies once, because within a MCS the same player may be invited to play many times, and other players
may not, since the process of players’ selection is random. Thus, when all players in both populations, have the
opportunity to update their strategies, on average, a MCS is completed and a new MCS starts in order to repeat the
dynamics of the game. This procedure characterizes the ACE model.

4. Results

In this section, we present the results16 obtained by the ACE algorithm. For this purpose, we insert the inputs
of each EMES shown in Table 3 into the payoﬀ matrix given by (6). Thus, the evolutionary dynamics no longer
rely on the analytical solution derived from replicator dynamics. Now, the strategy update criterion follows the rule
presented in equation (9). To compare and evaluate the strategic behavior of players, we group the EMEs as follows:
Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru form the group of Latin American countries. India, Russia and South
Africa make up the members of BRICS. Finally, the Philippines, South Korea and Thailand form the set of Asian
countries. Subsections 4.1 and 4.2 discusses the eﬀorts made by the Central Bank of EMEs to increase investors’
expected proﬁts.

16Since the ACE mechanism is based on a stochastic rule, we repeat the simulation for a hundred (100) times for each country under analysis.
As South Africa does not have a speciﬁc value for the IT, the results were generated from the average considering 50 simulations with its lower
bound plus 50 simulations considering its upper bound. In this way, Figures 2, 3 and 4 represent the average behavior pattern of entrepreneurs and
workers in relation to investment decision.

12

Countries
Brazil (BR)
Chile (CH)
Colombia (CO)
India (IND)
Mexico (ME)
Peru (PE)
Philippines (PHI)
Russia (RUS)
South Africa (SAF)
South Korea (SKO)
Thailand (THA)

IT (%) LB (%) UB (%)
4.25
3.00
3.00
4.00
3.00
2.00
3.00
4.00

2.75
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
1.00
2.00

5.75
4.00
4.00
6.00
4.00
3.00
4.00

-

-

-

2.00
2.50

3.00

-

6.00

-

1.00

4.00

i (%)
6.50
2.50
5.50
6.50
7.00
3.75
3.00
7.25
6.75
1.25
1.50

di
850
450
750
850
900
575
500
925
875
325
350

h

9.75
3.25
7.75
9.75
10.5
4.75
3.75
11.25
10.25
2.00
2.00

k

9.75
3.25
7.75
9.75
10.5
4.75
3.75
11.25
10.25
2.00
2.00

seIT ; swIT
0.09
0.13
0.08
0.07
0.05
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.30
0.13

sezero; swzero

0.13
0.16
0.10
0.11
0.09
0.09
0.11
0.10
0.11
0.37
0.19

Table 3: List of countries used in the ACE simulations.
IT represents the announced Inﬂation Target. LB and UB corresponds to the lower
and to the upper bound, respectively. The interest rate is given by i. The term di represents the expected fundamental demand and depends
on the amount of investments in human (h) and physical (k) which depends on the expected inﬂation rate, ( ˜γ1/γ0) − 1. The pair (seIT ; swIT )
represents the share of entrepreneurs and workers investing in physical and human capital, respectively, when the Central Bank is signaling
that will pursue the announced inﬂation target. In contrast, the pair (sezero ; swzero ) represents the share of entrepreneurs and workers investing
in physical and human capital, respectively, when the Central Bank is signalling that will pursue a zero inﬂation rate. Information available at
http://www.centralbanknews.info/p/inflation-targets.html.

On the left side of Figure 2, we show the ACE results for the EMEs of Latin America, considering that the Central
Bank pursues the target inﬂation rate. For Mexico, in order for the equilibrium to be reached with both players
investing, it is necessary that at time t = 0, the share of entrepreneurs (MEe) and workers (MEw) willing to invest
to be greater than or equal to 5%. Otherwise, the equilibrium obtained is with both players not investing. Although
it requires the lowest initial share of investor among EMEs, it should be emphasized that it has the highest: (a)
expected fundamental demand (di = 900); (b) expenditure with investments in both human and physical capital (h; k)
= (10.5, 10.5); (c) interest rate (i = 7.00%) of Latin American EMEs. Therefore, given the high costs associated with
the investment decision, which could inhibit players’ investment, together with an expected increase in the inﬂation
rate, the great task of the Mexican Central Bank is to increase its credibility. The best way to achieve this goal is
through signaling in monetary policy. In this sense, if the Central Bank is quite transparent, i.e., if the announced
inﬂation target is actually reached, we might observe a coordination in players’ expectations, leading workers and
entrepreneurs to invest.

Figure 2: ACE. Left: The Central Bank pursues the target inﬂation rate. Right: The Central Bank pursues a zero inﬂation rate. The solid lines
(dashed lines) correspond to the fraction of entrepreneurs (workers) playing strategy I in each of the Latin America countries.

Note that the ACE simulation for Mexico required the greatest amount of MCS to reach the steady state, i.e.,
MCS (cid:46) 35. The outcome showed that, once the Central Bank is committed to the inﬂation target, entrepreneurs make

13

510152025303500.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91PopulationsofEntrepreneursandWorkersInvesting-LatinAmericaCountriesMonteCarloStepProportion  510152025303500.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91MonteCarloStepProportion  BReBRwCHeCHwCOeCOwMEeMEwPEePEwthe ﬁrst move towards investment decision and, in sequence, workers coordinate their strategy. Only in Brazil this
pattern was not observed, since the population of workers (BRw) reaches the steady state before the population of
entrepreneurs (BRe). Brazil’s initial share (9%) is almost twice the share of Mexico and the convergence to the steady
state occurs around MCS (cid:46) 15. This is the less time-consuming simulation. Thus, once conﬁdence is established the
coordination between investment decision quickly takes place.

The similarity lies in the amounts of di, k, h and i. What determines the diﬀerence between the equilibrium paths is
the level of eﬀort each Central Bank must make to be credible. Note that Brazil’s inﬂation target is signiﬁcantly higher
than that of Mexico and this may justify the diﬀerence between the initial shares (seIT ; swIT ) required for each country
to reach the equilibrium. Chile requires the largest initial share of players willing to invest (13%). This diﬀerence in
relation to the other Latin American EMEs might be justiﬁed by its (i) low real interest rate, (ii) low investment costs
in physical and human capital and (iii) low expected fundamental demand. The combination of these three factors
shortens the distance (in terms of the payoﬀ) between the strategies NI and I. In this way, since the Central Bank
of Chile seeks mechanisms to further solidify its institutional arrangement, the convergence to the steady state in
which both players invest is rapidly attained, especially if compared to Colombia and Mexico. This intuition partially
explains the equilibrium path of the Peruvian economy. Compared with Chile, the lower share of players willing to
invest at t = 0 in Peru to achieve the steady state can be justiﬁed by their diﬀerent expected fundamental demand.

On the right side of Figure 2, we show the results when the monetary authority seeks a zero inﬂation rate. We
can observe that in Mexico and in Peru, if the share of entrepreneurs and workers willing to invest is less than 9%,
the equilibrium reached is with both players not investing. For Colombia, this value is equal to 10%. Note again that
the economies of Brazil and Chile require a greater eﬀort from the monetary authority to gain investor conﬁdence.
For Brazil (Chile), if the proportion of workers and entrepreneurs willing to invest is less than 13% (16%), the ESS
is reached with both players adopting the strategy (NI, NI). Despite of the particularities of each Latin American
EMEs, the need for a higher initial share of players willing to invest when the Central Bank seeks a zero inﬂation
rate is justiﬁed by a decreasing in the distance between the payoﬀs of the coordinated strategies. Hence, the monetary
authority needs to intensify its eﬀort to establish conﬁdence in the economic environment. By doing so, agents are
more likely to incur the cost of investing, on the belief that they will acquire the beneﬁts of this strategic decision.

Figure 3: ACE. Left: The Central Bank pursues the target inﬂation rate. Right: The Central Bank pursues a zero inﬂation rate. Solid (dashed) lines
correspond to the fraction of entrepreneurs (workers) playing strategy I in each of the BRICS countries.

Comparing the dynamics observed in Figure 3 with Figures 2 and 4, we see that BRICS countries form a homoge-
neous group in terms of the initial proportion of players to achieve the steady state in which both players invest. This
behavioral pattern can be justiﬁed by the high (and similar) values for the variables that make up the payoﬀ earned
from each of the strategic interactions. On the left side of Figure 3, we see that South Africa and Russia reach the
balance of the game around the MCS (cid:46) 30. In turn, India reaches equilibrium around the MCS (cid:46) 40. It can be

14

51015202530354000.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91PopulationsofEntrepreneursandWorkersInvesting-BRICSCountriesMonteCarloStepProportion  51015202500.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91MonteCarloStepProportion  INDeINDwRUSeRUSwSAFeSAFwexplained by the smaller payoﬀ diﬀerence when both players coordinate (NI, NI) and when they coordinate (I, I).
Note that this diﬀerence in the speed of convergence is less evident on the right side of Figure 3. Finally, it is possible
to observe that when the Central Bank seeks a zero inﬂation rate, the coordination between the investment decision
occurs more quickly, reinforcing the importance of the credibility of monetary authority discussed above.

The EMEs of Asian countries have the lowest cost of investing in h and k. Combined with an expectation of low
inﬂation and, consequently, a low real interest rate, this makes the Central Bank performance even more challenging
in order to avoid stagnation. This can be seen from Figure 4. Note that in South Korea the share of players willing to
invest at t = 0 for the economy to reach its steady state is the highest among all countries surveyed (30%) - even more
so when the Central Bank announces that its target is a zero inﬂation rate (37%). For both scenarios, the balance is
reached around MCS (cid:46) 15.

Figure 4: ACE. Left: The Central Bank pursues the target inﬂation rate. Right: The Central Bank pursues a zero inﬂation rate. Solid (dashed) lines
correspond to the fraction of entrepreneurs (workers) playing strategy I in each of the Asian Tiger countries.

In Thailand, the costs associated with investment, the amount of the expected fundamental demand and the nom-
inal interest rate resemble those observed in South Korea. However, when the Thai Central Bank announces that it
will meet the IT, the expected inﬂation rate in the economy makes the share of workers and entrepreneurs willing to
invest at t = 0 signiﬁcantly lower than those in South Korea. This eﬀect on the expected inﬂation rate is even more
evident when we evaluate the equilibrium path for the Philippines, whose share of players willing to invest at t = 0 is
lower than that observed in Thailand and in South Korea.

The results shown on the right side of Figure 4 suggests that, when the Central Bank is pursuing a zero inﬂation
rate, there may exist a correlation between the costs associated with h and k and the time of convergence to the steady
state. We emphasize that the Philippines have the highest investment costs among Asian countries and, perhaps not
by chance, it is the last to reach the steady state (MCS (cid:46) 30) in this particular case. This same pattern was observed
for Mexico and Russia on the right side of Figures 2 and 3, respectively.

From what we presented here, it is possible to visualize that, for a level of inﬂation that corresponds to the inﬂation
target, a smaller share of players that are willing to invest is necessary to guide the economy to the steady state. In
addition, we can see that the results obtained by the ACE give more robustness to those obtained by the replicator
dynamics. In the next subsection, we will present some theoretical derivations to support the results of the simulation.

4.1. The Policy Channels: The Eﬀorts to Increase Players’ Expected Proﬁts

To examine the signaling and transmission mechanisms of monetary policy, we evaluate the eﬀects of the target
inﬂation rate. To explore the policy channels for reducing the nominal interest rate, i, and for announcing the target

15

5101520253000.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91PopulationsofEntrepreneursandWorkersInvesting-AsianTigerCountriesMonteCarloStepProportion  5101520253000.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91MonteCarloStepProportion  PHIePHIwSKOeSKOwTHAeTHAwinﬂation rate, ˜γ1/γ0, we decompose the real interest rate of the EMEs into its nominal interest17 and the expected
inﬂation rates:

1 + r =

1 + i
˜γ1/γ0

In this way, by considering the medium term, i is the lowest rate possible to maintain inﬂation between the limits
of the target announced by the Central Bank. The expectation of rising prices by the entrepreneurs leads to an increase
in the level of equilibrium prices. This drives to an increase in expected proﬁt. The comparative statics of ˜γ1 are
presented in Corollary 1.
Corollary 1. (a) A and B increase with ˜γ1. (b) The share of players investing in the economy, sI, increases with ˜γ1.

Proof. (a) can be deduced by the deﬁnition of A and B given in subsection 2.1. (b) πH>πM>πL and ∂πH
0 hold. In addition, α ∈ (0, 1/2) and πH, πM and πL are convex. Thus, the following inequalities hold:
∂ ˜γ1

> ∂πM
∂ ˜γ1

> ∂πL
∂ ˜γ1

>

∂πH
∂ ˜γ1

− ∂πM
∂ ˜γ1

>

∂πM
∂ ˜γ1

− ∂πL
∂ ˜γ1

> 0

Thus, ∂σ∗

e
∂ ˜γ1

< 0 and ∂σ∗

w
∂ ˜γ1

< 0 are obtained, and sI increases with ˜γ1.

From this corollary, we observe that the increase in ˜γ1 makes the evolutionary dynamics of equilibrium more likely
to be the one in which both entrepreneurs and workers invest. Speciﬁcally, through the increase in (A + B) under the
perfect-foresight dynamics and through the decrease in σ∗
w under the best-response dynamics, the economy
operates with an inﬂation rate closer to the upper bound of the target announced.

e and σ∗

4.2. The Key Role of EMEs Central Banks

Here, we try to evaluate the possible incentives that can be given to the players, so that they invest more in the
economy, even if the signaling of the Central Bank is to seek an inﬂation rate closer to zero. To achieve our purposes,
we depart from the following question: do players always expect the Central Bank of EMEs to meet the inﬂation
target? In our analysis, the agents are rational, i.e., for the sake of credibility, they expect that the price level to be
reached in t + 1, ˜γ1, will be feasible if and only if its value belongs to the interval established as credible. On the other
hand, if players perceive uncertainty about ˜γ1, the policymaker announcement may have a minor eﬀect.

Through the presented results, the eﬀect of an increase in ˜γ1 keeps the payoﬀ structure of the game more favorable
to those players who are willing to invest. However, there is a limit for
˜γ1 to have an eﬀect on rational agents.
Therefore, policy is not always eﬃcient in stimulating investment in the economy. In addition, the current state of
the economy is of utmost importance in analyzing policy eﬀectiveness, especially when considering that players are
backward-looking. As the game is dynamic, and there is a rule of learning and updating beliefs, the balance is said
to be "path-dependent". In other words, the fraction of players who invested in the most recent rounds exert great
inﬂuence on the equilibrium outcome. In contrast, the current state does not matter if players are forward-looking.

Consider that, for a given initial condition, the relative frequency of entrepreneurs and workers willing to invest
(se, sw) is already near the target inﬂation rate equilibrium. To increase the level of investment by agents, ˜γ1 should
be raised to the upper bound inﬂation rate equilibrium. On this matter, the following policy measures could be
implemented. First, the government may grant subsidies or tax incentives in order to expand sI by reducing the cost
of investment, k. Second, it should undertake initiatives to synchronize interests between workers and entrepreneurs,
with the objective of reducing h. By doing so, if workers expect that they will be in the workforce for a suﬃciently
long period, the greater will be their incentives to invest in human capital. Another potential measure is the so-called
networking innovation activities, i.e., the promotion of collaboration among industry, academia, and the government
leads to a reduction in investment costs and an increase in expected returns (Nelson & Shaw, 2003).

17For the numerical simulations, we use the values provided by the Central Bank News: http://www.centralbanknews.info/p/

inflation-targets.html.

16

5. Conclusion

In this paper we proposed an ACE model to evaluate in which conditions of equilibrium the EMEs economies
could ﬁnd themselves with a high level of investment, given the inﬂation target rate announced by the monetary
authority. Our approach consists of an iteratively played stage game among entrepreneurs and workers, which assumes
that the presence of complementarity between the investments decisions implies the existence of two equilibria.

Therefore, the main contributions of ACE learning models are twofold: (a) a reﬁnement of dynamic equilibrium
analysis through numerical simulation to determine the trajectory of the level of investment in the economy for a
given inﬂation targeting rate; (b) a more precise measuring of the proportion of agents willing to invest in demand-
creating rather than cost-reducing, optimizing the implementation of the economic policy by the central planner. In
one of the balances, both entrepreneurs and workers invest. In this case, there are two conditions necessary to ensure
that the economy converges to the inﬂation target: (i) entrepreneurs should signal their intention to invest in demand
expansion; (ii) the proportion of workers and entrepreneurs investing at the current moment should be large enough. If
these conditions are not observed, policies need to be developed to drive the economy into such favorable environment.
On the other hand, according to the proposed model, there is a balance in which players coordinate their actions so
that there is no investment in the economy.

Furthermore, our results do not diﬀer from the mainstream economics, once we are stating that policymaker
hardening on pursuing the inﬂation target results in a faster convergence to the equilibrium in which both players are
investing and concurrently reduces investments costs in h and k. In this sense, an important extension to the model
for future researches is to consider the accumulation of physical and human capital in the economy. Settling these
issues is not a trivial task from the evolutionary game theory perspective, but it expands the power of analysis and
understanding of the ideal conditions to ensure that the inﬂation rate converges to the announced target inﬂation rate.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank Lucas Lourenço, Irina Bogacheva, Izak Silva, Ricardo Vieira Marques and Roberto Amaral

Santos, which helped us to improve the manuscript.

References

Acemoglu, D. (1997). Training and innovation in an imperfect labour market. The Review of Economic Studies, 64, 445–464.
Aguir, A., Mhamdi, G., Farhani, R. et al. (2015). Credibility and monetary policy under inﬂation targeting. International Journal of Business,

Economics and Management, 2, 78–90.

Arestis, P., Ferrari-Filho, F., & de Paula, L. F. (2011). Inﬂation targeting in brazil. International Review of Applied Economics, 25, 127–148.
Asako, Y., Okuda, T. et al. (2017). Guiding the Economy Toward the Target Inﬂation Rate: An Evolutionary Game Theory Approach. Technical

Report Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan.

Ayres, K., Belasen, A. R., & Kutan, A. M. (2014). Does inﬂation targeting lower inﬂation and spur growth? Journal of Policy Modeling, 36,

Barajas, A., Steiner, R., Villar, L., & Pabón, C. (2014). Inﬂation targeting in latin america, .
Binmore, K. G., & Samuelson, L. (1992). Evolutionary stability in repeated games played by ﬁnite automata. Journal of economic theory, 57,

Blundell, R., Dearden, L., Meghir, C., & Sianesi, B. (1999). Human capital investment: the returns from education and training to the individual,

the ﬁrm and the economy. Fiscal studies, 20, 1–23.

Bruno, V., & Shin, H. S. (2015). Capital ﬂows and the risk-taking channel of monetary policy. Journal of Monetary Economics, 71, 119–132.
Carlsson, H., & Van Damme, E. (1993). Global games and equilibrium selection. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, (pp.

Céspedes, L. F., Chang, R., & Velasco, A. (2014). Is inﬂation targeting still on target? the recent experience of latin america. International Finance,

Chan, N. W., Xu, C., Tey, S. K., Yap, Y. J., & Hui, P. (2013). Evolutionary snowdrift game incorporating costly punishment in structured

populations. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 392, 168–176.

Cukierman, A., & Meltzer, A. H. (1986). A theory of ambiguity, credibility, and inﬂation under discretion and asymmetric information. Econo-

Da Silva Rocha, A. B. (2017). Cooperation in the well-mixed two-population snowdrift game with punishment enforced through diﬀerent mecha-

metrica: journal of the econometric society, (pp. 1099–1128).

nisms. Advances in Complex Systems, 20, 1750010.

Filardo, A., Genberg, H. et al. (2010). Targeting inﬂation in asia and the paciﬁc: lessons from the recent past. BIS papers, 52, 251–73.
Fraga, A., Goldfajn, I., & Minella, A. (2003). Inﬂation targeting in emerging market economies. NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 18, 365–400.
Gilbert, R. J. (2006). Competition and innovation. Journal of Industrial Organization Education, 1, 1–23.

373–388.

278–305.

989–1018).

17, 185–208.

17

241–252.

.

178–191.

61801.

85, 312–318.

Gilboa, I., & Matsui, A. (1991). Social stability and equilibrium. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, (pp. 859–867).
Gonçalves, C. E. S., & Salles, J. M. (2008). Inﬂation targeting in emerging economies: What do the data say? Journal of Development Economics,
Hauert, C. (2002). Eﬀects of space in 2× 2 games. International Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos, 12, 1531–1548.
Hirth, S. (2014). Credit rating dynamics and competition. Journal of Banking & Finance, 49, 100–112.
Ito, T., & Hayashi, T. (2004). Inﬂation targeting in asia. HKIMR Occasional Paper, 1.
Kamien, M. I., & Schwartz, N. L. (1970). Market structure, elasticity of demand and incentive to invent. The Journal of Law and Economics, 13,

Katagiri, M. et al. (2016). Coordination in Price Setting and the Zero Lower Bound: A Global Games Approach. Technical Report Bank of Japan.
Kempf, H. (2018). Inﬂation targeting and the forward bias puzzle in emerging countries. Journal of International Money and Finance, 90, 19–33.
Krusell, P., Ohanian, L. E., Ríos-Rull, J.-V., & Violante, G. L. (2000). Capital-skill complementarity and inequality: A macroeconomic analysis.

Lin, S., & Ye, H. (2009). Does inﬂation targeting make a diﬀerence in developing countries? Journal of Development economics, 89, 118–123.
Mankiw, N. G., & Reis, R. (2002). Sticky information versus sticky prices: a proposal to replace the new keynesian phillips curve. The Quarterly

Econometrica, 68, 1029–1053.

Journal of Economics, 117, 1295–1328.

Matsui, A., & Matsuyama, K. (1995). An approach to equilibrium selection. Journal of Economic Theory, 65, 415–434.
de Mendonca, H. (2007). Towards credibility from inﬂation targeting: the brazilian experience. applied Economics, 39, 2599–2615.
de Mendonça, H. F. (2018). Credibility and inﬂation expectations: What we can tell from seven emerging economies? Journal of Policy Modeling,

de Mendonça, H. F., & Lima, T. R. V. d. S. (2011). Macroeconomic determinants of investment under inﬂation targeting: empirical evidence from

the brazilian economy. Latin American business review, 12, 25–38.

de Mendonça, H. F., & Souza, G. J. d. G. (2009). Inﬂation targeting credibility and reputation: the consequences for the interest rate. Economic

Modelling, 26, 1228–1238.

de Mendonça, H. F., & Souza, G. J. d. G. (2012). Is inﬂation targeting a good remedy to control inﬂation? Journal of Development Economics, 98,

Morris, S., & Shin, H. S. (1998). Unique equilibrium in a model of self-fulﬁlling currency attacks. American Economic Review, (pp. 587–597).
Mukherjee, S., & Bhattacharya, R. (2011). Inﬂation targeting and monetary policy transmission mechanisms in emerging market economies, .
Nelson, M. L., & Shaw, M. J. (2003). The adoption and diﬀusion of interorganizational system standards and process innovations. Urbana, 51,

Prasertnukul, W., Kim, D., & Kakinaka, M. (2010). Exchange rates, price levels, and inﬂation targeting: Evidence from asian countries. Japan and

the World Economy, 22, 173–182.

Samuelson, L. (2002). Evolution and game theory. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16, 47–66.
Sims, C. A. (2003). Implications of rational inattention. Journal of monetary Economics, 50, 665–690.
Smith, J. M., & Price, G. R. (1973). The logic of animal conﬂict. Nature, 246, 15–18.
Spence, A. M. (1975). Monopoly, quality, and regulation. The Bell Journal of Economics, (pp. 417–429).
Taylor, P. D., & Jonker, L. B. (1978). Evolutionary stable strategies and game dynamics. Mathematical biosciences, 40, 145–156.
Vickers, J. (1986). Signalling in a model of monetary policy with incomplete information. Oxford Economic Papers, 38, 443–455.
Woodford, M. (2002). mimperfect common knowledge and the eﬀects of monetary policy, nin knowledge, information, and expectations in modern

macroeconomics: In honor of edmund s. phelps, ed. by p. aghion, r. frydman, j. stiglitz, and m. woodford.

18

