If bad money drives out good money:

deunionisation and productivity slowdown

M. C. Pereira∗1,2, G. Dosi†2, R. Freeman‡3, A. Roventini§2,4, and M. E.

Virgillito¶5,2

1University of Campinas

2Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna
3Harvard University and NBER

4OFCE, Sciences Po

5Universita’ Cattolica del Sacro Cuore

Abstract

We develop an agent-based model able to account for the macroeconomic conse-
quences of an endogenous process of de-unionisation resulting from a competition mech-
anism between two types of ﬁrms, namely unionised and non-unionised. Whenever
non-unionised ﬁrms prevail, the average productivity growth declines, the productivity
standard deviation and the market concentration increase, in a “winner-takes-it-all” sce-
nario, cost competition induces a deﬂationary spiral, and product quality is reduced. By
means of a shift and share decomposition, we track the within, between, cross, entry and
exit components of productivity growth and the ensuing wage-productivity nexus.

Keywords: Deunionization, productivity slow-down, agent-based model
Desenvolvemos um modelo agent-based capaz de analizar as consequências macroe-
conômicas de um processo endógeno de dessindicalização resultante de um mecanismo
de concorrência entre dois tipos de ﬁrmas, sindicalizadas ou não. Sempre que as em-
presas não sindicalizadas prevalecem, o crescimento médio da produtividade declina,
o desvio padrão da produtividade e a concentração do mercado aumentam, em um
cenário “o ganhador ﬁca com tudo”, a competição de custos induz uma espiral deﬂa-
cionária e a qualidade do produto é reduzida. Por meio de uma decomposição do tipo
shift-and-share, rastreamos os componentes do crescimento da produtividade e o nexo
salário-produtividade resultante.

Palavras-chave: Dessindicalização, desaceleração produtividade, modelo agent-based
Área ANPEC: Crescimento, Desenvolvimento Econômico e Instituições (6)
JEL codes: C63, E02, E24

E-mail address: mcper<at>unicamp.br

E-mail address: gdosi<at>santannapisa.it

∗Corresponding author: Institute of Economics, University of Campinas, Campinas - SP (Brazil), 13083-970.
†Institute of Economics, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Piazza Martiri della Liberta’ 33, I-56127, Pisa (Italy).
‡Harvard University and NBER, Cambridge (MA), US
§Institute of Economics, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Piazza Martiri della Liberta’ 33, I-56127, Pisa (Italy),
¶Institute of Economic Policy, Universita’ Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Via Pietro Necchi 5, I-20123, Milan

and OFCE, Sciences Po, Nice France. E-mail address: andrea.roventini<at>santannapisa.it

(Italy). E-mail addressmariaenrica.virgillito<at>unicatt.it

1

1

Introduction

A new emerging malaise of capitalist organizations is currently affecting many mature
economies, namely productivity slowdown. Since the First Industrial Revolution produc-
tivity has been the engine pumping wage and output growth and ensuring better standard
of leaving. Currently, the dynamics of productivity does exhibit alarming trends. Syverson
(2017) documents that US productivity growth more than halved between 1995 and 2015,
moving from 2.8% in (1995-2004) to 1.3% (2005 – 2015). A similar pattern characterizes 29
out of 30 countries analysed in the same study, with an average decline of 1.2 percentage
points and 0.9 p.p. of standard deviation.

Less new are the patterns affecting wage dynamics: stagnant real wage growth and the
surge in wage inequality. Already since the late Eighties, scholars have been studying the in-
creasing patterns of wage dispersion (Freeman, 1984; Lee, 1999). More recent is the acknowl-
edgement of a declining labour share in developed countries (Hutchinson and Persyn, 2012;
Karabarbounis and Neiman, 2013). If the Golden Age of capitalism was characterized by a
proportional wage/productivity growth, and a constant wage share, since the eighties the
wage-productivity nexus has weakened its relationships, with a declining pass-through of
productivity growth on wage growth. The decoupling of wage-productivity growth is there-
fore the result of two concurrent factors: declining labour share and increasing divergence
between median and average income (Schwellnus et al., 2017).

Moving from macro to micro, a growing stream of literature digs inside into the dynam-
ics of ﬁrm/establishment level wage dispersion. In particular, looking at the main drivers of
wage inequality, since the contribution by Dunne et al. (2004), it appears that the between-
establishment component of the overall wage inequality has been the main driver of the
growth of wages dispersion, while the within one, contributed more moderately to the in-
crease in the latter. Recent ﬁndings by Barth et al. (2016), linking the Census Bureau’s Lon-
gitudinal Business Data Base (LBD) and the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics
data (LEHD) show that the inter-establishment wage dispersion does contribute roughly
twice with respect to the intra-establishment one. In fact, paraphrasing the article by Barth
et al. (2016), it is exactly where you work that has been strongly impacting on the increase
in wages and earnings dispersion in the US. In a similar vein Berlingieri et al. (2017) have
recently documented a surge in both wage and productivity dispersions across 16 OECD
countries from the mid-1990s to 2012, especially in the service sectors and concerning the
bottom-part of the distributions (50-10 percentiles).

Which are the causes at the root of the latter empirical patterns? Among the main possi-
ble mechanisms, ranging from demand to supply side ones, the explanation we are going to
explore in this work is the link between the wage structure and ﬁrms market performance,
in terms of productivity growth: if low-productive ﬁrms are also low-wage ﬁrms they might
in tune remain alive leveraging on their cost structure. In this respect, alternative wage set-
ting schemes act as a selection/non selection mechanism cleansing or not the market. This
selection process, going from wage, to productivity to survival/exit is tightly linked to the
changing nature of labour market organization, which in the last decades has seen, together
with many fundamental changes, a dramatic decline in the unionization rate.

How much of the emerging pattern of average productivity slowdown and increasing
productivity dispersion can be accounted by the process of deunionization of ﬁrms? This
paper is meant to address the latter question by means of a simulated economy populated
by a set of heterogeneous interacting agents, according to the modelling practice going

2

under the heading of Agent-Based Models (ABMs). ABMs are large-scale, computational
models which allow the simulation of artiﬁcial economies wherein ensembles of heteroge-
neous agents interact on the ground of simple behavioural rules. Aggregate-level outcomes
are the emergent properties from the interactions of such boundedly rational agents. Un-
likely DSGE models driven by the search of closed-form solutions derived from linearisa-
tion around equilibrium conditions, ABMs are open-ended systems where the notion of
coordination substitutes the one of equilibrium. Moreover such models may display path-
dependency along each simulation history, as well as between alternative simulations. Short
of any derivation from some principle of rationality, ABMs ought to be primarily judged on
their ability to reproduce as emergent properties sets of stylised facts, i.e. empirically observed
statistical regularities. The use of agent-based models has become the standard practice in
many disciplines dealing with complex phenomena, wherein the micro and the macro lev-
els are not isomorphic. More recently, these models have also been adopted in economics.
Indeed, the features of ABMs are particularly suited to the analysis of economic phenomena
characterised by (i) disequilibrium processes and (ii) persistent heterogeneity. Therefore we
model the process of deunionziation following a bottom-down perspective, according to the
spurt model ﬁrst investigated in (Freeman, 1997). Unionised and non-unionised ﬁrms do
compete in the product market arena in terms of their relative efﬁciency, affected by prices,
quality and quantity (excess, unﬁlled demand) variables. The model produces two possi-
ble statistical equilibrium patterns: a stable case of unsuccessful invasion by non-unionised
ﬁrms, and a stable case of invasion by non-unionised ﬁrms.

Whenever non-unionised ﬁrms prevail the average productivity growth declines, pro-
ductivity standard deviation and market concentration increase, mimicking a “winners-
take-all” scenario, cost-competition induces a deﬂationary spiral, and also product quality
is reduced. By means of a shift and share decomposition, we track the within, between, cross,
entry and exit components of productivity growth and the ensuing wage-productivity nexus.

2 At the source of weak selection

Microeconometric ﬁrm level studies have been devoting attention to the patterns of ﬁrm
level idiosyncratic learning, in terms of productivity growth, and of market selection, focus-
ing on the reallocation dynamics between incumbent ﬁrms and at the entry/exit patterns
(Foster et al., 2001). Results from this stream of literature emphasize the phenomenon of
job reallocation as a signal of the cleansing occurring in the market, with workers moving
from low-productivity to high-productivity ﬁrms (Davis et al., 1998). However, recent ﬁnd-
ings provide contrasting evidence: Dosi et al. (2015) using a sample of US listed, big ﬁrms
(COMPUSTAT) show that also in the US economy, considered to be quite prone to the pur-
ported reallocation dynamics, according to which less efﬁcient ﬁrms lose market shares in
favour of the more efﬁcient ones, the main driver of productivity growth is a within (in-
side the ﬁrm) process of accumulation of learning, while the selection process appears to
be quite weak. In line, Foster et al. (2016) ﬁnd that the pace of reallocation in terms of job
creation/job destruction rates and the ensuing cleansing effect in the Great Recession was
lower than those recorded in previous crisis periods. Additionally, the evidence on the re-
lationship between relative efﬁciency and ﬁrm growth does not provide a strong link on
the co-variations between the two latter variables: in a way, improvements in productivity
do not directly translate into ﬁrms market-performance, in terms of sales growth (Bottazzi

3

et al., 2010). These ﬁndings suggest (i) the existence of ample heterogeneity in ﬁrm level pro-
ductivity dynamics, (ii) a weak productivity-growth nexus, (iii) the absence of any converge
process in the productivity dynamics across ﬁrms. A tale of double divergence seems to
emerge: not only ﬁrms do present persistent heterogeneity in their performance variables –
including productivity - , but there is also no sign of convergence in wages. On the contrary,
divergence seems to prevail and grow.

Currently investigated causes of this divergence are the impact of easy access to credit
and entry slowdown. A recent OECD study (McGowan et al., 2017), recalling the idea of
zombie ﬁrms, analyses how, over the last decade (2003-2013), the share of zombie ﬁrms -
deﬁned as those ﬁrms in such ﬁnancial troubles that are unable to meet their interest pay-
ments, but are still alive - have been steadily increasing. Keeping alive, those ﬁrms might
hamper productivity growth. This latter evidence is again in line with some slow-down of
the selection/reallocation process, which is lacking to produce the expected cleansing ef-
fect, especially during recessionary phases. Related, the declining business dynamism, with
a slowdown of entry and a constant exit rate, is the further signal of the reduction in the
selection process (Decker et al., 2016).

However, less attention has been devoted to the link between labour market organiza-
tion and the ensuing productivity and technological conditions. Given the emerging tale of
double divergence, it is naturally to investigate to what extent the increasing wage disper-
sion has allowed low productivity ﬁrms to remain alive. Some empirical evidence points in
favour of the latter mechanism. Barth et al. (2014) when looking at the Scandinavian model
do ﬁnd evidence that more compressed wage structures, like those in Norway, Sweden and
Denmark, are able to fuel more creative destruction in the market, reducing the dispersion
in productivity. Similarly, Hibbs Jr and Locking (2000) ﬁnd that lower within-plant wage
dispersion exerts a positive effect on productivity, with a shift of capital and labour from
low-productivity to high-productivity ﬁrms. If less unequal between-plant wage level might
foster selection, the process of deunionization, which has largely invested many advanced
economies, is one of the major force pushing in the opposite direction. In this respect, the
increasing wage dispersion between ﬁrms induced by deunionization (Freeman, 1984), has
been an implicit buffer which indirectly helped low productivity ﬁrms to survive.

Granted the deunionization-productivity slowdown link we intend to explore, an in-
herent problem relies on how to model the process of deunionization. Freeman (1997),
documenting the patterns of unionization in many advanced economies, proposes the
metaphor of the spurt: unionization was a phase transition occurred after that some thresh-
olds/tipping points have been reached, resulting as a bottom-up emergent property of the
system; clearly, the probability that the spurt occurs positively depends on the existence of
already unionised workers/ﬁrms. On the contrary many labour historians and economists
see unionism as the result of some top down act, as the Wagner Act in US, the Blum govern-
ment in France, the PC 1003 in Canada. However, the exogenous shock interpretation leaves
reduced scope to interpret the spurt dynamics of union rise and decline and it predicts a
stable unionization rate over time, which is clearly not revealed by the data.

Interpreting unionization as a bottom up process allows also to model the process of de-
unionization. Bryson et al. (2017) argue that the process of union decline, more than due to
abandonment rate from previously unionised workers is due to the “never-member" effects,
which see new cohorts of worker never adhere to union organizations. Those ﬁrms experi-
encing the “never-member" effects result into being non unionised ones, therefore moving

4

Queue

Production
good ﬁrms

Workers

Government

Machines

Bank

Queue

Consumption

good ﬁrms

Heterogeneous

consumption goods

Figure 1: The model structure. Boxes in bold style represent heterogeneous agents populations.

from worker-level to ﬁrm-level unionisation/deunionization process.

Our ABM, presenting an inherent non-linear strucure allows, in line with the model in
Freeman (1997), to identify two convergence states (statistical equilibrium) of the system,
namely a zero union density and a high (complete) union density. After accounting for the
process of rising and fall of unionism, we shall study the ensuing technological regimes
emerging in the two states in order to explore the deunionization/productivity slowdown
nexus.

3 The model

We build a general disequilibrium, stock-and-ﬂow consistent agent-based model, populated
by heterogeneous ﬁrms and workers, who behave according to bounded-rational rules.
More speciﬁcally, we extend the existing Keynes Meets Schumpeter (K+S) model (Dosi et al.,
2010), including decentralized interactions among ﬁrms and workers in both the product
and the labour markets (Dosi et al., 2017, 2016), to introduce an endogenous process of work-
ers’ skills accumulation and variable number of ﬁrms.

The two-sector economy is composed of three populations of heterogeneous agents, F 1
t
capital-good ﬁrms (denoted by the subscript i), F 2
t consumption-good ﬁrms (denoted by
the subscript j), LS consumers/workers (denoted by the subscript (cid:96)), plus a bank and the
Government. The basic structure of the model is depicted in Figure 1. Capital-good ﬁrms
invest in R&D and produce heterogeneous machine-tools whose productivity stochastically
evolves over time. Consumption-good ﬁrms combine machines bought from capital-good
ﬁrms and labour in order to produce an homogeneous product for consumers. There is
a minimal ﬁnancial system represented by a single bank that provides credit to ﬁrms to
ﬁnance production and investment plans. Total credit is allocated to each ﬁrm according
to their own credit demand, which is constrained by their past sales, according to a loan to
value ratio rule. Credit supply is conversely completely elastic and unconstrained, adapting

5

to credit demand. Workers submit job applications to a subset of the ﬁrms. Firms hire
according to their individual adaptive demand expectations. The government levies taxes
on ﬁrms, pays unemployment beneﬁts and set minimum wages, according to the policy
setting, absorbing excess proﬁts and losses from the bank and keeping a relatively balanced
budget in the long run.

In the following, we ﬁrst summarize the functioning of the capital- and the consumption-
good sectors of our economy, with a focus on the entry process, and then present the labour
market dynamics, detailing the skills accumulation and deterioration mechanisms. Finally,
we describe the two alternative policy regime settings (and variations thereof) under which
the model has been explored.

3.1 The capital- and consumption-good sectors

The capital-good industry is the locus where innovation is endogenously generated in the
model. Capital-good ﬁrms develop new machine-embodied techniques or imitate the ones
of their competitors in order to produce and sell more productive and cheaper machinery.
On demand, they supply machine-tools to consumption-good ﬁrms, producing with labour
as the only input. Firms have access to bank loans to cover liquidity problems up to a limit.
The capital-good market is characterized by imperfect information and Schumpeterian com-
petition driven by technological innovation. Machine-tool ﬁrms signal the price and produc-
tivity of their machines to their current customers as well to a subset of potential new ones,
and invest a fraction of past revenues in R&D aimed at searching for new machines or copy
existing ones. Prices are set using a ﬁxed mark-up over (labour) costs of production.

Consumption-good ﬁrms produce a quality-differentiated single good employing capital
(composed by different “vintages” of machine-tools) and labour under constant returns to
scale. Desired production is determined according to adaptive (myopic) demand expecta-
tions. Given the actual inventories, if the current capital stock is not sufﬁcient to produce the
desired output, ﬁrms order new machines to expand their installed capacity, paying in ad-
vance – drawing on their retained past proﬁts or, up to some limit, on bank loans. Moreover,
they replace old machines according to a payback-period rule. As new machines embed
state-of-the-art technologies, the labour productivity of consumption-good ﬁrms increases
over time according to the mix of vintages of machines in their capital stocks. Consumption-
good ﬁrms choose in every period their capital-good supplier comparing the price and the
productivity of the machines they are aware of. Firms then ﬁx their prices applying a vari-
able mark-up rule on their production costs, trying to balance proﬁt margins and market
shares. More speciﬁcally, ﬁrms increase their mark-up and price whenever their market
share is expanding and vice versa.
Imperfect information is also the normal state of the
consumption-good market so consumers do not instantaneously switch to the most com-
petitive producer. Market shares evolve according to a (quasi) replicator dynamics: more
competitive ﬁrms expand, while ﬁrms with relatively lower competitiveness levels shrink,
or exit the market.

The process of entry-exit is entirely endogenous in both sectors. Firms leave the market
whenever their market shares get close to zero or their net assets turn negative (bankruptcy).
Conversely, the number of entrants stochastically depends on the number of incumbents and
on the prevailing ﬁnancial conditions. When the sectoral liquidity-to-debt ratio is shrinking
new ﬁrms ﬁnd it easier to enter, and vice versa.

6

3.2 The labour market and skills dynamics

The labour market in the model implements a fully-decentralized search and hiring process
between workers and ﬁrms. The aggregate supply of labour LS is ﬁxed and all workers are
available to be hired in any period. When unemployed, workers submit a certain number of
job applications to ﬁrms. Employed workers may apply or not for better positions, according
to the institutional set up. Larger ﬁrms have a proportionally higher probability of receiving
job applications, which are organized in separated, ﬁrm-speciﬁc application queues. The
labour market is characterized by imperfect information as ﬁrms only observe workers skills
and wage requests and workers are aware only of the wage offers they may receive.

Firms decide about their individual labour demand based on the received orders (capital-
good sector), the expected demand (consumption-good sector), and the expected labour
productivity levels. Considering the number and the productivity of the already employed
workers, ﬁrms decide whether to (i) hire new workers, (ii) ﬁre part of the existing ones, or
(iii) keep the existing labour force. Each hiring ﬁrm deﬁnes a unique wage offer for the
applicant workers, based on its internal conditions and the received applications. Workers
select the best offer they get from the ﬁrms to which they submitted applications, if any.
If already employed, depending on the institutional regime, they might quit the current
job if a better wage offer is received. There are no further rounds of bargaining between
workers and ﬁrms in the same period. Thus, ﬁrms have no guarantee of fulﬁlling all the
open positions, and no market clearing is ever guaranteed. Moreover, there are no ﬁring or
hiring transaction costs.

3.3 Competition between unionised and non-unionised ﬁrms

We employ the model described above to study a process of evolutionary competition be-
tween two types of ﬁrms, which we call unionised and non unionised. The distinctive features
of the two types of ﬁrms are telegraphically sketched in Table 1.

In unionised ﬁrms, whose market share are denoted as f U

2 , wages are insensitive to the
labour market conditions and indexed to the productivity gains of the ﬁrms. There is a
sort of covenant between ﬁrms and workers concerning “long term” employment: ﬁrms ﬁre
only when their proﬁts become negative, while workers are loyal to employers and do not
seek for alternative jobs. When hiring/ﬁring, ﬁrms aim to keep the more skilled workers.
Labour market institutions contemplate a minimum wage fully indexed to aggregated econ-
omy productivity and unemployment beneﬁts ﬁnanced by taxes on proﬁts. Conversely, in
non-unionised ﬁrms, whose market share are denoted as f NU
, ﬂexible wages respond to un-
employment and decentralised market dynamics, and are set by means of an asymmetric
bargaining process where ﬁrms have the last say. Employed workers search for better paid
jobs with some positive probability and ﬁrms freely adjust (ﬁre) their excess workforce ac-
cording to their planned production. Hiring/ﬁring workers by ﬁrms are based on a balance
between skills and wages, using a simple payback comparison rule. Non unionised ﬁrms
operate under different labour institutions: minimum wage is only partially indexed to pro-
ductivity and unemployment beneﬁts – and the associated taxes on proﬁts – are relatively
lower.

2

We simulate an artiﬁcial economy where at the beginning only unionised ﬁrms exist.
After 100 periods non unionised ﬁrms start to enter into the market according to an evo-
lutionary competition process. For the following 100 time steps, deﬁned by the parameter

7

ent2trdChg, non unionised ﬁrms enter with a ﬁxed proportion with respect to unionised ones,
namely 50%, deﬁned by the parameter ent2HldP er. This time window serves as a buffer in
order to let the new entrant ﬁrms growing and populating the market. After the critical
threshold is met, there exists a given probability for a new born ﬁrm of being non unionised,
being this probability the realization of a random draw from a uniform distribution bounded
min and from above by the share of existing types of non-
from below by a minimum ﬂoor f 2
unionised ﬁrms f 2,N U
t−1

:

b2,t = U[f 2
f NU

where f NU

b2,t is the share of new entrant ﬁrms of type NU, while 1 − f NU

(1)
b2,t is the share
of existing ﬁrms of type U. Firms compete in the product market according to their relative
competitiveness. In particular, Consumption-good prices are set applying a variable markup
µj,t on average unit costs:

min, f N U

2,t−1]

Mark-up changes are regulated by the evolution of ﬁrm market shares (fj,t):

with υ ∈ (0, 1). Firm market shares evolve according to a replicator dynamics:

pj,t = (1 + µj,t)cj,t.

(cid:18)

fj,t−1 − fj,t−2

fj,t−2

µj,t = µj,t−1

1 + υ

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

,

Ej,t − ¯Et

¯Et

fj,t = fj,t−1

1 + χ

(cid:19)

(cid:88)

j

¯Et =

1
F 2
t

Ej,tfj,t−1,

where the ﬁrms relative competitiveness Ej,t is deﬁned based on the individual normalized
prices p(cid:48)

j,t, unﬁlled demands l(cid:48)

j,t and product qualities q(cid:48)
j,t:
Ej,t = −ω1p(cid:48)

j,t−1 − ω2l(cid:48)

j,t−1 − ω3q(cid:48)

(5)
being (ω1, ω2, ω3) ∈ R2+ parameters. Unﬁlled demand lj,t is the difference between the
demand Dj,t the ﬁrm gets and its production Qj,t plus inventories Nj,t, if positive:

j,t−1,

lj,t = max [Dj,t − (Qj,t + Nj,t), 0] .

Product quality is deﬁned as the average of the log skills s(cid:96),t of the ﬁrm’s workers:

(cid:88)

qj,t =

1

Lj,t−1

(cid:96)∈{Lj,t−1}

log [s(cid:96),t−1] .

The skill level s(cid:96),t > 0 of each worker (cid:96) evolves over time as a multiplicative process:

(1 + τT )s(cid:96),t−1

s(cid:96),t−1

1

1 + τU

s(cid:96),t =

if employed in t − 1
if unemployed and not under training in t − 1,

where τT ≥ 0 is a parameter governing the learning rate while the worker is employed,
and τU ≥ 0 is the corresponding parameter accounting for the skills deterioration when a
worker is unemployed. As a consequence, when worker (cid:96) is employed her abilities improve
over time, as she becomes more experienced in her task or acquire new skills. Conversely,
unemployed workers lose skills. When a worker is hired, she immediately acquires the

8

(2)

(3)

(4)

(6)

(7)

(8)

minimum level of skills already present in the ﬁrm (the incumbent worker with the lowest
skills), if above her present level. Workers have a ﬁxed working life: after a ﬁxed number
of periods Tr, workers retire and are replaced by younger ones,1 whose skills are set to the
current minimum level of employed workers.

Workers’ skills deﬁne their individual (potential) productivity A(cid:96),t:

A(cid:96),t =

s(cid:96),t
¯st

Aτ
i ,

¯st =

1
LS

s(cid:96),t,

(9)

(cid:88)

(cid:96)

where ¯st is the average worker skills level, Aτ
i is the “standard” productivity of the vintage of
the machinery which the worker operates, and LS, the (ﬁxed) total labour supply. Thus, the
ratio s(cid:96),t/¯st, the worker normalized skills, represents her ability to produce more (if s(cid:96),t > ¯st)
or less than the “standard” associated with a given machine technology.2

Wage sensitivity to unemployment
Labour ﬁring restrictions
Workers hiring priority
Workers ﬁring priority
Unemployment beneﬁts
Minimum wage productivity indexation

UNIONISED

NON UNIONISED

low (rigid)

high (ﬂexible)

under losses only

none

higher skills
lower skills

yes
full

lower payback
higher payback
yes (reduced)

partial

Table 1: Main characteristics of the two types of ﬁrms

In order to better characterize contemporary labour markets we have also introduced
a proﬁt-sharing mechanism, according to which ﬁrms performing better than the average
ones, distribute bonuses to their workers. If distributed, bonuses are equal for all workers
inside the ﬁrms, and they are distributed proportionally to ﬁrms net proﬁts. Only those
ﬁrms whose proﬁt rate is higher than the average one distribute bonuses:

Bj,t = ψ6Πj,t(1 − tr)

if

Πj,t
Kj,t

>

Π2
t
K 2
t

(10)

3.4 Timeline of events

In each simulation time step, ﬁrms and workers behavioural rules are applied according to
the following timeline:

1. Machines ordered in the previous period (if any) are delivered;
2. Capital-good ﬁrms perform R&D and signal their machines to consumption-good

ﬁrms;

3. Consumption-good ﬁrms decide on how much to produce, invest and hire/ﬁre;

1At the start of each simulation, initial workers ages are randomly draw in the integer range [1, Tr] and all

start from the same skills level.

2Note that, in this speciﬁcation, the ﬁrm-level effective productivity Aj,t is a truly emergent property, re-
sulting together from the technical innovation dynamics (the introduction of new vintages Aτ
i ), the worker
skills evolution and the effective demand, which guides ﬁrms when deciding the capital stock dynamics and
the employed machine mix.

9

4. To fulﬁl production and investment plans, ﬁrms allocate cash-ﬂows and (if needed)

borrow from bank;

5. Firms send/receive machine-tool orders for the next period (if applicable);
6. Workers (employed and unemployed) update their own skills;
7. Firms open job queues and job-seekers send applications to them (“queue”);
8. Wages are set (indexation or bargaining) and job vacancies are partly or totally ﬁlled;
9. Government collects taxes and pays unemployment subsidies;
10. Consumption-good market opens and the market shares of ﬁrms evolve according to

competitiveness;

11. Firms in both sectors compute their proﬁts, pay wages, distribute bonuses and repay

debt;

12. Exit takes place, ﬁrms with near-zero market share or negative net assets are eschewed

from the market;

13. Prospective entrants decide to enter according to the markets conditions;
14. Aggregate variables are computed and the cycle restarts.

4 Deunionization and productivity slowdown

Let us now focus on the process of deunionization. The model produces two endogenous
statistical equilibria in terms of market shares, or equivalently convergent states. In Figure
???? the stable statistical equilibrium of Invasion is presented: as shown by the light grey
area, representing the maximum and the minimum realizations, there are cases in which the
occurrence of complete invasion by non-unionised ﬁrms does not happen. The latter is the
result of the stochastic competition between the two types of ﬁrms as deﬁned in Table 1 and
the sign of the path-dependency entailed by the model structure.

Scenarios

Invasion

CONDITIONS ON NU FIRMS

LOWER/HIGHER PAYBACK (WAGE/SKILLS RATIO)

WORKERS ARE HIRED/FIRED FIRST

No Invasion LOWER/HIGHER WAGE WORKERS ARE HIRED/FIRED FIRST

Table 2: Model conditions for the equilibrium of unsuccessful invasion (No Invasion scenario).

What are the conditions under which the process of invasion is not successful? Given
that the baseline conﬁguration of non-unionised ﬁrms, as presented in Table 1, produces the
Invasion scenario, where unionised ﬁrms are expelled from the marker, we intend to under-
stand under what conditions the survival of unionised ﬁrms occurs. The modiﬁcation to the
baseline conﬁguration is presented in Table 2. The case of unsuccessfully invasion depends
on non-unionised ﬁrms becoming more cost-sensitive changing their hiring/ﬁring order
scheme: under the new conditions they simply perform cost-minimization and hire/ﬁre
lower/higher wage workers ﬁrst. Differently from the baseline conﬁguration presented in
Table 1, if non-unionised ﬁrms do not use a payback rule, evaluating the cost of labour rel-
ative to worker skills, they end up loosing competitive advantage, offering too much lower

10

quality products in the market. Note in fact that under Equation 5, the product quality af-
fects ﬁrm competitiveness, and quality, under Equation 7 depends on the average workers’
skills at the ﬁrm level.

What type of wage patterns do emerge in the two scenarios and to what extent the preva-
lence of one of the two types of ﬁrm produces a less/more equal wage distributions? Figure
2(a) presents the pooled wage distribution of ﬁrm-level wages. As expected, the distribu-
tion of wages is extremely more concentrated and less dispersed in the No Invasion case,
wherein the majority of the ﬁrms are unionised ones. Not only in terms of remuneration
but also in terms of wage growth (see Figure 2(b)) the No Invasion scenario presents the
most compressed wage growth patterns, with a range of variation between [−0.05, 0.05].
The range of wage growth variation more than double in the Invasion scenario, explaining
the more skewed distribution in wage level.

Figure 2(c) presents the time evolution of productivity in the two scenarios, by ﬁrm type,
separately accounting for the role of unionised and non unionised ﬁrms. Figure 2(c) does
not simply account for the absolute level of productivity dynamics by ﬁrm type but it is
also affected by the dynamic evolution of each type of ﬁrm in the market. Starting from the
Invasion scenario, non-unionised ﬁrms, that are the fraction largely populating the market,
present a higher level of productivity which decouples from the one of unionised ﬁrms be-
fore t = 300. The lower productivity level of the latter ﬁrms is however largely due to the
reduced numerous of unionised ﬁrms. Although largely invaded, the few unionised ﬁrms
remaining alive in the market, maintain a positive productivity level, and keep surviving.
The opposite patterns instead occur in the No Invasion scenario: in this case non-unionised
ﬁrms completely disappear from the market. A ﬁrst side note is that, comparing in both
scenarios failing unionised vs non unionised ﬁrms, the former are more productive and re-
silient to the process of invasion.

In Figure 2(d) it is shown the dynamics of productivity standard deviation. Looking
at the Invasion case, after the process of invasion occurred, unionised ﬁrms do present a
much lower between ﬁrm productivity differential. The latter evidence is also revealed by
the increasing standard deviation spurring after non unionised ﬁrms start populating the
market, at t = 100, in both scenarios: in general the variation of productivity across ﬁrms
is always higher between non unionised ﬁrms (dotted line), as expected from the empirical
evidence.

Figure 3(a) presents the average productivity growth in the two scenarios comparing the
average value of the latter variable across 50MC runs in each of the two respective scenarios.
The invasion of non unionised ﬁrms entails a reduction of the average productivity growth
of 0.17%, signalling that the process of deunionization in our model causes a productivity
slowdown. Not only non unionised ﬁrms have in average a lower productivity, they also
produce products of lower quality (Figure 3(b)): the latter mechanism is due to the different
organization of labour market occurring in the two types of ﬁrms: in fact, in non unionised
ﬁrms, characterized by external ﬂexibility, workers are in average less skilled. The lower
degree of workers competence maps into lower quality products, according to Equation 7.

11

Figure 2: Wage and productivity dynamics I - Distributional and time series analysis

(a) Pooled wage distribution

(b) Pooled wage growth rate distribution

1
2

(c) Productivity dynamics by ﬁrm type

(d) Productivity standard deviation by ﬁrm type

−0.4−0.20.00.20.050.100.200.501.002.005.0010.00Pooled average wages distribution ( all experiments )( Consumption−goods sector )log(normalized average real wage)Binned densityInvasionNo InvasionNormal fits−0.10−0.050.000.050.100.10.20.51.02.05.010.020.0Pooled average wage growth distribution ( all experiments )( Consumption−goods sector )Normalized average real wage growth rateBinned densityInvasionNo InvasionLaplace fits01002003004000246810Productivity by firm type  ( all experiments )( vertical dotted line: regime change / sector 2 only / MC runs = 100 )TimeLog productivityInvasionNo InvasionPre−change firmsPost−change firms01002003004000.00.10.20.30.40.5Productivity standard deviation by firm type  ( all experiments )( vertical dotted line: regime change / sector 2 only / MC runs = 100 )TimeStandard deviation of log productivityInvasionNo InvasionPre−change firmsPost−change firmsFigure 3: Market competition performance comparison between unionised and non-unionised ﬁrms

(a) Average productivity growth

(b) Product quality

1
3

(c) Variation of price consumer product

(d) Market concentration - HHI

InvasionNo Invasion0.0050.0100.0150.020Productivity growth( bar: median / box: 2nd−3rd quartile / whiskers: max−min / points: outliers / MC runs = 100 / period = 301 − 500 )Average productivity growth rateInvasionNo Invasion1.51.61.71.8Quality( bar: median / box: 2nd−3rd quartile / whiskers: max−min / points: outliers / MC runs = 100 / period = 301 − 500 )Weighted average product quality in sector 2InvasionNo Invasion−0.004−0.0020.0000.002Inflation( bar: median / box: 2nd−3rd quartile / whiskers: max−min / points: outliers / MC runs = 100 / period = 301 − 500 )Consumer prices index average growth ratellllllllllInvasionNo Invasion0.0050.0100.0150.0200.025Market concentration( bar: median / box: 2nd−3rd quartile / whiskers: max−min / points: outliers / MC runs = 100 / period = 301 − 500 )Stadardized Herfindahl−Hirschman index in sector 2Figure 4: Market concentration and income distribution dynamics

(a) Market concentration

(b) Bonus share over GDP

1
4

(c) Bonus to wage ratio

(d) Wage standard deviation

01002003004000.000.010.020.030.04Market concentration  ( all experiments )( vertical dotted line: regime change / Sector 2 only / MC runs = 100 )TimeStandardized Herfindahl−Hirschman indexInvasionNo Invasion01002003004000.0100.0150.0200.025Bonus share  ( all experiments )( vertical dotted line: regime change / MC runs = 100 )TimeTotal real bonuses on GDPInvasionNo InvasionlllllllllInvasionNo Invasion0.0140.0160.0180.0200.0220.0240.026Bonus to wage ratio( bar: median / box: 2nd−3rd quartile / whiskers: max−min / points: outliers / MC runs = 100 / period = 301 − 500 )Average bonuses over wages in sector 2lllInvasionNo Invasion0.100.150.200.250.30Wages spread( bar: median / box: 2nd−3rd quartile / whiskers: max−min / points: outliers / MC runs = 100 / period = 301 − 500 )Standard deviation of log wagesNote that, in the Invasion scenario, non unionised ﬁrms prevail, independently of their
product quality. This is so because the latter ﬁrms leverage on the lower labour costs
due to wage and numerical ﬂexibility, imposing lower prices and and taking advantage
on unionised ones. As a result the long-run price consumer index presents a deﬂationary
spiral, and is much lower than the case of unionised ﬁrms (Figure 3(c)). The type of mar-
ket structure that emerges in the two cases is rather different: in fact, the degree of market
concentration is much higher in the invasion case, with fewer ﬁrms appropriating a higher
fraction of the market, as the performance comparison of the HH index shows in Figure 3(d).
The latter ﬁnding is consistent with an average sales growth dynamics more heterogeneous
in the invasion case, with few ﬁrms experiencing gains and the rest experiencing losses.

The temporal dynamics of the HH index is presented in Figure 4(a): note that the degree
of market concentration increases in both scenarios as non-unionised ﬁrms start to enter
into the market. Once the process of competition between the two types is over, the index
stabilizes in both scenarios, with a considerably higher level in the Invasion case. Which
are the implication of the two different industrial structures? They are reﬂected, among
other variables, in the different fraction of bonuses distributed to workers. In fact, in the
Invasion scenario the bonus share over GDP is much higher, entailed by the higher distance
characterizing the total proﬁts of the top performing ﬁrms and the average ones (Figure
4(b)). A higher share of bonuses and lower wages, results into a higher bonus-to-wage ratio
(Figure 4(c)), which in turn is reﬂected into a more skew wage distribution, as shown by the
higher wage standard deviation in the Invasion scenario ( Figure 4(d)). Table 3 presents a
summary of our performance comparison.

GDP growth 0.01
Productivity growth 0.01
Quality 1.52
Inﬂation -0.00
Market concentration 0.02
Wages standard deviation 0.22
Bonus to wage ratio 0.02

Baseline[1] Ratio[2] p-val[2]
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

1.17
1.16
1.13
-0.01
0.41
0.49
0.82

Table 3: Summary statistics of the performance comparison. Experiments: [1] Invasion, [2] No Inva-
sion ( numbers in brackets indicate the experiment number / H0: no difference with baseline / MC
runs = 100 / period = 301 - 500 )

5 Shift-and-share decomposition

2 only, and log πt−1 = (cid:80)

After this inspection, we now move to better account for the process of productivity growth
and reallocation across ﬁrms. We therefore perform a productivity decomposition on the
simulated data, according to Foster et al. (2001). The decomposition reads as in Equation
11 below, where fj,t and πj,t deﬁne employment shares and labour productivity of sector
j fj,t−1 log πj,t−1. The ﬁrst term in this decomposition represents
a within plant component based on plant-level changes, weighted by initial shares in the
industry. The second term represents a between-plant component that reﬂects changing

15

shares, weighted by the deviation of initial plant productivity from the initial industry in-
dex. The third term represents a cross (i.e., covariance-type) term. The last two terms repre-
sent the contribution of entering and exiting plants, respectively. In this decomposition, the
between-plant term and the entry and exit terms involve deviations of plant-level produc-
tivity from the initial industry index. For a continuing plant, this implies that an increase in
its share contributes positively to the between-plant component only if the plant has higher
productivity than average initial productivity for the industry. Similarly, an exiting plant
contributes positively only if the plant exhibits productivity lower than the initial average,
and an entering plant contributes positively only if the plant has higher productivity than
the initial average.

W IT HIN

BET W EEN

∆ log π2

t =

fj,t−1∆ log πj,t +

∆fj,t(log πj,t−1 − log πt−1) +

∆ log πj,t∆fj,t

(cid:125)(cid:124)

(cid:123)

(cid:122)
(cid:88)

j

(cid:125)(cid:124)
(cid:123)(cid:122)

(cid:125)(cid:124)

CROSS

(cid:123)

(cid:122)
(cid:88)

j

(cid:123)
(cid:125)

+

(11)

IN CU M BEN T S

(cid:125)(cid:124)

EN T RY

(cid:123)

(cid:122)
(cid:88)

(cid:125)(cid:124)

EXIT

fj,t(log πj,t − log πt−1)−

fj,t−1(log πj,t−1 − log πt−1)

(cid:123)

j

(cid:122)
(cid:88)
(cid:124)
(cid:122)
(cid:88)

j

j

Table 4 splits the overall productivity growth documented into the ﬁve components of
the FHK decomposition. The decomposition exercise allows in fact to compare the sign and
the intensity of the above components. Figure 5(a) presents the results for all types of ﬁrms
during the transient period (t = 270 − 300) of coexistence and then separately analyses the
process of reallocation for unionised (Figure 5(b)) and non unionised ﬁrms (Figure 5(c)).
Note that the analysis of the transient phase allows us to understand productivity realloca-
tion when both type of ﬁrms do coexist.

Interesting properties do emerge from this analysis. (1) In line with the empirical ev-
idence, the within component does always account for the higher fraction of productivity
growth, signalling that the process of productivity growth is mostly explained by the accu-
mulation of internal ﬁrms capabilities. (2) The between component is lower and positive in
both regime, the cross effect is negative, and higher in the No Invasion case. (3) The cross
effect becomes positive when using market instead of employment shares: the latter ﬁnd-
ing is due to the fact that market sales move in the same direction of productivity growth,
while in case of employment shares, more productive ﬁrms reduce their employment de-
mand. (4) The entry-exit components play a more negligible roles in the long-run, while they
are rather important in the short-run. (5) In both scenarios, the exit of unionised ﬁrms reduces
productivity growth to a higher degree than the exit of non unionised ﬁrms. (6) During the
entire simulation period the No Invasion scenario exhibits always a higher degree of the
all components, irrespectively of the type of reallocation used, in line with the slowdown
of productivity induced by the invasion of non-unionised ﬁrms. (7) The selection process,
including all components of the decomposition but the within one, is much higher in the
No Invasion scenario, signalling that in the latter case competition favour more productive
ﬁrms.

The latter battery of analysis we undertake shows the degree of correlation between pro-
ductivity and wage. In particular, following Bagger et al. (2014) we regress wage level on
productivity levels across ﬁrms. The latter regression allows to capture the degree according

16

Figure 5: FHK decomposition of productivity growth - Transient phase

(a) All ﬁrms

(b) Unionised ﬁrms

(c) Non Unionised ﬁrms

17

InvasionNo InvasionWithinBetweenCrossEntryExitLabor productivity growth−10−50510FHK decomposition of productivity growth ( all firms )( Share = labor / MC runs = 20 / Window = 8 periods / Period = 271−300 )( Consumption−goods sector )InvasionNo InvasionWithinBetweenCrossEntryExitLabor productivity growth−4−2024FHK decomposition of productivity growth ( pre−change firms )( Share = labor / MC runs = 20 / Window = 8 periods / Period = 271−300 )( Consumption−goods sector )InvasionNo InvasionWithinBetweenCrossEntryExitLabor productivity growth−50510FHK decomposition of productivity growth ( post−change firms )( Share = labor / MC runs = 20 / Window = 8 periods / Period = 271−300 )( Consumption−goods sector )Table 4: Productivity growth decomposition - Sample size = 934019 ﬁrms / Window = 8 periods /
MC runs = 20 / Period = 301 - 500

7.66
0.65
-0.14
0.17
7.80
0.66

-5.36
0.67
-0.05
0.03
-5.30
0.68

17.54
1.35
0.14
0.03
17.40
1.34

23.00
1.15
-1.73
0.21
24.73
1.21

Overall
(s.e.)
Unionised ﬁrms
(s.e.)
Non Unionised ﬁrms
(s.e.)

INVASION Total Within Between Cross Entry
-0.76
0.36
0.38
0.09
-1.14
0.30
NO INVASION Total Within Between Cross Entry
1.26
1.07
-0.59
0.43
1.84
0.68

Overall
(s.e.)
Unionised ﬁrms
(s.e.)
Non unionised ﬁrms
(s.e.)

25.94
0.61
30.89
1.06
-4.95
0.88

20.40
1.07
20.37
1.09
0.03
0.07

8.05
0.27
10.17
0.57
-2.12
0.58

-7.85
0.78
-7.82
0.80
-0.03
0.03

Exit Error
2.71
2.09
0.60
0.39
0.03
-1.96
0.01
0.23
4.05
2.83
0.45
0.42
Exit Error
0.13
4.17
0.59
1.34
4.89
4.12
0.74
0.86
0.03
-3.98
0.74
0.03

to which high-productive ﬁrms are also high-wage ﬁrms and conversely, the extent to which
low-productive ﬁrms are also low-wage ﬁrms. Results are presented in Table 5 which shows
a parametric estimation for 20 MC realizations. The No Invasion scenario is characterised by
a lower productivity-wage correlation, signalling that the wage-productivity nexus is more
ﬂat and equal across ﬁrms: a more compressed wage structure implies that wages are less
sensitive to productivity variations, in both direction. Conversely, in the Invasion case, the
wage structure is much more linked to the productivity dynamics: productivity gains are
appropriated by those workers employed in more productive ﬁrms, conversely workers
employed in less performing ﬁrms, enjoy relatively less productivity gains.

Table 5: Monte Carlo regressions summary - Sample size = 10393 ﬁrms / MC runs = 20 / Cross-
section = 300 - 304 by 4

Scenario
Intercept
(s.e.)
Beta
(s.e.)
Std. error
(s.e.)
p-value
(s.e.)
R2
(s.e.)
Firms
(s.e.)

Invasion No Invasion
4.49
0.21
0.14
0.04
0.01
0.00
0.08
0.06
0.24
0.05
313.05
10.50

1.77
0.31
0.63
0.06
0.05
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.36
0.03
296.80
8.92

18

6 Conclusions

This paper presents an ABM which endogenously accounts for the process of deunioniza-
tion. The process of deunionziation occurs following a bottom-down perspective, according
to the spurt model ﬁrst investigated in (Freeman, 1997). Unionised and non-unionised ﬁrms
do compete in the product market arena in terms of their relative efﬁciency, affected by
prices, quality and (excess) quantity variables. The model produces two possible statistical
equilibrium patterns: a stable case of unsuccessful invasion by non-unionised ﬁrms, and a
stable case of stable invasion by non-unionised ﬁrms.

The results from our analysis provide support in favour of the efﬁcient dynamics fos-
tered by a “Social market economy”, populated by unionised ﬁrms, wherein the process
of innovation, and therefore productivity growth is triggered by the accumulation of ﬁrms
level capabilities, workers skills, incremental innovation and an egalitarian wage structure.
Under these conditions, the process of ﬁrms competition in the product market features a
positive selection dynamics, with high-productivity ﬁrms prevailing upon low-productivity
ones. At the opposite end of the spectrum, a “Free market economy”, populated by non-
unionised ﬁrms ensuing a more dispersed wage structure, results into a slowdown of market
selection, with low-productivity ﬁrms remaining in the market, therefore reducing average
productivity and increasing its standard deviation. In this latter case, the exit dynamics neg-
atively contributes to the average growth of productivity, such as the negatively contributes
the cross effect, capturing the covariation between market share and productivity. .

Acknowledgements

We gratefully acknowledge the support by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation programme under grant agreement No. 649186 - ISIGrowth, and by Fundação
de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (FAPESP), process No. 2015/24341-7.

References

Bagger, J., B. J. Christensen, and D. T. Mortensen (2014). Wage and labor productivity disper-
sion: The roles of total factor productivity, labor quality, capital intensity, and rent sharing.
In 2014 Meeting Papers.

Barth, E., A. Bryson, J. C. Davis, and R. Freeman (2016). It’s where you work: Increases in the
dispersion of earnings across establishments and individuals in the united states. Journal
of Labor Economics 34(S2), S67–S97.

Barth, E., K. O. Moene, and F. Willumsen (2014). The scandinavian model—an interpretation.

Journal of Public Economics 117, 60–72.

Berlingieri, G., P. Blanchenay, and C. Criscuolo (2017). Great divergences: The growing

dispersion of wages and productivity in oecd countries.

Bottazzi, G., G. Dosi, N. Jacoby, A. Secchi, and F. Tamagni (2010). Corporate performances
and market selection: some comparative evidence. Industrial and Corporate Change 19(6),
1953–1996.

19

Bryson, A., R. Freeman, R. Gomez, and P. Willman (2017). The twin track model of employee
voice: An anglo-american perspective on union decline and the rise of alternative forms
of voice.

Davis, S. J., J. C. Haltiwanger, S. Schuh, et al. (1998). Job creation and destruction. MIT Press

Books 1.

Decker, R. A., J. Haltiwanger, R. S. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2016). Declining business dy-
namism: What we know and the way forward. American Economic Review 106(5), 203–07.
Dosi, G., G. Fagiolo, and A. Roventini (2010). Schumpeter meeting Keynes: A policy-friendly
model of endogenous growth and business cycles. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Con-
trol 34(9), 1748–1767.

Dosi, G., D. Moschella, E. Pugliese, and F. Tamagni (2015, Oct). Productivity, market selec-
tion, and corporate growth: comparative evidence across us and europe. Small Business
Economics 45(3), 643–672.

Dosi, G., M. C. Pereira, A. Roventini, and M. E. Virgillito (2016). The Effects of Labour
Market Reforms upon Unemployment and Income Inequalities: an Agent Based Model.
Socio-economic Review (2016/27).

Dosi, G., M. C. Pereira, A. Roventini, and M. E. Virgillito (2017). When more Flexibility Yields
more Fragility: the Microfoundations of Keynesian Aggregate Unemployment. Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control.

Dunne, T., L. Foster, J. Haltiwanger, and K. R. Troske (2004). Wage and productivity dis-
persion in united states manufacturing: The role of computer investment. Journal of Labor
Economics 22(2), 397–429.

Foster, L., C. Grim, and J. Haltiwanger (2016). Reallocation in the great recession: cleansing

or not? Journal of Labor Economics 34(S1), S293–S331.

Foster, L., J. C. Haltiwanger, and C. J. Krizan (2001). Aggregate productivity growth: Lessons
from microeconomic evidence. In New developments in productivity analysis, pp. 303–372.
University of Chicago Press.

Freeman, R. B. (1984). Longitudinal analyses of the effects of trade unions. Journal of labor

Economics 2(1), 1–26.

Freeman, R. B. (1997). Spurts in union growth: Deﬁning moments and social processes.

Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hibbs Jr, D. A. and H. Locking (2000). Wage dispersion and productive efﬁciency: Evidence

for Sweden. Journal of Labor Economics 18(4), 755–782.

Hutchinson, J. and D. Persyn (2012, Apr). Globalisation, concentration and footloose ﬁrms:
in search of the main cause of the declining labour share. Review of World Economics 148(1),
17–43.

Karabarbounis, L. and B. Neiman (2013). The global decline of the labor share. The Quarterly

Journal of Economics 129(1), 61–103.

Lee, D. S. (1999). Wage inequality in the united states during the 1980s: Rising dispersion or

falling minimum wage? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(3), 977–1023.

McGowan, M. A., D. Andrews, and V. Millot (2017). Insolvency regimes, zombie ﬁrms and

capital reallocation.

Schwellnus, C., A. Kappeler, and P.-A. Pionnier (2017). Decoupling of wages from produc-

tivity.

Syverson, C. (2017, May). Challenges to mismeasurement explanations for the us produc-

tivity slowdown. Journal of Economic Perspectives 31(2), 165–86.

20

