MONETARY PROGRAMMING, TURNOVER OF THE DIRECTORS OF CENTRAL BANK AND INTEREST 

RATE DETERMINATION: REACTION FUNCTION APPLICATIONS FOR BRAZIL 

Área 4 - Macroeconomia, Economia Monetária e Finanças 

 

 
by 

 

Allan Silveira dos Santos

1

 

Maria Helena Ambrosio Dias

2

 

Joilson Dias

3

 

Erica Oliveira Gonzales4 

 

 
Abstract:The objective of this paper is test empirically the question of Central Bank Independence 
(BCI)  in  Brazil.  We  estimated  two  reaction  functions  for  the  Brazil´s  Central  Bank  in  order  to 
identify  whether  the  turnover  of  the  Directors  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (COPOM),  and 
whether  the  deviations  of  monetary  aggregates  interfered  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  The 
results indicate that changes of directors did not result in changes in the conduct of monetary policy 
in  short-run,  but  indicate  changes  in  long-run  of  monetary  policy.  Besides,  the  results  of  reaction 
function show that is necessary a closer monitoring of Brazil´s monetary aggregates. 
 
Keywords:  Central  bank  independence,  monetary  policy,  reaction  function,  Turnover  COPOM´s 
directors, monetary aggregates. 
 
Resumo:  O  objetivo  deste  trabalho  é  testar  empiricamente  a  questão  da  Independência  do  Banco 
Central no Brasil. Foram estimadas duas funções de reação para o Banco Central no Brasil, a fim de 
identificar se a taxa de rotatividade dos Diretores do Comitê de Política Monetária (COPOM), e se 
os desvios dos agregados monetários interferiram na condução da política monetária. Os resultados 
indicam  que  mudanças  nos  diretores  do  COPOM  não  resultaram  em  mudanças  de  curto  prazo  na 
política  monetária,  mas  sinalizaram  uma  mudança  de  longo  prazo  na  conduta  do  Banco  Central. 
Além  disso,  dos  resultados  da  função  de  reação,  ficou  demonstrado  que  é  necessário  um 
acompanhamento mais próximo dos agregados monetários no Brasil. 
 
Palavras  Chave:  Independência  do  Banco  Central,  Política  Monetária,  Função  de  Reação, 
Rotatividade dos Diretores do COPOM, agregados monetários. 
 
Classificação JEL: E02, E52, C32. 
 

                                                 

1 Master of Science by the Graduate Program in Economics at the State University of Maringá-Brazil. Doctoral Student 
at  National  University  of  Brasília  –  Brazil.  Fellow  of  the  National  Counsel  of  Research  (CNPq-Brazil).  Email: 
allansilveira1@gmail.com 
2  Full  Professor  at  the  State  University  of  Maringá  –  Brazil,  Graduate  Program  in  Economics,  Department  of 
Economics, Fellow Researcher of the Araucária Foundation. Email: mhadias@uem.br  
3  Full  Professor  at  the  State  University  of  Maringá  –  Brazil,  Graduate  Program  in  Economics,  Department  of 
Economics, Fellow Researcher of the National Counsel of Research (CNPq-Brazil). Email: jdias@uem.br  
4 Is attending master’s degree at Maringá State University’s Graduate Program in Economics. Fellow of   Coordination 
of improving personal Higher Education (Capes-Brazil). Email: ericagonzales22@gmail.com 
 

1 

 

1. INTRODUCTION  

Throughout  history,  the  level  of  inflation  differs  across  countries.  Some  countries  have 
managed to successfully achieve and maintain prices at a low level, while others have gone through 
serious crises of currency stability.   

Kydland  and  Prescott  (1977)  address  the  problem  of  dynamic  inconsistency  of  monetary 
policy.  Accordingly,  the  form  through  which  decisions  about  monetary  policy  are  taking  and  the 
fact  that  policymakers  are  subject  to  an  inflationary  bias  cause  higher  inflation  for  a  particular 
country. 

Once detected the problem of dynamic inconsistency, avoiding it would be the establishment 
of independent central banks, specifically committed to price stability, (ROGOFF, 1985). Following 
Rogoff  (1985),  Grilli,  Masciandaro  and  Tabellini  (1991),  Cukierman,  Webb  and  Neyapty  (1992), 
Alesina  and  Summers  (1993)  agree  that  an  independent  central  bank  would  be  the  institutional 
arrangement able to prevent policymakers to use the economic policy to obtain short-term gains in 
the unemployment and inflation rate tradeoff. 

From  this  theoretical  assumption,  several  indexes  of  central  bank  independence  were 
created,  such  as,  legal  independence,  actual  independence,  which  were  aimed  to  check  whether 
there was any relationship between central bank independence and inflation levels. 

Since  1999,  prevails  in  Brazil  an  inflation  targeting  regime  for  price  control,  using  the 
interest rate as main instrument, this study focus is the central bank independence indicators effects 
in  the  reaction  function.  Therefore,  this  study  aims  to  estimate  reaction  functions  modified  to  the 
Central  Bank  of  Brazil  from  2001  to  2011.  In  accordance  with  the  methodology  proposed  by 
Cukierman, Webb and Neyapty (1992), two variables are included to calculate the degree of central 
bank  independence:  the  turnover  rate  of  central  bank  presidents  and  adherence  in  relation  to 
monetary  targets.  To  the  first  indicator  of  independence,  this  study  innovates  by  including  the 
turnover  rate  of  the  central  bank  directors  (governors)  from  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee 
(COPOM)5. 

Thus,  the  first  application  estimates  a  modified  version  of  the  reaction  function  for  Brazil, 
including as explanatory variables to the interest rate, the deviation of actual inflation from its target 
level, the deviation of inflation expectations from the target, the output gap relative to its potential 
level, and turnover rate of directors of the Monetary Policy Committee (COPOM).6 

The purpose of this application is whether the rotation of directors of COPOM interfered in 
the conduct of monetary policy, causing further relaxation or tightening of monetary aggregates, for 
example.  Accordingly,  this  analysis  helps  to  understand  how  changes  in  the  board  of  directors  of 
COPOM  could  explain  shifts  in  monetary  policy  and  on  the  price  levels,  in  light  with  the 
replacement of the president of the board appointed by the literature. 

In the second econometric application, it is evaluated the adherence of monetary aggregates 
in  relation  to  the  monetary  programming  established  by  COPOM  over  central  bank  reaction 
function.  In  other  words,  it  calculates  the  deviation  of  the  actual  growth  of  monetary  aggregate 
(M1) from that announced by the monetary authorities. 

Furthermore,  it  investigates  the  monetary  authorities’  reactions  to  deviations  of  preset 
targets.  In  that  way,  if  monetary  authorities  pursue  the  monetary  aggregates  and  if  there  is  any 
reaction  from  the  central  bank  because  of  a  shift  between  the  predicted  values  and  those  actually 
made, then it could alter the interest rate. We expected that, a systematic displacement between the 
predicted  values  and  effective  ones  occurring  for  monetary  aggregates  combined  with  a  lack  of 
reaction to these events can cause damage to combat inflation and increase its volatility. 

Along with this introduction, this paper has two main parts. The first  part is a brief review 
on the theoretical discussion of central bank independence and also on empirical evidence. On the 
                                                 

5 Respective to Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 
6 Following the econometric study of Dias, Teixeira, and Dias (2009). 

2 

 

second  topic,  the  econometric  methodology  and  the  data  set  are  presented.  Then,  the  results  of 
econometric applications are discussed. Following there is some overall considerations. 
 
2. CENTRAL BANK INDEPENDENCE: A REVIEW 

Along  last  decades,  some  countries  were  successful  in  maintaining  price  stability  while 
others have gone through serious crises and periods of hyperinflation. The range of observed values 
for  inflation  in  different  countries  has  encouraged  studies  to  explain  the  possible  causes  of  these 
dispersions in prices. 

The  reasons  for  these  differences  are  many  and  depend  on  each  country’s  specificity. 
However,  one  of  the  possible  reasons  to  understand  why  there  are  such  differences  between 
countries is attributed to the difference in the level of independence of Central Banks (ICB). Many 
authors  have  worked  with  the  idea  that  countries  with  higher  levels  of  independence  could,  over 
time,  keeping  prices  in  a  more  stable  path  than  the  countries  in  which  the  central  bank  was 
relatively more dependent or less autonomous. 

One  of  the  main  empirical  arguments  in  favor  of  delegating  greater  autonomy  to  central 
banks is due to the success of price stability obtained by central banks of Germany and Switzerland. 
These  experiences  led  to  a  range  of  countries  delegating  greater  sovereignty  to  their  respective 
central banks during the decades of 80 and 90 (MENDONÇA, 1998). 

Regarding the theoretical arguments, the first is related to the vision of public choice theory. 
The monetary authorities are exposed to strong political pressures so that they are forced to behave 
according to the preferences of the rulers. These pressures exerted by political authorities could be, 
for  example,  the  explanation  of  political  business  cycles  investigated  by  Allen  (1986),  and 
motivated by the study of pre-election periods cycles of Nordhaus's (1975). In such cases, from the 
point  of  view  of  public  choice  theory,  it  appears  that  the  greater  the  degree  of  ICB,  this  will  be 
subject to less political influence. 

The second argument is presented by Sargent and Wallace (1981). For these authors, there is 
a clear distinction  between monetary  and fiscal  authorities. According to  the relationship  between 
these  authorities,  there  may  be  monetary  instability.  If  fiscal  policy  is  dominant,  the  monetary 
authorities  can  not  control  the  money  supply,  because  it  ends  up  becoming  endogenous  to  the 
system.  In  this  case,  the  monetary  authorities  will  be  forced  to  finance  the  deficit  by  money 
creation. On the other hand, if monetary policy is dominant, the tax authorities will be required to 
reduce the deficit, or repudiate part of it. The higher the degree of ICB, the less monetary authorities 
would be coerced to finance government deficits through money creation. 

However,  the  main  theoretical  argument  used  to  support  studies  concerning  central  bank 
independence, is the problem of time inconsistency, which was developed primarily in Kydland and 
Prescott (1977), followed by Calvo (1978) and Barro and Gordon (1983). The problem of dynamic 
inconsistency starts when the best  plan prepared in  the present  to  some  future period differs  from 
the  plan  that  would  be  optimal  economically.  In  this  situation,  although  the  policy  chosen  by  the 
policymaker  is  consistent,  it  is  not  socially  optimal,  leading  to  higher  rates  of  inflation  without 
consequent  increase  in  the  level  of  output.  This  is  due  to  the  agents’  behavior  under  rational 
expectations.  Thus,  the  institutional  apparatus  of  an  independent  central  bank  would  be  able  to 
reject  the possibility of  using inflation surprise in  order to  gain  real  variables improvement in  the 
short run (MENDONÇA, 2001). 

The  importance  of  the  ICB  is  related  to  two  possible  advantages  arising  from  this 
institutional arrangement. First, with the ICB, the board of governors would be free of the political 
pressures 
inflation  and 
unemployment. The second advantage is associated with the objectives of central banks. The more 
independent the central bank is, the more prone it will be to pursue its "natural target" which should 
be the pursuit of price stability (MENDONÇA, 2001). 

to  monetize  budget  deficits, 

tradeoff  between 

in  exploring 

the 

 

3 

In  general,  Table  1  summarizes  some  studies  that  indicate  mainly  negative  relationships 
between inflation and legal independence of the central bank for industrialized countries. However, 
in developing countries, this result does not hold. Thus, an alternative capturing the effect of ICB on 
inflation levels is using an index that represents the behavior of the monetary authority in fact. The 
most common indicator in this direction is the turnover rate of the presidents of central banks. 

From  Table  1,  there  is  not  yet  a  consensus  regarding  the  negative  relationship  between 
inflation and ICB. Depending on the variable and the method used, the results differ substantially. 
In  general,  Central  Bank  Independence  appears  to  be  an  important  condition  but  not  sufficient  to 
ensure stability of prices. 

However,  although  there  is  no  consensus,  some  results  seem  to  converge.  The  negative 
relationship  between  inflation  and  ICB  is  more  explicit  in  the  case  of  high  income  countries,  or 
industrialized countries. Instead, the turnover rate of the presidents of central banks seems to be a 
better 
countries. 
Also,  in  account  with  actual  behavior  of  central  banks  it  must  be  created  some  indicator  that  is 
capable of identifying whether or not the CB acts independently. The turnover rate of the presidents 
of  CB  is  an  interesting  attempt  in  this  direction.  However,  we  must  look  for  other  variables  that 
could be used as a proxy for independence in fact of the CB. 

independence 

developing 

analyzing 

proxy 

when 

for 

An  even  greater  difficulty  is  the  construction  of  a  series  monthly,  quarterly  or  annually 
which represents the variation in the degree of ICB for a certain period of analysis. This difficulty 
implied  the  majority  of  studies  using  cross-sectional  data  in  analysis  of  the  importance  of  the 
relationship between the degree of ICB and inflation. 

The turnover of presidents of CB is a variable that changes over time and is a way to analyze 
the  temporal  variation  in  the  context  of the  degree  of  central  bank  independence.  One  obstacle  to 
this variable is, in most cases, the turnover of the President of the Central Bank relatively low. 

Avoiding  these  problems,  the  rotation  of  directors  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee 
(COPOM) as a proxy to capture the degree of actual independence of CB in a time series can be a 
good option. 

 

Authors 

Sample 

Type of Index 

Results 

Table 1 

ICB and Empirical Evidence 

Grilli,  Masciandaro 
&Tabellini (1991) 

Industrialized 
Countries 

Political  and  Economic 
Independence 

Cukierman, Webb & 
Neyapty (1992) 

Alesina  &  Summers 
(1993) 

Campillo  &  Miron 
(1997) 

Mangano (1998) 

Industrialized 
Countries 
and 
Developing 
Countries 
Industrialized 
Countries 

Industrialized 
Countries 
and 
Developing 
Countries 
Industrialized 
Countries 

Mendonça (2001) 

Brazil 

Turnover  Rate,  Legal 
Independence,  Survey, 
and Aggregate 

Legal 
Independence, 
Political  and  Economic 
Independence 
Turnover  Rate,  Legal 
Independence,  Survey 
and  Aggregate  (CWN 
index) 

Legal Independence, 
Political  and  Economic 
Independence  
Survey/Questionnaire 

Negative relation between independence index 
(CBI) and inflation, with no relation to growth 
rate of product 
CBI  index  and  inflation  are  negative 
in 
industrialized  countries.  Turnover  rate  are 
significant in developing countries.  

CBI 
index  shows  negative  relation  with 
inflation  but  no  relation  to  real  economic 
variables. 
The  relation  between  CBI  and 
presented low significance. 

inflation 

No  significant  relationship  between  CBI  and 
inflation. 

CBI  index  has  no  negative  relationship  with 
inflation 

4 

 

Mendonça (2006) 

Brazil 

Turnover  Rate 
Legal Independence 

and 

Anastasiou (2009) 

Klomp  &  Haan 
(2010) 
 

Legal Independence 

39  countries 
of OCDE 
100 countries  Turnover  Rate 

and 

Legal Independence 

Neither  significant  relationship  between  CBI 
index  and  inflation,  nor  between  inflation  and 
turnover rate. 
Negative  significant  relationship  between  CBI 
index and inflation. 
Negative  relationship  between  CBI  index  and 
inflation only for some countries. 

Another problem associated with most studies is disregarding some important features of the 
regressions in  determining inflation.  In this case, univariate regressions can lead to  biased  results, 
and then it is necessary performing a function that incorporates other possible explanatory variables 
for inflation.  

Finally,  there  seems  to  be  a  gap  in  studies  examining  the  effects  of  ICB  in  a  particular 
country.  Most  studies  reviewed  use  cross-section  regressions,  implying  loss  of  important 
information  from  various  countries.  This  information  omitted  probably  help  to  better  explain  the 
dynamics of inflation in each country. 

The  following  topic  deals  with  the  methodology  that  will  be  used  for  analysis  of  data 

referring to the Brazilian economy. 
 
3. EMPIRICAL METHODOLOGY 

Sims (1980) is a precursor regarding vector autoregressive models (VAR). This study spread 
the seminal analysis technique to the academy and became one of the most widely used techniques 
in  macroeconomics.  The  widespread  use  of  this  model  as  a  tool  of  analysis  is  partly  due  to  the 
possibility  of  analyzing  the  interrelationships  between  multiple  variables  from  a  minimum  set  of 
constraints identification. Thus, it enables us to estimate the effect of a "shock" from some variable 
on all the variables in the equations (CAVALCANTI, 2010). 
 
 
3.1. Impulse Response Functions and Variance Decomposition Analyses 
  
The main results used here from VAR models are the analysis of variance decomposition of 
forecasted  error  and  impulse  response  functions.  Through  the  impulse-response  functions,  it  is 
possible  to  observe  the  response  of  all  variables  in  the  system  from  a  shock  in  one  of  them  in  a 
given  time  horizon.  And  variance  decomposition  represents  how  the  variance  of  each  variable  is 
explained by their variance and by the variance of all other system variables (ENDERS, 1995). 
 
3.2. Specification of the Macroeconomic Variables 

Many  authors  have  worked  with  the  idea  that  countries  with  higher  levels  of  central  bank 
independence could keep prices in a more stable path than the countries in which the central bank 
was relatively more dependent. 

The main theoretical inspiration that underlies the need for ICB is based on the hypothesis 
that the use of monetary policy can not affect real economic variables in the long run. There is no 
tradeoff  between  inflation  and  unemployment  in  the  long  run.  If  the  Fed  is  independent,  the 
possibility  that  monetary  policy  will  lead  to  undesirable  results  in  relation  to  price  stability, 
becomes smaller. 

So  the  economic  variables  used  here  are  consistent  with  the  proposal  submitted,  whose 
objective is to identify if somehow the degree of independence of the Central Bank in Brazil may be 
related  to  the  way  policymakers  conduct  monetary  policy.  For  this  measure  will  be  estimated 
reaction functions for the Brazilian Central Bank (BCB), whose variables are displayed as follows. 

 

5 

 

Inflation  Rate  (CPI):  National  index  of  consumer  prices  -  wide  concept  (IPCA)7.  Percentage 
variation in 12 months provided by IBGE8. 
Inflation Expectations  (EXPCPI): Expected average  Inflation (IPCA)  -  accumulated rate for the 
next 12 months, provided by the Central Bank of Brazil through the FOCUS Report. 
DESVIO:  Difference  between  CPI  accumulated  in  12  months  and  the  target  set  by  the  National 
Monetary Council (CMN) in period "t". 
EXPDESVIO:  Difference  between  accumulated  inflation  expectations  in  the  next  12  months 
available through the FOCUS Report and the inflation target set by (CMN) in period "t". 
SELIC: Nominal interest rate set by the Monetary Policy Committee (COPOM). Since the Meeting 
on 04/Mar/1999, this rate was defined as the main monetary policy instrument. 
GAPPRODUTO1:  Difference  between  the  current  product  and  its  potential  level.  As  a  proxy  of 
the  product  was  used  Industrial  Production  Index  (PIND)  provided  by  IBGE.  The  number  of 
potential  output  is  determined  by  the  trend  of  PIND,  which  in  turn  is  obtained  by  applying  the 
Hodrick-Prescott  Filter  technique.  Therefore,  the  calculation  of  the  gap  of  the  product 
(GAPPRODUTO) can be performed as follows, 
GAPPRODUTO = (Real Product) - (Potential Product), or 
GAPPRODUTO = (PIND) - (Trend of the Industrial Production Index). 
ROTATIPERCENT:  Variable  that  represents  the  turnover  rate  of  the  directors  (governors)  of 
Monetary  Policy  Committee  (COPOM).  This  series  was  constructed  from  the  analysis  of  the 
minutes of the COPOM provided by BCB. The idea for the construction  of this variable is  that it 
can  be  used  as  an  indicator  of  independence  of  BCB.  The  higher  the  turnover  of  representatives 
from  COPOM,  less  independence  would  have  the  CB.  As  a  high  rate  of  change  may  indicate 
instability  of  the  directors  in  office,  which  can  make  more  political  pressure  on  the  director,  for 
example.9 

Therefore, this is an index actual independence of the monetary authority and would be an 
alternative  to  the  turnover  rate  of  the  president  of  Central  Bank  used  in  Cukierman,  Webb  and 
Neyapty (1992), Campillo and Miron (1997), Mendoza (2006), and Klomp and Haan (2010). 

For the calculation of the variable, divide the number of members of the board of governors 
with  the  right  of  voting  that  were  replaced  in  a  particular  meeting  to  the  number  of  members 
present.  Thus,  in  some  particular  meeting,  there  were  eight  directors  present  and  one  of  the  eight 
was a replacement in comparison to the previous meeting, such as: 
Turnover Rate10=Quantity of directors replaced/Total directors present in the Meeting 
Turnover Rate = 1/8 = 0.125 or 12.5%. 
And so on for each meeting. 
Monetary Aggregates  Target  (MAM): Difference between the quantity  of money  (M1) actually 
occurred and the programmed amount by the monetary authority in a given period. These data are 
provided by the Central Bank of Brazil (BCB). In Brazil, the monetary programming is announced 
quarterly.  According  to  Cukierman,  Webb  and  Neyapty  (1992),  the  existence  of  targets  for 
monetary aggregates shows that the central bank is more independent to focus on pursuing the goal 
of  price  stability.  Therefore,  the  higher  the  grip  in  relation  to  the  goal,  it  would  classify  a  more 
independent monetary authority. 

                                                 

7 IPCA: Índice de Preços ao Consumidor Amplo. 
8 IBGE: Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística. 
9  Although  admitting  that  the  higher  the  rotation  of  the  president  of  Central  Bank,  the  lower  would  be  the  degree  of 
independence,  Cukierman  (1996)  gives  attention  to  for  situations  in  which  low  substitutions  may  indicate  high 
subservience from Central Bank representatives to government goals, characterizing high degree of dependence. 
10 A study on the causes of the replacement of the directors of the Central Bank would be interesting; however, these 
factors are not available to the general public, so we will treat only the quantitative issue. 

6 

 

MAMt = (Effective Variation)t - (Predicted Change)t 
As higher the adherence of monetary aggregates to quantities predicted by authorities in relation to 
their target, more independent monetary authority would be. 

Finally, concerning the periodicity of the variables, the observations are monthly from July 
2001  to  December  2011.  The  initial  period  is  due  to  the  number  of  expected  inflation  that  is 
available only  from that  date. Moreover, the period beginning on that  date excludes the period of 
transition goals for the currency inflation targeting regime, which was a period of adjustment to the 
new regime and relatively with higher volatility in the data. 
 
4. REACTION FUNCTION AND TURNOVER OF DIRECTORS OF COPOM: VAR APPLICATIONS TO BCB 

From  late  80s  to  early  90s,  along  with  Bade  and  Parkin  (1988),  Cukierman  (1992),  and 
Alesina  and  Summers  (1993)  arose  that  institutions,  especially  those  who  controlled  monetary 
policy,  could  be  crucial  to  explain  the  differences  between  the  behavior  of  prices  in  various 
countries. 

The  main  theoretical  argument  increased  with  the  rational  expectations  revolution,  first 
proposed  by  Muth  (1961),  further  developed  by  Lucas  (1972),  and  consolidated  and  systematized 
by Kydland and Prescott (1977) on the problem of dynamic inconsistency of monetary policy. 

Kydland  and  Prescott  (1977)  argued  that  the  way  in  which  monetary  policy  was 
implemented  implied  the  policymakers  were  tempted  to  follow  a  behavior  that  would  cause  an 
inflationary  bias  without  any  increase  in  real  output.  Thus,  the  establishment  of  an  institution  of 
independent monetary policy goals and unique stabilization of prices could be a possible solution to 
the problem of inflation bias. 

Since  then,  empirical  studies  have  tried  creating  or  using  some  index  of  central  bank 
independence and relating this information with the level of inflation in the countries. Among these, 
note  Cukierman,  Webb  and  Neyapty  (1992),  Alesina  and  Summers  (1993),  Campillo  and  Miron 
(1997),  Mendonça  (2006),  and  Haan  and  Klomp  (2010).  Because  there  is  no  consensus  over  the 
results about the effects of ICB on inflation in developing countries, the authors, except Alesina and 
Summers  (1993),  used  the  turnover  rate  of  the  president  of  central  banks  as  a  proxy  to  the 
independence in fact and tested it against inflation. In general, for developing countries the results 
showed a negative relationship between turnover rate and inflation. 

Considering  the  Brazilian  experience,  in  recent  years,  especially  after  the  stabilization  of 
prices  in  1994,  the  turnover  rate  of  the  President  of  the  Central  Bank  (BCB)  has  decreased 
significantly. Since the beginning of the Real  Plan (Plano Real) were eight different  presidents  to 
occupy  the  head  office.  Specifically  after  the  inflation  targeting  regime,  the  president  of  the  BCB 
has only been replaced twice. However, although there has been a significant drop in turnover of the 
BCB’s  president,  there  were  29  replacements  of  directors  of  the  board  of  governors  with  voting 
power  decisions  in  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (COPOM)  from  2001  to  2011.  Then,  on 
average, all members of the board were replaced four times during the period analyzed here. 

The  question  to  be  examined  is  then:  the  rotation  of  directors  of  COPOM  may  have 
somehow influenced the conduct of monetary policy in the post-inflation targeting regime in Brazil. 
More specifically, turnover of directors may have influenced the determination of interest  rates in 
the Brazilian Economy? 

Dias,  Teixeira,  and  Dias  (2009),  applied  a  VAR  model  to  the  reaction  function  Brazilian 
Central Bank, adding a dummy variable to account for rotation of directors of COPOM. The dummy 
had the value 1 for those occasions when there was a replacement of one or more directors and zero 
otherwise.  

In  this  context,  one  aim  of  this  paper  is  deepening  the  work  of  Dias,  Teixeira  and  Dias 
(2009),  innovating  with  respect  to  the  estimation  method,  using  a  structural  VAR  model  and 
treating the variable rotation of the directors of COPOM in percentage terms, rather than a dummy 
variable, considered a limitation by the literature, providing to obtain further interactions with other 

7 

 

variables in the system. Furthermore, the expanded sample period allows greater robustness to the 
results.  Therefore,  a  reaction  function  for  the  Central  Bank  of  Brazil  is  estimated,  including  the 
variable turnover among the explanatory variables of the model, whose results are reported in  the 
following topics. 
 
4.1. Empirical Modeling 

Identifying  and  measuring  the  response  of  monetary  authority  to  stabilize  inflation  and 
output around their predetermined values  and demonstrating the effects  of actual independence of 
BCB  (ROTATIPERCENT)  on  the  interest  rate  required  estimations  of  reaction  functions  à  la 
Taylor  (1993),  incorporating  expectations,  as  in  Clarida  et  al.  (1998),  Meyer  (2001),  Arestis  and 
Sawyer (2002), among others. Accordingly, the first specification testing is: 

 

 

Where it is the difference of the logarithm of the interest rate (basic Selic rate); DLDESVIO is the 
logarithm of the rate of inflation minus its target level in the first difference; DLEXPDESVIO is the 
logarithm  of  expected  inflation  from  the  target  in  first  difference;  and  ROTATIPERCENT 
represents  the  turnover  of  the  Directors  entitled  to  vote  in  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee 
(COPOM) in percentage terms, in each given month. Including the latter variable aims identifying 
whether  the  changes  of  one  or  more  directors  of  COPOM  interfere  in  the  decisions  of  the 
Committee over the instrument interest rate. If it does, in which magnitude it translates into positive 
or negative changes afterwards. 

The  hypothesis  is  that  if  the  substitution  of  directors  entitled  voting  took  place  through 
political  pressure,  the  BCB  would  be  less  independent  than  ideal,  then  these  changes  would  be 
negative  to  the  interest  rate,  because  is  assumed  that  higher  turnover  implies  a  lower  level  of 
independence  of  BCB  until  certain  threshold.  Being  less  independent,  the  BCB  would  give  less 
attention to the control of inflation, which would translate into more flexible policies regarding the 
interest rate. 

The methodology used to estimate the reaction function specified in equation (01) is Vector 
Autoregressive (VAR). In order to define the best model specification, the first test was lag length 
criterion.  The  results  indicated  as  properly  three  lags,  depending  on  the  chosen  criterion.  So  it  is 
reasonable considering that monetary policy decisions are based on solid information over a period, 
the estimated model used the first  and third lags of information.  It  was  also  accomplished the lag 
exclusion tests. The results suggested that the lags one and three should not be excluded from the 
model. 

Moreover, the estimation tested two Dummy variables. The first includes the period of June 
2002  to  June  2003  capturing  the  crisis  of  confidence  over  presidential  election  because  some 
variables  appears  more  volatile  behavior  compared  with  the  total  period.  This  first  Dummy  was 
significant. We tested also a Dummy for the  crisis  of subprime of 2008. This  was not  significant, 
and then was excluded from the model.  

Regarding  the  explanatory  power  of  the  test,  approximately  48%  of  the  variation  in 
DLSELIC can be explained by variations in the variable itself and as a result of other variables in 
the system. 

At  first,  the  estimates  of  ROTATIPERCENT  coefficient  from  the  unrestricted  VAR  were 
not significant, indicating that the turnover of the Directors of COPOM could not alter the conduct 
of  monetary  policy.  One  explanation  for  the  lack  of  significance  may  be  related  to  the  fact  that, 

8 

 

initially,  as  a  way  of  signaling  to  the  market  consolidation  policy  of  inflation  targeting,  the 
appointment of directors would be for agents more compromised to inflation targeting.  

However,  the  structural  VAR  model  investigation  about  the  effect  of  rotation  of  BCB’s 
directors of COPOM in the reaction function indicated a long run relationship between the variables 
of  inflation  target  programming.  Structural  VAR  allows  us  testing  whether  the  effects  of 
explanatory variables treated as exogenous remain in the long run. 

Accordingly,  the  coefficients  C51,  C52,  C53,  C54  and  C55  represented  in  the  empirical 
model  are  long  run  effects  over  de  interest  rate  instrument  of  the  follows  variables,  respectively: 
ROTATIPERCENT, GAPPRODUTO, DLEXPEDESVIO, DLDESVIO, DLSELIC. 
 

Figure 1: Structural VAR Coefficients – Long Run Relations 

 

 

 

 

        Note: Results from estimations. 

 
The results indicate that there is a significant long-run relationship between the variables of 
the system and DLSELIC – the interest rate instrument of monetary policy. Accordingly, 11.5% of 
the growth rate of the interest is explained by changes in the system variables in the long run. 

Regarding  the  variable  ROTATIPERCENT,  turnover  of  the  directors  of  COPOM  affects 

positively and is statistically significant in explaining the variations in DLSELIC in the long run. 

This  means that if  the turnover of the Directors  of COPOM maintain in the long run, then 
the  Central  Bank  would  be  interpreted  as  less  independent,  making  monetary  policy  less  reliable. 
This  lack of  credibility contributes to  inflation deviations from  its target,  which in  turn forces the 
monetary authority to increase the growth rate of interest. Thus, higher turnover rate would increase 
interest rates in the long run. Hence, rotation of the directors of the Committee at a high frequency 
may be harmful to the conduct of monetary policy. Somehow, it may signal that the directors do not 
have sufficient autonomy or are subject to the pressures of political government for purposes other 
than  price  stability,  which  can  generate  mistrust  to  the  market,  affecting  the  credibility  of  the 
monetary authority. 

Ensuring  robustness  of  the  model  implies  to  attend  the  stability  conditions  which  were 
verified. Then, we tested for autocorrelation in the residuals, normality, and stationarity. Results of 
the  impulse  response  functions,  considering  the  shock  of  the  system  variables  on  the  interest  rate 
(DLSELIC) are also displayed. 
 
 

9 

 

4.2. Impulse Response Functions and Variance Decomposition Analyses 

Initially,  the  impulse  response  functions  are  shown  in  Figure  2.  As  expected,  there  is  an 
inertial component in the interest rate captured over its growth rate. A shock from DSELIC of the 
size of its standard deviation causes a positive reaction to itself of 0.03, changing its growth rate. 

In addition, a shock in the deviation of inflation from its target level causes increases in the 
interest rate growth that are dissipated only 11 months later, which is in accordance with a central 
bank behavior committed to price stability. 

 

Figure 2 

Impulse Response Functions - DLSELIC 

        Note: Results from estimations. 

 

 

10 

-.01.00.01.02.03.04123456789101112Response of DLSELIC to DLSELIC-.01.00.01.02.03.04123456789101112Response of DLSELIC to DLDESVIO-.01.00.01.02.03.04123456789101112Response of DLSELIC to DLEXPDESVIO-.01.00.01.02.03.04123456789101112Response of DLSELIC to GAPPRODUTO1-.01.00.01.02.03.04123456789101112Response of DLSELIC to ROTATIPERCENTResponse to Cholesky One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E. 
In relation to the output gap, the results indicate that the monetary authority in the Brazilian 
economy behaved in a manner sensitive to changes in the product relative to potential output. The 
impulse  response  function  shows  that  a  one  standard  deviation  shock  on  the  output  gap  is 
accompanied by a rise in the interest rates. This implies that the monetary authority has taken into 
account the current state of the economy in its monetary policy decisions.  

Regarding  the  percentage  turnover  of  the  directors  of  COPOM  (ROTATIPERCENT), 
observed through impulse response functions, the variable DLSELIC reacts to turnover of directors 
following a positive increase. That can be seen especially between third and fifth months. Despite 
the  small  reduction  in  the  interest  rate  in  the  first  two  months,  that  indicates  changing  of  the 
directors of COPOM may not be followed by monetary easing, causing the interest rate growth to 
increase  in  the  long  run,  but  with  a  smaller  effect  in  the  long  run  in  comparison  to  the  other 
variables of the SVAR system. 

In any case, the impact of shocks from rotations of BCB’s directors can be positive in Brazil 
because recent experience of hyperinflation. Since changes in the rotation of directors of COPOM 
could  configure  monetary  easing,  then  interest  rate  growth  should  increase  to  offset  that 
interpretation. 

Even  though  a  high  turnover  rate  of  these  directors  might  somehow  indicate  that  the 
monetary  authority  has  less  independence  than  it  should,  the  changes  in  the  directors  of  COPOM 
does  not  seem  having  influenced  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  and  in  fact,  the  behavior  of  the 
monetary authority might been consistent with price stability. 

Another  tool  from  VAR  models  is  the  analysis  of  variance  decomposition  of  the  forecast 
error,  displayed  in  Table  2.  The  variance  decomposition  estimates  the  relative  participation  of 
innovations to each endogenous variable in the VAR (ENDERS, 1995). 

  

Variance Decomposition of Predicted Error 

Table 2 

Period 

S.E. 

DLSELIC  DLDESVIO  DLEXPDESVIO  GAPPRODUTO  ROTATIPERCENT 

1 

3 

6 

9 

0.02958 

100.0000 

0.03180 

87.8789 

0.03790 

64.3215 

0.03941 

59.4678 

12 

0.03950 

59.2588 

0.0000 

2.9990 

5.1182 

5.4624 

5.4515 

0.0000 

3.4887 

5.2443 

5.0756 

5.0880 

0.0000 

5.5928 

24.9078 

29.6116 

29.8171 

0.0000 

0.0406 

0.4082 

0.3827 

0.3846 

Cholesky Ordering: DLSELIC DLDESVIO DLEXPDESVIO GAPPRODUTO ROTATIPERCENT 

Note: Results from estimations. 

 
According  to  the  variance  decomposition  results  from  Table  2,  the  analysis  of  impulse 
response functions are confirmed. First, note the inertial characteristic of the interest rate variation 
(DLSELIC). That is, most of the variance of the interest rate is explained by shocks on itself. The 
second  highest  influence  on  DLSELIC  is  the  output  gap.  Furthermore,  the  change  of  directors  of 
COPOM  showed  relatively  low  magnitude  over  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  with  respect  to 
interest rates determination, confirming results from the impulse response functions. 

 

5.  MONETARY  PROGRAMMING  AND  INTEREST  RATE  DETERMINATION  IN  BRAZIL:  APPLICATION  TO 
BCB’S REACTION FUNCTION 

The  index  created  by  Cukierman,  Webb  and  Neyapty  (1992)  has  been  replicated  by  many 
studies on central  bank independence.  Accordingly,  countries with  targets to  monetary  aggregates 
have  gains  from  central  bank  independence  against  those  who  have  not.  The  greater  the  grip  in 

 

11 

relation  to  pre-established  goals,  central  bank  would  be  more  committed,  having  a  higher 
independence index. 

In  general,  good  adherence  occurs  when  the  value  of  the  monetary  aggregate  for  a  given 

period is inside the predicted one by the monetary authority. 

In Brazil, although there is no commitment to monetary targets explicitly, there is monetary 
programming  in  which  the  predicted  values  are  set  in  advance  to  monetary  aggregate  variation. 
Monitoring monetary aggregates has long run relationships to average price levels. Deviations from 
expected future values of money may affect inflation desired values. In this respect, the European 
Central  Bank  is  known  as  the  example  of  a  committed  monetary  authority  to  monetary 
programming. 

Thus,  this  topic  has  the  following  objectives:  to  investigate  what  is  the  adherence  of  the 
Central  Bank  monetary  program;  to  identify  possible  causal  relationships  between  adherence  in 
relation  to  goals  and  other  variables  such  as  interest  rates,  inflation  and  inflationary  expectations; 
and lastly, to investigate whether the monetary authorities manage the interest rate when there is  a 
deviation of the expected values and occurred ones during the period of monetary program. 

Here,  the  monetary  aggregate  used  for  analyses  is  the  M1  concept  (demand  deposits  plus 
currency  held  by  the  public)  and  the  variable  defined  to  represent  adherence  is  called  Monetary 
Aggregate Target (MAM). 

Given  its  role  to  the  efficiency  of  the  inflation  targeting  regime,  this  study  about  the 
monetary programming  adherence in  Brazil contributes, especially, by the empirical  methodology 
employed. The time series analysis applied with structural VAR model can identify precedence and 
relations  for  the  long  run,  making  use  of  Granger  causality  tests,  impulse  response  functions,  and 
variance decomposition. 

 

5.1. Inflation Targeting and Monetary Aggregates 

The  behavior  of  monetary  aggregates  in  Brazil  is  summarized  in  Figure  3.  The  variable 
(MAM)  represents  the  difference  in  percentage  terms  between  occurred  variation  of  M1  and  its 
predicted  variation  reported  by  policymakers  in  the  monetary  program,  quarterly.  The  variable 
DESVIO is the difference in percentage terms between the price index accumulated in 12 months 
(IPCA) and the inflation target pursued by the government during 2000 through 2011, quarterly. 

Adherence of Monetary Aggregates vs. Inflation Deviations 

 

Figure 3 

 

 

12 

-15-10-505101502030405060708091011MAMDESVIO 

Figure 3 indicates there is a relative volatility in MAM, the difference of the actual value of 
the  means  of  payments  from  its  predicted  one  by  policymakers.  Note  the  relation  between  these 
deviations  and  the  deviations  of  inflation  from  target,  on  an  inverse  basis.  The  bias  in  MAM 
coincides with a deviation of the inflation from its target level with lags. 

Also,  there  is  a  sharp  volatility  in  the  period  from  2001  to  2003,  in  which  the  difference 
between the predicted values and actual ones exceeded 10% in some quarters. However, for latter 
periods,  the  series  show  lower  volatility  compared  to  the  initial  one.  In  general,  it  is  clear  that  in 
many  periods,  the  actual  values  exceeded  or  were  below  predicted  one  over  several  periods, 
showing a low grip to the monetary aggregates. 

 

5.2. Granger Causality Tests 

In  order  to  identify  the  relationship  between  the  variable  (MAM)  and  the  other  system 
variables, Granger causality tests are performed. Table 3 display relationships of precedence among 
the variable system. 

 

Table 3 

Granger Causality Tests 

Null Hypothesis 
  MAM does not Granger Cause DLSELIC 
  DLSELIC does not Granger Cause MAM 
  MAM does not Granger Cause DLDESVIO 
  DLDESVIO does not Granger Cause MAM 
  MAM does not Granger Cause DLEXPDESVIO 
  DLEXPDESVIO does not Granger Cause MAM 
  MAM does not Granger Cause GAPPRODUTO 
  GAPPRODUTO does not Granger Cause MAM 

F statistics 

Probability 

7.85383 
3.31906 
4.64192 
1.23742 
6.87636 
2.29582 
2.67544 
2.32577 

8.20E-05 
0.02239 
0.00422 
0.29945 
0.00027 
0.08145 
0.05047 
0.07840 

Note: 03 lags, 122 observations, monthly observations. 

 

Table 3 implies temporal precedence from MAM to the variable system at the significance 
level  of  5%,  including  DLSELIC,  DLDESVIO,  DLEXPDESVIO,  GAPPRODUTO.  On  the  other 
side,  DLSELIC  can  Granger  cause  MAM,  at  5%  significance,  while  DLEXPDESVIO, 
GAPPRODUTO  could  precede  MAM  at  10%  level  of  significance.  These  results  indicate  some 
feedback relationship among the variables. 

One interpretation is that deviations from the value of the monetary aggregate M1 in relation 
to  its predicted values  may  be an important  leader indicator to  anticipate  changes in  inflation  and 
agents' expectations. 
 
5.3. Empirical Modeling 

In order to identify the reaction of the interest rate due to actual deviations of money from its 
values announced by policymakers, the variable MAM, a reaction function is estimated here. Then, 
the  variables  of  equation  (01)  remain,  except  the  variable  ROTATIPERCENT,  including  the 
variable MAM in determining the interest rate in Brazil. 

This  variable  refers  to  the  deviation  from  the  target  monetary  aggregate  to  the  value 
provided  by  the  monetary  authorities  to  a  particular  period.  It  is  therefore  a  measure  of  the 
adherence  to  the  monetary  intermediary  targets.  This  accounts  for  the  degree  of  independence  of 
BCB, according to the methodology proposed in Cukierman, Webb and Neyapty (1992). The higher 
the adherence of the goals to monetary aggregates, BCB would be more independent. 

13 

 

Regarding the results, it is expected that the more independent the central bank is, more the 
monetary  authority  will  react  to  stabilize  inflation.  Thus,  it  is  expected  that  a  positive  deviation 
from the target aggregates would translate into a positive movement in interest rates. 

The  methodology  used  to  estimate  the  reaction  function  will  be  the  Vector  Autoregressive 
(VAR). In order to define the best model specification, the first test was the selection lag criterion 
whose results are reported here. 

The results indicate the model contains one or three lags depending on the chosen criterion. 
Considering  that  monetary  policy  decisions  are  based  on  information  from  more  than  one  period 
(month), the estimated model used the first and third lags of information. In order to  confirm that 
the choice of lags is adequate, the test of lag exclusion was implemented. The results suggest that 
the lags 01 (one) and 03 (three) should not be excluded from the model. 

After  determining  stationary  conditions  and  normality  of  the  variables  of  the  system,  to 
analyze  Granger  causality  tests,  to  identify  the  appropriate  number  of  lags,  the  VAR  model  was 
estimated.  After  estimating  the  model  the  stability  conditions  of  residuals,  autocorrelation, 
normality and stationary conditions were tested to accept the results. 

From  using  this  model,  one  can  obtain  significant  results  for  analysis  of  the  relationships 
among  system  variables.  Analysis  of  variance  decomposition  and  impulse  response  functions,  for 
example, are important instruments to understand the behavior of the variables.  

Furthermore, we tested dummy variables to the period of June 2002 to June 2003, to account 
for political instability during presidential elections in Brazil, and to the international crisis of 2008 
period. Only the first was significant and thus retained in the final model. 

Note that approximately 52% of the variation in the interest rate variations can be explained 

by variations in the variable itself. 
 
5.4. Impulse Response Functions and Variance Decomposition Analyses 

From  the  impulse  response  functions,  it  is  possible  to  dynamically  analyze  the  effect  of  a 
one  standard  deviation  shock  to  one  of  the  system  variables  and  the  resulting  response  on  the 
variable  selected.  Here,  we  concentrate  in  the  effects  over  the  interest  rate  determination,  in 
logarithm 
the  shocks  over  DLSELIC,  DLDESVIO, 
DLEXPDESVIO, GAPPRODUTO, and our new variable MAM. 

first  difference, 

terms  and 

from 

Mainly,  the  objective  is  to  observe  the  reaction  of  the  Brazilian  economy  interest  rate 
(DLSELIC)  to  deviations  of  intermediary  targets  programmed  by  central  bank,  such  as  the 
monetary aggregate representing the means of payments (MAM). 

The results are similar to those found before about the degree of inertia in the interest rates, 
with a positive change in the DLSELIC functions from a shock to DLSELIC itself, from a shock to 
the output gap, and by a positive deviation of inflation from its target. 

Regarding the deviations of the expectation of inflation from the target, the graph shows the 
interest  rate  increases  with  two  picks  until  the  fourth  month  due  to  deviations  in  inflationary 
expectations, after this period the changes in DLSELIC are negative. 

On the other hand, a shock coming from the variable MAM affects negatively the growth of 
the interest rate, reducing DLSELIC till the third month. After that, the changes in the interest rate 
become positive, indicating that central bank reduces the growth of the SELIC initially, probably to 
identify the sources of the shock and the reaction of the market. One quarter latter, a time equivalent 
to  two  meetings  of  the  Central  Bank  Committee  for  monetary  policy,  policymakers  increase  the 
interest rate, which remains higher than average for at least 08 months. 

 

 

14 

Figure 4  

Impulse Response Functions: DLSELIC 

 

     Note: Results from estimations. 
 

 
The  following  will  consider  the  results  obtained  by  decomposition  of  the  variance  of  the 
interest  rate  (DLSELIC).  By  Enders  (1995),  the  variance  decomposition  analysis  determines  the 
quantitative participation of exogenous shocks to each variables of the system on the forecast error 
variance of each variable in the VAR. 

 

 

 

15 

-.01.00.01.02.03.04123456789101112Response of DLSELIC to DLSELIC-.01.00.01.02.03.04123456789101112Response of DLSELIC to DLDESVIO-.01.00.01.02.03.04123456789101112Response of DLSELIC to DLEXPDESVIO-.01.00.01.02.03.04123456789101112Response of DLSELIC to GAPPRODUTO-.01.00.01.02.03.04123456789101112Response of DLSELIC to MAMResponse to Cholesky One S.D. Innovations ± 2 S.E.Table 4 

Variance Decomposition of DLSELIC 

Period 

S.E. 

DLSELIC  DLDESVIO  DLEXPDESVIO  GAPPRODUTO  MAM 

1 

2 

3 

6 

9 

0.028256 

100 

0 

0.028902 

95.73575 

0.862138 

0.02926 

93.54266 

1.033597 

0.033641 

72.71977 

3.842925 

0.036201 

63.72488 

3.744163 

12 

0.037405 

60.62117 

3.585245 

0 

0.722895 

0.759027 

1.088991 

2.453607 

3.197346 

0 

0 

2.27708 

0.402134 

3.945913 

0.718807 

17.51509 

4.833224 

19.32947 

10.74788 

18.23319 

14.36305 

Cholesky Ordering: DLSELIC DLDESVIO DLEXPDESVIO GAPPRODUTO MAM 

Note: Results from estimations. 
 
Again, this model indicates a high degree of inertia in DSELIC, most of the variance of that 
variable was caused by variation in the variable itself. Second, much of the variance of  DLSELIC 
was caused by shocks coming from the output gap, showing a concern of the monetary authorities 
to  the  economic  activity  and  the  variable  representing  unemployment.  Also,  the  forecast  error  of 
DLSELIC responds to changes in the monetary aggregates (MAM). 

Specifically on the variable (MAM), its significance to the forecast error of the interest rate 
shows a relative share monetary grip (MAM) in 12 months of variance decomposition analyses of 
14.36%, smaller only than the value of output gap and the interest rate itself. 

 

6. CONCLUSIONS 

Here  we  examine  macroeconomic  monetary  policy  issues  related  to  interest  rate  and 
inflation.  In  particular,  two  economic  themes  are  treated  in  the  literature  review,  Central  Bank 
Independence (CBI) and programming on the monetary target regime. From the empirical analysis 
of Vector Autoregressive models applied for the Brazilian economy, the turnover of the Directors of 
the Monetary Policy Committee (COPOM) and deviations from the predicted actual value of money 
affects interest rate variations in Brazil. 

Some  advantages  from  central  bank  independence  (CBI)  can  be  emphasized.  An 
institutional arrangement of CBI would be able to reject political pressures seeking to exploit short-
term tradeoff between inflation and unemployment. Also, because the more independent the central 
bank, more compromise price stability, it would provide some solution to the problem of dynamic 
inconsistency of monetary policy by Kydland and Prescott (1997). 

Most  studies  appoint  a  direct  relationship  between  CBI  and  inflation,  suggesting  that  the 
higher the degree of central bank independence, the lowest level of inflation would result in a given 
country. Overall, there is no consensus  on the  econometric results. Depending on the method  and 
the  variable  used,  the  results  differ  substantially.  The  results  seem  to  converge  is  that  a  negative 
relationship  between  inflation  and  CBI  is  more  explicit  in  the  case  of  high-income  countries,  or 
industrialized economies. On the other hand, the turnover rate of the presidents of CB seems to be a 
better proxy for independence when analyzing developing countries. 

Regarding  monetary  target  regimes,  the  literature  revels  that  staying  under  a  target  system 
helps  coordinating  anti-inflationary  policies.  Because  permits  greater  transparency  of  monetary 
authorities  objectives  to  the  general  public.  Moreover,  becomes  more  costly  for  the  central  bank 
credibility  to  deviate  from  pre-established  goals.  Concerning  the  type  of  goal  being  pursued,  all 
have advantages and disadvantages. In general, one presenting more advantageous features has been 
the  inflation  targeting  regime,  as  longevity,  transparency,  monitoring  capacity  and  ability  to  deal 
with supply shocks. 

Empirical  applications  to  the  Brazilian  case  estimate  two  reaction  functions.  The  first 
estimation proves that directors’ turnover in and out of the monetary policy committee (COPOM) 
16 

 

affects interest rate growth in Brazil, but less than the other variables in the system. That is, there 
was  small  easing  or  tightening  in  interest  rates  due  to  these  changes.  However,  it  is  worth  noting 
that  the  number  of  directors  that  were  exchanged  in  COPOM  was  relatively  high  (twenty  nine) 
during the period of analysis. 

Although  the  consequences  on  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  from  the  frequency  of 
replacement  of  directors  are  relatively  small,  it  may  generate  some  degree  of  uncertainty  in  the 
market and even reducing credibility, influencing agents' expectations, making it harder to fight the 
inflationary pressures. 

The second application and analysis of the Brazilian economy refers to the behavior of the 
monetary  aggregate  (M1)  or  means  of  payments.  The  variable  MAM  represents  the  adherence  of 
the  aggregate  money  programming  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Brazil,  accounting  for  the  effects  of 
deviations between actual and announced values over the interest rate. 

Analyzing the behavior of MAM, in some periods, its values are above or below the values 
established  for  several  consecutive  periods.  Moreover,  there  is  a  relatively  sharp  volatility  in  the 
variable  that  represents  this  deviation,  indicating  a  low  adherence  of  MAM  to  the  predetermined 
values. 

From  the  estimation  of  the  reaction  function  of  interest  rate  determination,  the  monetary 
authority reacts to deviations of the monetary aggregate from its preset values. However, the results 
indicate that the response of the monetary authorities differs in time, lowering interest growth in the 
first  quarter and increasing it afterwards. This  reaction could  be a prudential  one or a lagged one, 
depending on the point of view. 

The  low  adhesion  of  monetary  aggregates  plus  the  relatively  lengthy  responses  of  the 
monetary authority may be factors that cause volatility of inflation. Brazilian economy may need a 
closer  monitoring  of  monetary  aggregates.  This  monitoring  could  reduce  inflation  rate  deviations 
over values and periods, through the interest rate reaction function. 
 

7. REFERENCES 

ALESINA,  A.;  SUMMERS,  L.  "Central  Bank  Independence  and  Macroeconomic  Performance:  Some 

Comparative Evidence". Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, May 1993. 

ALLEN, S. D. “The Federal Reserve and the Electoral Cycle,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 18 

(1) February, 88-94, 1986. 

ANASTASIOU,  A.  Central  Bank  Independence  and  Economic  Performance,  Cyprus  Economic  Policy 

Review, Vol. 3, No. 1, 123-156, 2009. 

ARESTIS,  P.;  SAWYER,  M.  Can  Monetary  Policy  Affect  The  Real  Economy?  Working  Paper  Series, 

Annandale-on-Hudson, Nova York: The Levy Economics Institute, n. 355, 2002. 

ARESTIS,  P.;  SAWYER, M.  New  consensus  macroeconomics  and inflation  targeting:  Keynesian critique. 

Economia e Sociedade. Campinas, v.17. Número especial, p. 629-653, dez. 2008. 

BADE,  R.;  PARKIN,  M..  “Central  Bank  Laws  and  Monetary  Policy,”  University  of  Western  Ontário, 

October 1988, processed. 

BANCO CENTRAL DO BRASIL. Relatórios de Programação monetária, Vários anos. 
BANCO CENTRAL DO BRASIL. Atas das Reuniões do Copom. Many issues.  
BARRO, R.; GORDON, D. "Rules, Discretion, and Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy." Journal of 

Monetary Economics 12, July, 101-22, 1983. 

CALVO, G. A.  On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in a Monetary Economy.   Econometrica, Vol. 

46, No. 6, Nov., p. 1411-1428, 1978. 

CAMPILLO,  M.;  MIRON,  J.  A.  Why  does  inflation  differ  across  countries?  In:  Romer,  C.D.  and  D.H. 
Romer  (eds.),  Reducing  Inflation:  Motivation  and  Strategy  (Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press), 
1997. 

 

17 

CAVALCANTI,  M.  A.  F.  H.  Identificação  de  modelos  VAR  e  causalidade  de  Granger:  uma  nota  de 
advertência. Economia Aplicada,  Ribeirão Preto,  Vol. 14,  no. 2, June,  2010. Access on Jan 15, 2012.  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/S1413-80502010000200008  

CLARIDA,  R.;  GALÍ,  J.;  GERTLER,  M.  Monetary  policy  rules  in  practice:  some  international  evidence. 

European Economic Review, no. 42, p. 1033-1067, 1998. 

CLARIDA, R.; GALÍ, J.; GERTLER, M. Monetary policy rules and macroeconomic stability: Evidence and 
some  theory.  NBER  Working  Paper  no.  6442.  Cambridge,  Mass.:  National  Bureau  of  Economic 
Research, 1998a. 

CUKIERMAN,  A.;  WEBB,  S.  B.;  NEYAPTY,  B.  Measuring  the  Independence  of  Central  Banks  and  Its 

Effect on Policy Outcomes. World Bank Economic Review, 6, 353-398, 1992. 

CUKIERMAN,  A.  C.  Targeting  Monetary  aggregates  and  inflation in  Europe.  In:  Conference  on  Future 

European Monetary Policy. Frankfurt, 1995. 

CUKIERMAN, A. A economia do Banco Central. Revista Brasileira de Economia, 50, 389-426, 1996. 
DIAS,  M.  H.  A.;  TEIXEIRA,  A.  M.;  DIAS,  J.  (2009)  Novo  Consenso  Macroeconômico  e  Regras  de 
Conduta: O Papel da Rotatividade dos Diretores do COPOM no Brasil. XXXVII Encontro Nacional 
de Economia Annuals, vol. 1, 1-20, Foz do Iguaçu, Brazil. 

DICKEY,  D.A;  FULLER,  W.A.  “Distribution  of  the  estimator  for  auto-regressive  time  series  with  a  unit 

root.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 74:427-31, 1979. 

DICKEY,  D.A.;  FULLER,  W.A.  Likelihood ratio statistics for  autoregressive time  series  with  a  unit root. 

Econometrica, 49:1057-1072, 1981. 

ENDERS, W. “Applied Econometric Time Series”, 1a Ed., John Wiley & Sons, 1995. 
ENGLE,  R.  F.,  GRANGER,  C.W.J.  “Co-integration  and  error-correction:  representation,  estimation,  and 

testing.” Econometrica, v.55, p. 251-76, 1987. 

GRANGER, C. W. J.“Investigating Causal Relations by Econometric Models and Cross-Spectral Methods,” 

Econometrica, 37, 424–438, 1969. 

GRILLI,  V.,  MASCIANDARO,  D.;  TABELLINI,  G.  "Political  and  Monetary  Institutions  and  Public 

Finance Policies in the Industrial Countries." Economic Policy, 13, October, 341-92, 1991. 
inflation 

independence 

HAAN, 

Central 

bank 

and 

J.; 

J. 

KLOMP, 

revisited 

Public Choice, Springer Netherlands, 144, 445-457, 2010.  

KYDLAND, F. E.; PRESCOTT, E. C. Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans. 

Journal of Political Economy, 85, 473-91, 1977. 

LUCAS,  R.  E.,  Jr.,  “Expectations  and  the  Neutrality  of  Money”.  Journal  of  Economic  Theory,  4,  Abril, 

103-24, 1972. 

MANGANO,  G.  Measuring  central  bank  independence:  a  tale  of  subjectivity  and  of  its  consequences. 

Oxford Economic Papers, 50, 468-492, 1998. 

MENDONÇA, H. F. Aspectos Teóricos e Empíricos sobre Bancos Centrais Independentes: Implicações para 

o Caso Brasileiro. Economia Aplicada, FIPE/FEA-USP, Jan.-Mar., V. 2, N. 1, p. 83-111, 1998. 

MENDONÇA,  H.  F.  “A  mensuração  do  grau  de  independência  do  Banco  Central:  uma  análise  de  suas 
fragilidades.”  Análise  Econômica.  Faculdade  de  Ciências  Econômicas,  UFRGS,  Ano  19,  N.  36, 
setembro, p. 47-67, 2001. 

MENDONÇA, H. F. Efeitos da independência do banco central e da taxa de rotatividade sobre a inflação 

brasileira. Revista de Economia Política, vol. 26, No. 4 (104), p. 552-563, outubro-dezembro/2006. 
MEYER, L. H. Does money matter? Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, p. 01-15, set./out. 2001. 
MUTH, J. F. “Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price Movements,” Econometrica, v. 29, p. 315-335, 

1961. 

NORDHAUS, W. D. “The Political Business Cycle.” Review of Economic Studies, 42, April, 169-90, 1975. 
PHILLIPS, P.C.B; PERRON P. “Testing for a Unit Root in Time Series Regressions." Biometrika 75, 335-

346, 1988. 

ROGOFF,  K.  "The  Optimal  Degree  of  Commitment  to  an  Intermediate  Monetary  Target."  Quarterly 

Journal of Economic, 1, 10, Nov., 1169-90, 1985. 

SARGENT,  T.  J.;  WALLACE,  N.  "Some  unpleasant  monetarist  arithmetic."  Quarterly  Review,  Federal 

Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Fall, 1981. 

SVENSSON,  L.  E.  O.  Price  level  targeting  vs.  Inflation  targeting:  a  free  lunch?  Working  Paper  5719 

NBER. 1050 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138 August, 1996. 

18 

 

SVENSSON, L. E. O. Inflation targeting as a monetary policy rule. Journal of Monetary Economics, 43, 

607–654, 1999. 

SVENSSON, L. E. O. Inflation targeting: Should it be modeled as an instrument rule or a targeting rule? 

European Economic Review, 46, 771 – 780, 2002. 

TAYLOR, J.  Discretion  versus  policy rules in  practice.  Carnegie-Rochester  Conference  Series  on  Public 

Policy, 39, 195-214, 1993. 

 

 

19 

Appendix 

Methodology to Estimate the Degree of the Central Bank Independence 
Variables and Definition Codes  
1. Turnover 
a) Low  
b) Medium  
c) High 
2. Limitations on Lending in Practice 
a) Tight 
b) Moderately Tight 
c) Moderately Loose 
d) Loose or Nonexistent 
3. Resolution of Conflicts  
a) Absence of Accommodation in some Cases  
b) All, Except Items a and b  
c) Accommodations in All Cases   

4. Who elaborate the Budget of the Central Bank  
a) The Central Bank  
b) Central Bank and Executive/Legislative 
c) Executive/Legislative 

5. Who defines Wages and Profit Distirbution of the Central Bank?  
a) Central Bank or Law  
b) Central Bank and Executive/Legislative 
c) Executive/Legislative 

6. Quantitative Monetary Stock Targets  
a) Such targets exist; Good Adherence  
b) Such targets exist; Mixed Adherence 
c) Such targets exist; Poor Adherence 
d) No stocks targets  
7. Formal or informal interest rates targets  
a) No  
b) Yes 

8. Actual Priority Given to Price Stability  
a) First Priority  
b) First Priority assigned to a fixed exchange rate  
c) Price or Exchange Rate stability are among the bank’s objectives, 
    but not first priority  
d) No mention of prices or exchange rate objectives  
9. Function as a development bank, granting credit at subsidy rates?  
a) No  
b) To some extent  
c) Yes  
d) Yes, heavily 

Note: Cukierman, Webb, and Neyapty (1992). 

Abbreviation 

    Codes 
 

rot 

rfsp 

rc 

obc 

sl 

mam 

 

mtj 

pep 

fqf 

1,00 
0,50 
0,00 

 

1,00 
0,66 
0,33 
0,00 

 

1,00 
0,50 
0,00 

 

1,00 
0,50 
0,00 

 

1,00 
0,50 
0,00 

1,00 
0,66 
0,33 
0,00 
 
1,00 
0,00 

 

1,00 
0,66 
0,33 
0,00 

 

1,00 
0,66 
0,33 
0,00 

 

20 

