Some stylized facts on external shocks and inflation upsurge in Brazil, 1951-1985 

 
 
 

Eduardo F. Bastian – Professor Adjunto, Instituto de Economia – Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro 
(IE-UFRJ) (eduardobastian@ie.ufrj.br) 
Carlos Pinkusfeld Bastos - Professor Adjunto, Instituto de Economia – Universidade Federal do Rio de 
Janeiro (IE-UFRJ) (pinkusfeld@gmail.com) 
Júlia  de  Medeiros  Braga  -  Professora  Adjunta,  Faculdade  de  Economia  -  Universidade  Federal 
Fluminense (jbraga@id.uff.br) 
Ricardo  Bielschowsky    -  Professor  Adjunto,  Instituto  de  Economia  –  Universidade  Federal  do  Rio  de 
Janeiro (IE-UFRJ) (ricardo.bielschowsky@gmail.com) 

 

Abstract: 

From the late Forties on, the so-called Latin American Structuralist School or Economic Commission for 
Latin America (ECLA) School developed the idea that Latin American inflation was due to  structutural 
characteristics of this region, especially the recurrent balance of payments problems due to external shocks. 
This  paper  examines  the  structuralist  hypothesis  in  the  Brazilian  case.  For  this  purpose,  it  develops  an 
historical analysis of the period 1951-1985 and presents some econometric tests. In this context, both the 
historical analysis and the econometric tests show that the structuralist hypothesis should not be refused in 
the Brazilian case. 
Key words: structuralist school; Brazil; inflation; external shocks. 
JEL Classification: N16 

 

Resumo: 

A  Escola  Estruturalista  Latino  Americana  –  ou  Escola  da  Comissão  Econômica  para  América  Latina 
(Cepal) – desenvolveu, desde os anos 1940, a teoria que as altas taxas de inflação na América Latina se 
deviam a problemas estruturais da região. Dentre estes problemas estruturais, um dos mais importantes era 
os recorrentes problemas de balanço de pagamentos devido a choque externos. O presente trabalho examina 
a hipótese estruturalista para o caso brasileiro a partir de uma análise histórica do  período 1951-85 e de 
testes econométricos. Neste contexto, em ambos os casos, a evidência encontrada no artigo mostra que a 
hipótese dos estruturalistas não deve ser rejeitada para o caso brasileiro. 
Palavras chave: escola estruturalista; Brasil; inflação; choques externos. 
 

External structural imbalances and Brazilian chronic inflation during the second half of the 20th 

Century 

 

Introduction 

In the second half of the 20th century, most Latin American countries suffered a process of chronic 
inflation, so that there was a huge debate in these countries on the causes of this problem. One obvious 
interpretation was the orthodox view that the inflationary process was the result of excess demand due to 
lax fiscal and monetary policies. This traditional view – usually known as monetarist - was supported by 
many economists within these countries and by international institutions like the International Monetary 
Fund (IMF). 
 
From  the  late  forties  on,  this  traditional  interpretation  was  challenged  by  an  alternative  view 
developed  by  economists  associated  to  the  so  called  Latin  American  Structuralist  School  or  Economic 
Commission for Latin America (ECLA) School.   

The greatest contribution of ECLA´s School to the study of Latin American development has been 
to put the external constraint as its crucial analytical element.  In this sense, from the pioneering work of 
ECLA´s founding father Raul Prebisch (ECLA, 1950), Latin American development problems were seen 
as the result of import capacity´s restraint stemming from the tendency of terms of trade deterioration and 
unfavorable  income  elasticities  of  imports  and  exports.  In  terms  of  the  inflation  causes,  the  external 
constraint  was  once  again  at  the  core  of  the  structuralist  interpretation  (Noyola-Vasquez,  1957,  Sunkel 
1958).  More  precisely,  ECLA´s  economists  argued  that  the  process  of  chronic  inflation  experienced  by 
Latin  American  economies  was  fundamentally  caused  by  structural  characteristics  of  this  region,  and, 
among them, external shocks due to recurrent balance of payments crisis were crucial. 

This  paper  intends  to  study  the  causes  of  inflation  in  Brazil  from  1951  to  1985,  a  period  when 
Brazilian inflation rates were among the highest in the world. More precisely, the purpose is to test whether 
or not the structuralist theory of inflation fits the Brazilian data. Particularly it was a period that registered 
several  episodes  of  external  crisis,  or,  at  least  external  financing  conditions  deteriorations,  while  the 
domestic institutional setting of monetary and fiscal policy changed quite radically. It is not the aim of the 
paper to establish a complete model of inflation and test it for the whole period covered by the historical 
analysis. However, it will reinforce the structuralist analysis if we are able to show that cannot be denied a 
strong connection between external shocks and inflationary upsurges throughout a long historical period 
when, as we mentioned, fiscal and monetary policies varied substantially. 

The  paper  is  divided  in  three  sections,  besides  this  introduction  and  the  conclusions.  The  first 
consists of a theoretical discussion, in which the Latin American structuralist theory of inflation will be 
presented. The second corresponds to a historical analysis directed to describe a long period narrative that 
supports the structuralist hypothesis. In this section, one picks all the episodes of inflation  upsurge from 
1951  to  1985  and  analyzes  if  these  episodes  were  preceded  by  some  kind  of  external  shock,  being  it 
exchange rate devaluations or commodity price shocks. Finally, the third section consists on econometric 
tests.  In  particular,  a  VAR  model  with  exogenous  variables  is  estimated  and  a  Granger  causality  test  is 
calculated, in order to give further evidence of whether or not one can refuse the structuralist hypothesis in 
the Brazilian case. 
 
I-An overview of cost-push models - The Latin American Tradition 

In this section we will  firstly  present  a brief summary  of what  one may  call the  Latin American 
tradition  of  cost-push  models.  Secondly,  we  will  describe  the  connections  between  exchange  rate 
devaluations and inflation. By the latter, we mean a group of explanations for inflation developed by Latin 
American authors and/or aiming at explaining Latin America’s experience. These explanations follow the 
non-monetarist tradition that could be traced back to Thomas Tooke explanation for the British inflation 
during Napoleon War and the German Interpretation of Germany´s 1920´s hyperinflation, which contrasted 

with the allies (monetarist) diagnosis.1 The Latin American cost-push models analyze inflationary histories 
focusing  on  the  dynamic  of  some  basic  elements  of  costs  instead  of  mismatches  between  full-capacity 
production  and  demand.  The  basic  ideas  were,  broadly  speaking,  developed  around  ECLA  in  Santiago, 
Chile. 

The  seminal  paper  that  marks  the  beginning  of  the  so-called  ECLA’s  School  is  the  Estudio 
Econômico de America Latina written in 1949 by Dr. Raul Prebisch. This paper - an authentic watershed 
in theoretical terms - was followed by a strong body of work, whose most important consequence was the 
support to  Import Substitution policies by almost  all  Latin America's  countries. Although these policies 
became  almost  the  trademark  of  the  ECLA  School  in  Latin  America,  this  institution  had  also  some 
interesting things to say about inflation2. 

Prebisch is said to have drawn from his experience as president of Argentina’s Central Bank the 
conclusion that “...the control of the inflation in our countries demand specific diagnosis for each case and 
not the adoption tout court of measures related with money and credit expansion.” (Gamboa 1978, pp. 9). 
This is a basic and important characteristic of the Latin American structuralist interpretation: inflation is a 
particular phenomenon and thus it has to be studied according to the particular institutional and historical 
setting of each country. In other words, it has to be studied according to its structural components. 

In search for structural factors, several authors examined the causes of inflation as supply elements, 
or factors influencing costs formation. The latter follows precisely the theoretical approach that we think 
provides  a  good  explanation  for  Latin  American  inflationary  experiences3.  Moreover,  consistently  with 
ECLA’s  general  approach  sketched  above,  several  structural  factors  that  explain  inflation  also  play  an 
important  role  on  the  analysis  of  problems  or  barriers  to  economic  development.  Two  main  sets  of 
arguments can be presented, as follows. 

Firstly, there was the idea of imbalances that stem from rapid economic growth. Despite the fact 
that imbalanced growth could have positive dynamic properties, as Albert Hirschman stressed in his work, 
it  might  create  some  sectoral  imbalances  resulting  in  eventual  cost  pressures  even  when  the  economy 
operates bellow full employment. This type of sectoral imbalance analysis has great importance within the 
structuralist tradition. The paper written by Olivera (1964) limits the structuralist interpretation within these 
rather  strict  boundaries,  meaning  that  the  approach  should  basically  refer  to  structural  imbalances  and 
rigidities on specific economic sectors. What structuralist authors and particularly Olivera (1964) proposes 
is that Latin America economies were likely to present sustained inflation, what would be well described 
by this structural reason, namely the growth process that characterizes developing countries. 

An example of specific sectoral imbalance that was repeatedly singled out by structuralist authors 
as  the  most  important  is  the  agricultural  bottleneck,  especially  the  production  of  foodstuff  directed  to 
internal consumption. Taking into consideration that foodstuff is a sizable portion of workers real wage4 it 

                                                           
1 See for Arnon (1991) Tooke´s main ideas. On the debate around the 1920´s hyperinflations see Bastos (2002) and Franco 
(1986). 

2 It is important not to confuse the positive contribution that we will study in the next paragraphs with the allegedly inflationist 
bias of economic policies inspired by ECLA´s theories. The latter is the result of a conservative criticism developed since the 
1980’s, which links policies that are intended to spur economic growth with the existence of several cases of persistent inflation 
in Latin America. This conservative position became increasingly popular following the neoliberal tide of the 1980’s. It does not 
develop any structural relation between development and inflation, and relies heavily on the excess of demand approach, which 
is exactly the position that we do not follow. 

3  It  is  important  to  recognize  though  that  the  work  of  structuralist  authors  mixed  up  strictly  supply  factors  with  demand 
considerations  as  “structural”  causes  for  inflation.  See  for  example  Sunkel  (1958)  p.  574,  where  an  alleged  chronic  savings 
deficiency is meant to be a persistent explanation for inflation in Chile. 

4 The backwardness of Latin countries implied that the share of foodstuff in the consumption basket of  workers  was high in 
relation to more developed countries. 

2 

 

was expected that workers would fight to index their wages to the variation of such prices. Therefore the 
mechanism  of  wage  indexation  would  then  transmit  this  initial  cost  push  to  the  rest  of  the  economy 
(including  sectors  where  agricultural  products  were  not  direct  inputs).Of  course  the  argument  had  a 
decreasing importance as agriculture in Latin America advanced in terms of productivity in almost every 
country; on the other hand, the relation between commodity prices and internal inflation got even stronger 
as modernized agriculture became fully integrated with world markets, and international prices have a direct 
effect  on domestic food  prices and  agricultural  inputs prices. This  mechanism gives to the international 
commodity  prices  in  local  currency  -  multiplied  by  the  exchange  rate-    a  strong  influence  on  internal 
inflation. 

A second, and for our purposes more relevant point raised by the structuralist authors, is the relation 
between  external  conditions  and  inflation.  As  Latin  American  economies  face  persistent  deficits  on  the 
current account, any deterioration of external trade conditions not matched by increased external financing 
(and unfortunately for the periphery trade and financing crisis are usually two faces of the same coin), will 
bring recurrent exchange rate devaluations. This instability, and recurrent crisis would trigger a exchange 
rate-nominal wage spiral and the structural external imbalances would make it very difficult to stop this 
process by adopting some sort of fixed nominal exchange rate policy. 

Even though several Latin American authors stressed the connection between external conditions 
and  inflation  it  was  a  British  economist,  Nicholas  Kaldor  (1978)  that  presented  this  question  in  a  very 
systematic and organized way. As a consequence of the persistent pressure on import capacity of certain 
countries,  Kaldor  divided  the  latter  in  two  types:  inflationary  ones  (that  present  this  tendency)  and  non 
inflationary.  Therefore  there  is  an  endogenous  cause  for  persistent  exchange  rate  devaluation.  The 
combination of exchange rate devaluations with some degree of distribution conflict explains the recurrence 
and persistence of inflationary episodes in the continent. 

Pazos  (1972)  provided  an  interesting  analysis  within  the  structuralist  approach  discussed  in  this 
subsection. Even though he affirms that inflation is a multi factor process, in several passages of the book, 
for example, he doesn´t support the interpretation that there is a persistent relation between an acceleration 
of economic growth and inflation. In fact, due to the very nature of chronic inflation the acceleracionist 
idea  that  is  present  in  the  monetarist  model  is  dismissed  by  Pazos.  On  the  contrary,  he  argues  that  the 
causality usually runs in the opposite direction by showing that the distortions induced in the economic 
system  by  persistent  (and  high)  inflation  are  elements  that  usually  “discourage  production  and  hinder 
economic growth” (Pazos 1972: 375). He also uses the concept of economies and diseconomies of scale as 
an argument to support his criticism to the usual direction of causation67. 

However, the most important contribution of this author is the idea of inertial inflation, whose name 
was later associated with authors that became highly influential in policy prescriptions during the 1980´s, 
mainly in Brazil.8 

                                                           
5 In fact Pazos notices that since inflation in Latin America is a persistent phenomena through the economic cycle it migh vary 
also its cause: from cost push elements to demand pull ones. 

6 When criticizing contractionary policies he says: “When aggregate demand increases proportionately less than the inertial rise 
in costs, enterprises restrict sales and output rather than permit a reduction in their profits per unit of output by raising prices less 
than costs. As sales go down, costs per unit of output go up, thus giving a further push to prices.” (Pazos 1972: 135) 

7  Based  on  the  empirical  evidence  from  1950  and  1970,  Pazos  (1972)  also  suggested  that  investment  levels  are  not  directly 
correlated with inflation in any sense: “It is clear that the figures on fixed investment ... do not correlate closely with the rates of 
inflation; hence they do not support the ideas most frequently held regarding the relationship between the two series. Neither do 
the  figures  substantiate  the  theory  that  inflation  facilitates  the  financing  of  a  high-level  volume  of  investment  by  forcing  up 
savings, nor the idea that it keeps investment down discouraging voluntary savings.” (Pazos 1972: 41) 

8 The first stabilization program to openly use the concept of inertial inflation in Brazil was the Cruzado Plan. After the latter 
every plan implemented in Brazil adopted some formula to bring wages to their previous real value (or its average over a 
specific period of time) and some mechanism to eliminate the inertial component. 

3 

 

Even though the wage and administered prices mechanism that explain inflation inertia deals clearly 
with the dynamic of cost elements it is also true that the existence of such inertia indicates some degree of 
equilibrium,  or  the  absence  of  an  external  force  that  accelerates  the  rate  of  inflation.  This  distinction  is 
useful to briefly discuss the distinction of stable and high (and accelerating, or highly unstable) inflation.  
According  to  Pazos’s  “..rapid  accelerations  are  usually  associated  with  foreign  currency 
crisis.”(Pazos 1972: 136). In this context, one may ask: What happens after an exchange rate devaluation? 
If  it  is  a  once  and  for  all  movement,  there  would  be  an  inflation  spike  that  gradually  subsides 
bringing, in the end, a lower wage rate and a real exchange rate devaluation smaller than the initial value. 
However, as it is the case in Latin American economies, the exchange devaluation is the consequence of 
serious international crisis; terms of trade deterioration would imply, or require, a series of new nominal 
exchange rate devaluation until the new real  exchange rate settles in an equilibrium value, with the real 
wage bearing the burden for the change in external conditions. 

However,  it  is  highly  unlikely  that  the  resulting  fall  of  wages  and  other  changes  in  internal 
distributive  variables  would  be  met  without  any  kind  of  resistance.  Usually  both  nominal  wages  and 
nominal interest rates react to the increase of exchange rate, setting in motion several rounds of nominal 
increases of all relevant distributive variables. If there is no accommodation, or if wage resistance were so 
strong that workers could increase nominal wage by the same rate of other distributive variables, then a 
hyperinflation  can  result.  This  highly  unstable  case  is  not  of  interest  for  most  practical  cases,  and 
specifically not for our study. What happened in real historical cases, or what the exchange rate devaluation 
triggers, is a sequence of nominal increases that at some point start to converge to some nominal  stable 
variation rates, corresponding to real, or average, values for the relevant  distributive variables, e.g., real 
exchange rate, real wage and real margin of profit (Bastos, 2002).  

This is exactly what we are going to develop in this paper, first in a highly schematic way through 
a brief review of the inflation process from 1951 to 1985 and finally applying quantitative methods to test 
our basic hypothesis in section 3.  
 
II – Exchange rate devaluation and inflation upsurge in Brazil, 1951-1985 
II.1 – Overview 
 
The  aim  of  this  section  is  to  analyze  Brazilian  historical  data,  in  order  to  evaluate  the  possible 
connections between external shocks and episodes of inflation  upsurge. Episodes of inflation upsurge are 
characterized by situations wherein the inflation rate (accumulated in 12 months) starts a period of several 
months  (more  than  6  months)  of  continuous  or  almost  continuous  rise,  resulting  in  an  inflation  rate 
(accumulated in  12 months) at  least  50% higher than its initial  value. External  shocks are identified by a 
period  of  successive  nominal  exchange  rate  devaluations,  a  maxi-devaluation  and/or  a  commodity  price 
shock. The goal here is to identify episodes of inflation upsurge and to analyze whether or not these episodes 
were preceded or concomitant to some kind of external shock.  
 
Our analysis starts in the post Second World War, when a rapid industrialization process was already 
underway, since the early 1930s. As Furtado (1965) wrote in “The Economic Growth of Brazil”, in the 1930s 
there had been in Brazil a definitive "displacement of the economy´s dynamic center" from export-geared 
agricultural activities to domestic market activities. In a context of huge scarcity of foreign currency all along 
this decade, limited import capacity forced industrialization and urbanization processes to be supported by 
the  (poorly  efficient)  previous  productive  capacity  and  by  imports  of  used  equipment  from  countries  in 
recession, as well as by indigenous supply of capital goods in its low-efficiency infant stage of production – 
all of them acting as constraints that should have probably increased throughout the war. This resulted in a 
generalized claim for infrastructure investment among entrepreneurs and government officials.   
 
By the end of the war and for a couple of years there has been widespread hope that the international 
market would quickly start to operate normally under the rules of the Bretton Woods system. In this context, 
Brazilian policy-makers were confident that the foreign exchange reserves accumulated during the war, the 
export expansion prospects and the support of the United States to their Latin American war allies would 
make  possible  the  implementation  of  large  infrastructure  projects.  This  would  soon  prove  to  be  a  too 

4 

 

optimistic bet and was replaced by growing frustration in the context of dollar shortage and of the North 
American emphasis in reconstruction of Europe and Japan, careless of Latin American and Brazilian needs. 
“Economic  Reequipment”  was  the  expression  obsessively  used  for  many  years  to  refer  to  infrastructure 
requirements,  as  shows  the  fact  that  many  years  later,  when  the  Banco  Nacional  do  Desenvolvimento 
(National Development Bank – BNDE) was installed in 1952, its funding came from a newly created “Fund 
for Economic Reequipment”.  
 
The  period  that  we  will  analyze  in  this  section  starts  in  1951  within  this  context  of  internal  and 
external changes and ends in 1985, when once again important changes were happening both internally and 
externally. It starts in 1951 because during Eurico Dutra´s presidency (1946-51) the nominal exchange rate 
was kept fixed and there was no major external shock. It ends in 1985 because from this year on there were 
several (failed) stabilization plans, causing too many structural breaks in the data and leading to a situation 
of a near-hyperinflation by the end of the Eighties. In such a context, the data are not at all reliable and it is 
hard to identify any causal relationship between variables, especially when it comes to econometric studies 
as the one we will develop in section 3. 
 
II.2 – Historical Record (1951-1985): eight out of the nine episodes of inflation upsurge were preceded 
by external shocks 

The data analysis shows that from 1951 to 1985 there were 8 episodes of inflation upsurge and that 
7 of these episodes were preceded by some kind of external shock. This evidence shows that we can´t refuse 
the hypothesis that inflation upsurge in Brazil is strongly related to difficulties in the external sector9.  
 
A first phase can be identified in the period running from 1951 until 1964. This phase was all along 
one of scarce foreign currency availability. The increase of coffee prices (Brazil´s most important exports 
good) between 1949 and 1954 and large direct foreign investment in the second half of the decade alleviated 
the dollar shortage, but the fast economic growth until 1962 and poor access to finance throughout the whole 
period resulted in continuous pressure on nominal exchange rates, and thereby on inflation. Throughout this 
period  there  were  four  episodes  of  inflation  upsurge.  Three  out  of  them  were  preceded  by  some  sort  of 
external shock (see figure 1). The sole exception was the episode of 1955-56 10. 
 

Insert Figure 1 here 

 

The first episode took place in 1953-54 and was caused by the 103% maxi-devaluation of February 
1953, which was then reinforced by the establishment of a multiple exchange rate system in October of the 
same year11. This devaluation was the lasting result of a long period in which the exchange rate was kept 
fixed and overvalued: shortly after World War II, the nominal exchange rate was fixed in an appreciated 
level in real terms and was not changed throughout Eurico Dutra’s government (1946-51). In 1951, Getúlio 
Vargas presidency (1951-54) started with the Finance Minister, Horácio Lafer, attempting to bring inflation 
rates down, so that the exchange rate was not devalued and the import’s license system was relaxed. The 
combination of this less protectionist system and an appreciated real exchange rate resulted in an imports 
boom,  so  that  the  international  reserves  in  convertible  currency  fell  sharply.  From  this  point  on,  the 

                                                           
9 For a complete list of the inflation upsurge episodes, see Annex 1. 

10  The  exchange  rate  devaluations  for  the  entire  period  1951-1985  were  calculated  based  on  the  monthly  change  (%)  of  the 
average nominal exchange rate. This choice was due to the fact that all along the Fifties Brazil had multiple exchange rates. The 
inflation rate used as a reference was the IGPDI (Índice Geral de Preços, General Price Index) 12 months accumulated inflation 
rate. The IGPDI was the most important inflation index in Brazil after the Second World War. 

11 Shortly after the adoption of the multiple exchange rates regime, there was a 38% maxi-devaluation in the average nominal 
exchange rate in December 1953. 

5 

 

government tried to restore the former import´s license system, but the currency shortage was not overcome 
(Vianna, 1990: 126-28).  
 
After so long a process of real appreciation and in a context of balance of payments crisis, the nominal 
exchange rate devaluation became inevitable. In early 1953, there was a huge devaluation and the exchange 
rate  system  was  changed  first  with  the  Law  1807  of  March  1953,  which  in  practice  instituted  a  multiple 
exchange  rate  system  (Vianna,  1990:  134).  The  system  was  changed  again  in  October  1953  when  the 
Instruction  70  of  the  Superintendência  da  Moeda  e  do  Crédito  (Money  and  Credit  Superintendency, 
SUMOC)12 launched officially multiple exchange rates13. 
After an episode not related to any external shock in 1955-56, there was a new episode of inflation 
 
upsurge preceded by nominal exchange rate devaluations starting in February 1958. The devaluations took 
place in the second semester of 1957 and were likely to have been due to the changes in the exchange rate 
system caused by the Law 3244, which reduced from five to two the number of categories under the variable 
surcharge rule. The new rules were set in August 1957 and the devaluation in the average nominal exchange 
rate started from this point on. There was a 40% devaluation of the average nominal exchange rate from July 
1957 to February 1958, which was followed by a further 26% nominal devaluation from March 1958 to May 
1958. There was altogether an 83% nominal devaluation from July 1957 to May 1958. This was all along a 
period of growing difficulties in the balance of payments due to a  33% fall in the international price of coffee 
(average import price in the United States) from 1954 to 1958 (Bacha & Greenhill, 1992).  

In 1961, there was once again an inflation upsurge episode due to an external shock. This time the 
causes  were  the  51%  nominal  exchange  rate  devaluation  (from  December  1960  to  April  1961)  and  the 
reduction in the import´s subsidies (for oil and wheat) in the first months of the year. According to Malan 
(1981), these measures had an immediate impact on inflation rates, so that wholesale prices grew 15,5% in 
the first semester (Malan, 1981: 94). Moreover, it is also worth mentioning that the multiple exchange rate 
system was further dismantled throughout 1961 by a series of “measures that brought greater unity to the 
foreign exchange system” (Baer, 2001: 58).  

After inflation rates slowed down a bit for a very short period in mid 1962, they accelerated again 
in November 1962 following an exchange rate devaluation of 30% from July 1962 to October 1962, which 
was  again  reinforced  by  a  new  devaluation  in  the  first  semester  of  1963.  At  this  time  the  country  was 
experiencing a period of political unrest and economic crisis. In a context wherein annual inflation rates 
were around 50%, the cost shocks due to the exchange rate devaluation led to a wage-price spiral, enhanced 
by  political  difficulties  that  João  Goulart´s  presidency  was  facing.  On  the  one  hand,  he  didn´t  have  the 
support of the US authorities to get the funds to face debt payments in the short run. On the other hand, his 
connections with the labour movement did not leave him many degrees of freedom to impose restrictive 
wage policies or to adopt other contractionary policies. This turbulent context led to the military coup d´état 
of April 1964 and annual inflation rates reached 90% by then. 

The dictatorship implemented in 1964 faced much better international conditions and the 1964-73 
period was one of abundant foreign currency. At the climax of the so-called golden age of capitalism, fast 
export growth and unprecedented access to booming international finance availability has allowed for low 

                                                           
12 At that time, Brazil had no Central Bank and the monetary authority duties were divided by two institutions: Sumoc and Banco 
do Brasil (Bank of Brazil). In general, Sumoc had normative rules, while the Bank of Brazil had the role of implementing the 
policies and norms. 

13 According to this Instruction, exporters would receive the official rate (Cr$ 18,50/ US$) plus a bonus of Cr$5/US$ in the case 
of coffee exports and of Cr$10/US$ in the case of the other exports. In terms of the imports, there were three different exchange 
rates depending on the imported good: 1) official exchange rate (without surcharge) for special imports like for instance wheat 
and  newsprint;  2)  official  exchange  rate  plus  a  fixed  surcharge  for  oil  and  direct  imports  of  the  federal,  state  and  county 
governments; 3) official exchange rate plus a variable surcharge for the other imports being the level of these variable surcharges 
was defined in auctions for which the imports belonging to the third group were divided in five different categories according to 
a criteria of essentiality established by the government (Vianna, 1990: 139-41). 

6 

 

pressure on the exchange rate and relatively low inflation rates – especially from 1968 to 1973 - in a context 
of  fast  growth.  Furthermore,  the  military  regime  had  the  support  of  the  US  government,  allowing  a 
renegotiation  of  the  external  debt  conditions  that  helped  the  country  to  get  more  external  funds.  For 
example, Brazil was the fourth largest receiver of funds from  AID from 1964-67, coming after only India, 
Pakistan and South Vietnam (Lara Resende, 1982, p. 782-783). Under these favourable external conditions, 
it was not surprising that the adjustment program launched by the authoritarian government in 1964 - the 
so-called Programa de Ação Econômica do Governo (Government´s Economic Action Programme, PAEG) 
- was successful in bringing inflation rates down. From 1967-8 until 1973, inflation rates were around 15-
20%, a reasonably low level for Brazilian standards at that time.  

It is worth mentioning that PAEG´s strategy has included at its start an exchange rate devaluation, 
which was supposed to correct a long time overvalued exchange rate. It is nonetheless also important to 
point out that PAEG´s policy-makers feared an exchange rate-prices-nominal wages spiral due to this cost 
push  shock.  Therefore,  they  introduced  a  regressive  wage  rule  that  caused  a  huge  real  wage  fall  in  the 
following  years.  This  policy  was  intended  to  bring  down  inflation  stepwise  using  and  ingenuous  wage 
indexation scheme. Wages were adjusted to their past two years average plus the expected future rate of 
inflation. If the expected inflation had been exactly equal the actual one this indexation scheme would have 
been able to bring inflation down without real wage losses. This was however not the case, due to several 
reasons  as, for example, a deliberate increase in  administered public prices intended to reinforce  public 
enterprises revenues. Therefore, inflation was brought down by controlling nominal wages, or sub-indexing 
them, combining lower inflation and real wages. 

In 1967 the government established a crawling peg regime which had two basic purposes. First, it 
was  intended  to  establish  a  competitive  real  exchange  rate.  Second  it  aimed  at  smoothing  out  the 
international  capital  flows  that  at  this  moment  were  beginning  to  pick  up  with  the  development  of  the 
international  “Eurodollars”  market.  The  shortening  of  exchange  rate  indexation  lag  could  have  affected 
positively the rate of inflation in the period but the aforementioned nominal wages sub-indexation prevented 
a price/wages spiral. 

Figure  2  shows  inflation  rates  falling  during  the  1964-73  period  until  the  1973  First  Oil  Shock. 
Brazil had to import most of its oil, so that the oil prices hike meant a major cost shock, which was possibly 
reinforced by the government´s decision not to halt economic growth through restrictive monetary or fiscal 
policies. The First Oil Shock was a turning point in the international economic conditions for countries like 
Brazil.  

Insert Figure 2 here 

 

In  this  new  context,  inflation  rates  rapidly  grew  in  1974  leading  to  a  new  episode  of  inflation 
upsurge: there was an increase in the rate of inflation accumulated in 12 months from 15% in November 
1973 to 35% in December 1974. According to Serra (1982) commodity prices increase pushing internal 
basic costs and aggravated by the oil shock was already in its way in the second semester of 1973. It should 
also be pointed out that in 1974 nominal wage indexation rule have changed adding an extra cost element 
to  push  up  inflation  rates.  The  previous  rule  of  nominal  adjustment,  based  on  the  two  previous  years´ 
average was changed for one year. In a period when inflation was accelerating this measure represented a 
nominal upward push on wages and consequently on prices. 

By the end of 1975, the 12 months accumulated inflation rate moved slightly upward around 25-
30%, to a new plateau close to 50% (see Figure 3). Once again the explanation for this episode is a cost-
push element associated to the foreign sector, namely the imposition of a compulsory deposit of 100% for 
360 days on every import purchase. One might call it effective nominal exchange rate devaluation (Bastos, 
2002). The consequence of this measure, as observed by Belluzzo and Coutinho (1982, p.160-161), was 
that  inflation  accelerated  in  1976.  In  terms  of  the  impact  on  import  prices,  it  had  a  similar  effect  to  an 
exchange rate devaluation but without the negative consequences on capital flows, which the country was 
in  dire need in  this  period.  Apart from  this change, other sources of cost- push  inflation were relatively 
stable during these years. The exchange rate kept its crawling peg pattern and there was no change in the 

7 

 

wage indexation policy. In brief, what seems most likely is that a change of inflation plateau has occurred, 
by  means  of  a  shock  transmitted  to  the  whole  economy  through  the  indexation  mechanisms,  with  the 
establishment of a higher “stable” inflationary level. 

In 1979, Brazil suffered external and internal shocks. More importantly, there was a further change 
for worse in the international economic environment that would set new parameters for all Latin American 
economies in the next decade.  

The first important exogenous shock was the 110% increase in international oil prices from June 
1979 to February 1980. It is interesting to notice that this price hike was not as sharp as the previous one in 
1973. However, its impact was greater in Brazil. In 1974 the change in internal prices of oil products (gas 
and motor oils) was 65.7% while external prices changed 257.32%. In 1979, the increases were 160.1% 
and 110%, respectively. This difference is explained by the strong subsidies to oil prices in the first shock. 
The  increase  in  international  interest  rates  also  created  a  new  external  pressure  on  the  Brazilian 
economy, as it made the international capital market less prone to lend money to Latin American countries, 
which were already indebted countries and also facing renewed current transactions problems. This lower 
enthusiasm regarding lending led to an increase in the value of the spreads (over the increasing base interest 
rates) and the shortening of loan terms. The combination of such elements resulted in a snowball type of 
indebtedness with strong negative impacts over the external balance. In such a difficult external situation, 
it was not possible to avoid a stronger internal impact from the external shock, as it had been the case five 
years before. The economic authorities, in an attempt to cope with the critical external situation, devalued 
the exchange rate by around 28% in December 1979, which was an extra cost shock posing inflationary 
pressures in the economy. 

At  the  same  time,  there  was  a  change  in  the  nominal  wage  adjustment  rule.  The  new  policy 
established by the Law nº 6.708 of September 30th, 1979, was not designed to maintain the real wage (as 
the previous one), or the average wage obtained in a past period, but to restore a past peak value, adjusting 
the nominal value using the inflation of the period. This adjustment was not horizontally applied to every 
wage level. It was designed to have a distributive effect in favor of the lower wages. Workers that received 
up  to  3  minimum  wages  had  their  wages  adjusted  by  a  value  10%  superior  to  the  past  inflation.  The 
adjustment decreased inversely with the value of wages14.The most important element of this new wage 
policy  was  the  change  in  the  adjustment  periodicity,  from  a  yearly  basis  to  a  semester-to-semester  one, 
which concurred to the upsurge of the inflation rate. 

As a result of these four cost-push shocks (oil shock, interest rates hike, wage readjustments and 
exchange rate devaluation) happening almost at the same time, it is no surprise that the rate of inflation 
leaped to a new plateau (Bastos, 2002). In numerical terms, as these shocks were distributed over a certain 
period of time15 we can only see their full effect in the 1980’s rate of inflation. For instance, the average 
monthly inflation rate in the second semester of 1979 was 3.8%, whereas the monthly average of the first 
semester of 1980 was 6%. In this context, the inflation rate accumulated in 12 months evolved from 41% 
in December 1978 to 77% in December 1979 and then moved forward to 110% in December 1980. It kept 
increasing until March 1981 when it reached 121%.  

                                                           
14 The adjustment was, in fact, a bit more complicated in the case of wages above three minimum wages. For example, in the 
case of  workers that received “twelve minimum wages”,  the adjustment  would be: 10% above inflation for the “three wages 
“part” of the total wage; the full inflation for the part between three and ten and 80% for the remainder “two wages”. Workers 
and firms would freely negotiate the productivity growth rate. This wage policy was altered by the Law nº 6,886 from December 
10th, 1980. The new rule did not change the main characteristics of the previous one (periodicity and adjustment to replace the 
past nominal peak) but just the percentage of past inflation associated with different wage levels brackets. 

15 The  oil price  increase  extended  from  the  second  semester  of  1979  through  1980,  the  same  applying  to  other  commodities 
prices.  The  new  wage  adjustment  rule,  as  we  said  before,  was  enacted  in  October  and  finally  the  exchange  rate  devaluation 
happened in December. 

8 

 

Moreover, the erratic daily administration of the Brazilian economy between 1979 and 1982 made 
entirely ineffective the 1979 exchange rate maxi-devaluation, and consequently, there was no impact on 
trade balance. It´s deficit in 1980 was almost the same as in 1979. Meanwhile, the current account deficit 
was rising due to the snowball indebtedness described above. In brief, with the external situation worsening 
- the current account deficit jumped from US$ 10 billion in 1979 to US$ 16 billion, approximately, in 1982 
- the government was forced16 to devaluate the exchange rate, once again by a large amount. In February 
1983, there was a new maxi-devaluation of the Brazilian currency with respect to the dollar.17 

Aware of the inflationary impacts of this exchange rate devaluation, the authorities tried to curb the 
existing wage indexation and hence the price-wages spiral. However, the National Congress refused such 
proposals  and  finally  established  (by  the  Law  nº  2,065)  that  the  automatic  wage  adjustment  would  be 
effective only in  the  range of 3  to 15 minimum  wages. Yet  these  attempts  were not  able to  prevent  the 
inflation to double in 1983 and the purchase power of wages to fall 15%. 

In sum, as it can be seen in figure 3, there were three episodes of inflation acceleration within the 
period 1974-85 and all of them were preceded by  some sort of external shock. In this context, it is also 
possible to see that the 1979 and 1983 shocks led inflation rates in Brazil to levels never reached before. 
Finally, looking at figure 3 it is also possible to notice that the inflation rates in the years 1983, 1984 and 
1985  were  stabilized  around  200%.  As  previously  noticed,  such  a  behavior  was  common  during  the 
indexation period: after an external shock, inflation rates would move upward from an old plateau and then 
stabilize in a new plateau. At this time, however, quite distinct macroeconomic circumstances were at stake. 
The  most  important  one  was  the  extremely  auspicious  performance  at  the  external  front.  After  the  first 
sizable trade surplus of 1983, the result for 1984 and were even larger, with mega-surpluses of around US$ 
13 billion. Even more importantly, such values were obtained with the economy growing at a rate of 5.4% 
and  7.8%  in  1984  and  1985,  respectively.  The  positive  performance  at  the  external  front  allowed  the 
authorities to keep the exchange rate almost constant in real terms18.  
 

 

Insert Figure 3 here 

The inflation rates kept in a high plateau during the following years. At this point, stabilization was 
increasingly  becoming  the  government  top  priority.  In  February  1986,  the  government  launched  a 
stabilization plan (Cruzado Plan), which intended to stabilize prices by dismantling the indexation schemes. 
It was the first of a series of failed stabilization programs until stabilization was finally achieved by Plano 
Real (Real Plan) in 1994.  

 
 

III – Econometric tests 
 

                                                           
16 At this point - after the Mexican and Polish default - the debt crisis for the developing countries was installed. Brazilian and 
IMF authorities initiated their conversations by the end of 1982 and the exchange rate devaluation was part of the agreement. 
The  exchange  rate  devaluation  was  enacted  while  the  first  formal  letter  of  intentions  (the  adjustment  plan  proposed  by  the 
Brazilian government) was still being studied by the IMF bureaucracy.  

17 According to Batista Junior (1983) this value corresponded to the appreciation of the exchange rate after the previous maxi-
devaluation. 

18 The second and third phases correspond to a period wherein inflation was deeply connected to generalized indexation and the 
resulting inflationary inertia. This is what happened when inflation jumped from a 20% to a 30 % “plateau” in 1973-74, to a 
40% one in 1976, and further to 100% in 1979 and to 200% in 1983. This is a point of the differences when one compares these 
two phases with the first one. 

9 

 

This section is devoted to empirical tests regarding nominal  exchange rates and inflation rates in 
Brazil from 1951 to 1985. It is interesting to notice that we did not find a lot of empirical econometric work 
on the subject covered in this paper. One of the few exceptions is Barbosa (1983) where the author attempts 
to develop, and test econometrically, a structuralist model for inflation. Basically, the model has, as the 
forces  that  explain  inflation,  an  excess  of  demand  on  agricultural  internally  consumed  goods,  and  the 
external  prices  of  export  agricultural  goods  and  imported  goods.  However,  in  his  theoretical  model  the 
variable for external prices incorporates both the change in international prices in US dollars and the change 
of real  exchange rate (the value above past  inflation). Besides this divergence,  among other details that 
make his inflation mechanisms distinct from the assumed here, when the author tests empirically the model 
his  best  specification  has  some  important  differences  with  respect  to  his  own  theoretical  tenets.  Due  to 
limitations  of  data  availability  the  best  specification  has,  as  exogenous  variables,  the  rate  of  change  o 
government consumption, the acceleration of the increase in oil and gas prices, and the gap between the 
rate of growth of agriculture production and its post war trend. Definitely, this kind of result has almost no 
relation to our basic hypothesis and tests since the exchange rate is not tested and variable that represents 
some degree of excess demand is included. 

Modiano  (1988)  estimated  a  reduced  form  of  a  structuralist  inflation  model  with  exchange  rate 
shock, nominal wages, import tariffs and subsidies on oil imports, the output gap, the domestic food supply 
gap, and commodities price index as the exogenous variables from 1966 to 1982. The exchange rate shock 
had strongest elasticity, a 1.4 coefficient. Even though, the exchange rate variable differs from the adopted 
in this paper, the results fort o shorter period of time support the hypothesis of a central role played by the 
trajectory of the exchange rate on Brazilian inflation.  It  is  also,  interesting to  notice that the size of the 
multiplier effect of exchange rate on inflation depends on the level of the inflation itself. The idea is that an 
increase in a given high level of inflation would lead to a higher wages indexation. The idea of it is that the 
losses of real wages would be much more difficult to bear by workers than the lost when inflation grows 
starting from a lower rate. 

In this paper, we will develop a Vector Autoregressive (VAR) model with exogenous variables and 
apply a Granger causality test. The data employed are % monthly changes of the average nominal exchange 
rate and % monthly changes of the inflation rate  

The analysis starts with unit root tests on the two series. However, this analysis won´t be restricted 
to the conventional Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test. Brazilian data are full of structural breaks and 
the two series employed here do show this pattern. As structural breaks may bias the traditional unit root 
tests towards false non-rejection of the null of non-stationarity, it is thus advisable to employ tests that take 
breaks into consideration as a way of properly dealing with them (Patterson, 2000: 277-78).  

The literature of unit root tests with structural breaks was started by the pioneering paper of Perron 
(1989), who assumed a  single breakpoint affecting the level  or the  growth  or both.  This  paper had as  a 
major setback which is the fact that the breakpoint is assumed to be known, what leads to the criticism of 
data-mining. Zivot and Andrews (1992) developed then a test that was not subject to this criticism since 
the breakpoint was treated as unknown and calculated in a way that maximizes the chances of the alternative 
hypothesis. However, this test didn’t include the hypothesis of structural break in the null (Patterson, 2000: 
277-85). Finally, Lee and Strazicich (2003) developed a test that allowed up to two breakpoints, treated 
both of them as unknown and included them in the null hypothesis19. In this context, this paper applies the 
Zivot & Andrews (1992) and Lee & Strazicich (2003) tests, besides the traditional ADF test. All of them 
were calculated in R. 

The test results can be seen in table 1. All tests showed that the exchange rate series does not present 

unit root.  

 

                                                           
19 For a good summary of unit root tests with structural breaks prior to the 2000s, see Patterson (2000). For a brief summary of 
these tests including Lee and Strazicich (2003) test, see Greasley and Oxley (2011). 

Insert Table 1 here 

10 

 

However, the results were not conclusive when it comes to the inflation rate data. ADF  (for 5%) 
and Zivot & Andrews (ZA) tests showed that the series is stationary, but Lee & Strazicich (LS) test showed 
the opposite result (see table 2).  
 

 

Insert Table 2 here 

 

 
 

Due to the inconclusive results, it was decided to develop two VAR models, one in level and another 
with  the inflation rate series in  differences. These models included intercept,  a trend and the significant 
dummies suggested by the  LS test as the structural  break points of the two series.  According to  the  LS 
results, there is a trend break in the inflation rate series in February 1977, while the exchange rate series 
presented a trend and level break in August 1964. In the case of the differentiated inflation rate series, there 
was a trend break in February 1961 and another trend break in June 198220. 
 
The VAR that included the differentiated inflation rate series performed very poorly. For instance, 
it had a low R2, autocorrelation, heteroscedasticity and nonnormality in the residuals. The VAR in level 
proved to perform much better. We started with a VAR without exogenous variables21. Based on this model, 
we analyzed the lag length criteria (table 3). According to these criteria, it was decided to incorporate 12 
lags in the model. 
 

Insert Table 3 here 

 

Then, a VAR in level was estimated, including intercept, trend and the dummies for the inflation 
and exchange rate series as exogenous variables. This VAR model had a high R2 for instance22. Moreover, 
based on the AR root table, it satisfies the stability condition (see table 4). 

 

 

Insert Table 4 here 

 

The next step was then to apply the VAR Granger Causality/Block Exogeneity Wald Test. As it can 
be seen in figure 8, the results were in line with the interpretation that is being set in this paper: the exchange 
rate change Granger-causes the inflation rate, but the inflation rate does not Granger cause the exchange 
rate change. This result does not imply of course that the exchange rate change actually causes the inflation 
rate: it simply implies that the exchange rate cannot be treated as an exogenous variable in relation to the 
inflation rate. In any case, it is an additional sign that we cannot refuse the structuralist hypothesis. 
 

Insert Table 5 here 

 

 

 

                                                           
20 All three unit root tests showed that the differentiated inflation series is stationary. 

21 The VAR models were calculated in E-Views 8.0. 

22 The exchange rate equation was not well estimated. However, this is a traditional problem in the econometric literature on the 
exchange rate. 

11 

 

Nevertheless, it is also mandatory to make a series of tests in the residuals, in order to ensure the 
above results. In this sense, autocorrelation, heteroscedasticity and normality tests were applied. In terms 
of the autocorrelation problem LM tests were used. No autocorrelation in the residuals was found (see table 
6). 

 

Insert Table 6 here 

 

 
When it comes to the normality test, the results were not so positive. As it can be seen in figure 9, 

the normality hypothesis was rejected for both equations and for the model as a whole. 

The  heteroscedasticity  test  had  also  negative  results,  It  showed  a  high  probability  of 
heteroscedasticity in the residuals of the inflation equation (res1*res1), but also in the correlation of the 
residuals of the two variables (res2*res1).  

The result is particularly negative since the presence of heteroscedasticity invalidates the Granger 
causality  test  used  before.  Therefore,  it  became  necessary  to  correct  this  heteroscedasticity  problem, 
otherwise the former result of the Granger test would not stand.  

For this purpose, we estimated two systems through different estimation methods, but both were 
estimated following the same specification of our original VAR in level with exogenous variables. The first 
system was estimated through weighted least squares with weights - in each of the equations - equal to the 
inverse of the variance of the residuals estimated through minimum least squares. In the second system, the 
Seemingly  Unrelated  Regression  (SUR)  methodology  was  used.  This  alternative  was  chosen  due  to  the 
correlation in the residuals of the two equations that was detected by the heteroscedasticity test. In order to 
test for Granger causality, the Wald test was used for all the lags of the exchange rate change variable in 
the inflation equation. In the same way, restrictions for all the inflation lags were specified in the exchange 
rate change equation. 

The tests pointed out no change in terms of the former Granger causality tests results. Therefore, 
inflation does not Granger-cause the exchange rate change, but the exchange rate change does Granger-
cause inflation (see table 7). 
 

 

In other words, the evidence shows that the former result is not invalid. 

Insert Table 7 here 

 
 
 
 
Conclusions: 

This paper examined - in the Brazilian case - the structuralist hypothesis that high inflation rates in 
Latin America during the second half of the 20th century were the result of external shocks that triggered 
an internal reaction of distributive variables generating a cost price spiral. For this purpose, it presented an 
historical analysis of the Brazilian data and some econometric tests. 

From  eight  episodes  of  inflation  upsurge  detected  from  1951-1985  seven  were  preceded  or 
concomitant  to  an  external  shock  (foreign  exchange  devaluation,  or  commodity  price-shocks,  or  both), 
suggesting that external shocks were an important trigger to inflation upsurge episodes. 

The  econometric  analysis  presented  in  the  paper  gave  evidence  that  such  a  strong  sign  of  the 
structuralist hypothesis should not be refused. A VAR model with exogenous variables for the period 1951-
1985  was  estimated,  using  as  endogeneous  variables  the  %  monthly  changes  of  the  average  nominal 
exchange rate and the % monthly changes of the inflation rate In this context, the Granger causality test 
showed that inflation does not Granger-cause the exchange rate change, but the exchange rate change does 
Granger-cause  inflation.  The  residual  tests  showed  heteroscedasticity,  challenging  the  validity  of  the 

12 

 

Granger  test  results,  but  systems  estimated  by  weighted  minimum  squares  and  the  SUR  methodology 
proved that the Granger test result holds. 
This paper did not aim to estimate a closed model for inflation, given the complexity of institutional and 
political changes of the long period analyzed. Further econometric developments may be necessary to 
establish a quantitative relation between exchange rate movements and inflation. However, the broad 
picture presented by the econometrical test has a particular interest insofar: it shows the persistence of the 
impact of the exchange rate on inflation, during a long period when internal public financing (both 
institutional instruments and the value of the deficit) changed markedly. Besides that, along the period 
studied monetary policy also varied a lot, as well the structural conditions of particular components of the 
aggregate supply, like agricultural supply and energy production.  

 
Therefore, the test suggests that, in spite of other macro and microeconomic changes, the external 
factor has an undeniable role to explain the persistent and predominately high inflation through the period 
analyzed. The majority of episodes described here were of external shocks or external devaluations, that 
followed  the  deterioration  of  terms  of  trade,  sometimes  accompanied  by  the  deterioration  of  external 
financial conditions (both international rates of interest and the limitation of external voluntary financial 
flows to Brazil). Therefore, this historical pattern suggests that the external conditions are crucial to explain 
a long period inflationary process in Brazil. The detailed sub period studies will show the impact of the 
exchange rate devaluation on inflation, based on its interaction with other internal variables like the wage 
resistance by workers. 
 
 
 
References: 
 
ARNON, A (1991). “Thomas Tooke: Pioneer of Monetary Theory”. University of Michigan Press, 1991. 
BACHA, E.; GREENHILL, R. (1992), “150 Anos de Café”, Rio de Janeiro: Salamandra Cos. 
BAER, W. (2001), “The Brazilian Economy: growth and development”, Westport: Praeger Publishers. 
BARBOSA,  Fernando  de  H.  (1983)  A  inflação  brasileira  no  pós-guerra:  monetarismo  versus 
estruturalismo. Rio de Janeiro: INPES/IPEA, 1983. 
BASTOS, Carlos P. M. “Price Stabilization in Brazil: a Classical Interpretation for an Indexed Nominal 
Interest Rate Economy”, Unpublished Ph.D. diss.. New School University, 2002. 
BASTOS, Carlos P “Inflação e Estabilização” in Pauperização Mundial e Crescimento, edited by J.L.Fiori 
and C. Medeiros, Petropolis: Vozes, 2001. 
COUTINHO, L & BELLUZZO, L.G.M.(1982), “Política Econômica, inflexões e crise: 1974-1981” in 
Belluzzo, LG.& Coutinho, L. Desenvolvimento Capitalista no Brasil. São Paulo: Brasiliense, 1982, 
ECLA (1950), “The Economic Development of Latin America and Its Principal Problems”, United 
Nations Department of Economic Affairs, 1950  
FRANCO, G H B (1986) “Aspects of the Economics of Hyperinflation: Theoretical Issues and Historical 
Studies of Four European Hyperinflations”, Ph.D. diss.. Harvard University, 1986. 
FURTADO, Celso (1965), “The economic growth of Brazil: a Survey from Colonial to Modern 
Times”, University of California Press, 1965 
GAMBOA, Roberto R. (1978), “Apresentação.” In Inflação Recente no Brasil e América Latina, edited 
by A. Pinto, H. Assael, A. N Del Prado, L. C. Marinho. Rio de Janeiro: Graal, 1978. 
GREASLEY, D.; OXLEY, L., (2010), Cliometrics and Time Series Econometrics: some theory and 
applications”, Journal of Economic Surveys, vol. 24, No. 5, pp. 970–1042. 
KALDOR, N. (1974), “The Role of Industrialisation in Latin American Inflation” in Further Essays on 
Applied Economics, New York: Holmes &Meir Publishers. 

13 

 

LARA RESENDE, A.(1982) . “A Política Brasileira de Estabilização 1963/68”. Pesquisa e Planejamento 
Econômico, vol. 12, n.3, 1982. 
LEE, J.; STRAZICICH, M.C. (2003), “Minimum LM Unit Root Test with Two Structural Breaks”, Review 
of Economics and Statistics, 63, pp.1082-1089. 
MALAN, P. S.; BONELLI, R.; ABREU, M.P.; PEREIRA, J.E.C. (1980), “Política Econômica Externa e 
Industrialização no Brasil (1939/52)”, Rio de Janeiro: IPEA/INPES. 
MALAN, P. S. (1981), “Política Econômica e Teorias de Balanço de Pagamentos: relações internacionais 
do  Brasil  no  período  1946-1979”.  Unpublished  Professorship  Thesis.  Faculdade  de  Economia  e 
Administração, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (FEA-UFRJ). 
MODIANO, Eduardo M.(1986),  “Da Inflação ao Cruzado: a política econômica no primeiro ano da 
Nova República”. Rio de Janeiro: Campus,1986. 
MODIANO, Eduardo M. (1988), “Inflação, Inércia e Conflito”, Rio de Janeiro, Capus, 1988. 
NOYOLA- VASQUEZ, J. (1957), “Inflación y Desarrollo en México y Chile”, Panorama económico, 
Nº170, Santiago de Chile, Julio. 
OLIVERA, Julio H. G. (1964),“On Structural Inflation and Latin-American ‘Structuralism’.” Oxford 
Economic Papers. November, pp. 321-332. 
PATTERSON, K. (2000), “An Introduction to Applied Econometrics: a time series approach”, New York: 
St. Martin´s Press. 
PAZOS, Felipe.  Chronic Inflation in Latin America. New York: Praeger Publishers, 1972. 
PERRON, P. (1989), “The great crash, the oil price shock, and the unit root hypothesis”,Econometrica, 57, 
pp.1361-1401. 
SERRA, J. (1982) “Ciclos e mudanças estruturais na economia brasileira do apósguerra”, Revista de 
Economia Política, Vol. 2, No. 2, pp. 5- 45. 
STIRATI, A. ( 2001), "Inflation, Unemployment and Hysteresis: An alternative view," Review of 
Political Economy, Taylor and Francis Journals, vol. 13(4), pages 427-451. 
SUNKEL , O. (1958), “La inﬂacion chilena: un enfoque heterodoxo”. El Trimestre Económico, v. 25, n. 4 
out - dec. 1958. 
VIANNA, S.B. (1990), “Duas Tentativas de Estabilização:1951-54”. In: ABREU, M.P.(org.), “ A Ordem 
do Progresso: cem anos de política econômica republicana, 1889-1989”, Rio de Janeiro: Campus. 
ZIVOT, E. ; ANDREWS, K. (1992), “Further Evidence On The Great Crash, The Oil Price Shock, and The 
Unit Root Hypothesis”, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 10 (10), pp. 251–70. 
 
 
 
Annex 1: Episodes of Inflation Upsurge 

 

The first month of each episode is the month of the lowest inflation rate before inflation rates started to 
increase. 
 
Episode 1: 
July 1953 – May 1954 
Lowest rate: 12% 
Highest rate: 32% 
 
 

14 

 

Episode 2: 
April 1956 – January 1957 
Lowest rate: 14% 
Highest rate: 28% 
 
 
Episode 3: 
February 1958 – August 1959 
Lowest rate: 4% 
Highest rate: 42% 
 
 
Episode 4: 
February 1961 – April 1964 
Lowest rate: 28% 
Highest rate: 94% 
Episode 5: 
November 1973 – December 1974 
Lowest rate: 15% 
Highest rate: 35% 
 
 
Episode 6: 
December 1975 - January 1977 
Lowest rate: 29% 
Highest rate: 47% 
 
 
Episode 7: 
June 1979 – March 1981 
Lowest rate: 45% 
Highest rate: 121% 
 
 

Episode 8: 
February 1983 – May 1984 
Lowest rate: 104% 
Highest rate: 236% 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

15 

Annex 2: Figures and Tables 
 
Figure 1 – External Shocks and Inflation Upsurge (1951-1964) 

Source: author’s elaboration from Ipeadata. 
 
Figure 2 – External Shocks and Inflation Upsurge (1964-74) 

Source: author’s elaboration from Ipeadata. 
Figure 3 – External Shocks and Inflation Upsurge (1974-85) 

 

 

 

Source: author’s elaboration from Ipeadata. 

 

16 

0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%1951.011951.061951.111952.041952.091953.021953.071953.121954.051954.101955.031955.081956.011956.061956.111957.041957.091958.021958.071958.121959.051959.101960.031960.081961.011961.061961.111962.041962.091963.021963.071963.121964.051964.10ExchangeRate DevaluationExchangeRate DevaluationExchangeRate Devaluation0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%1964.011964.061964.111965.041965.091966.021966.071966.121967.051967.101968.031968.081969.011969.061969.111970.041970.091971.021971.071971.121972.051972.101973.031973.081974.011974.061974.11Commodity Shock0%50%100%150%200%250%1974.011974.061974.111975.041975.091976.021976.071976.121977.051977.101978.031978.081979.011979.061979.111980.041980.091981.021981.071981.121982.051982.101983.031983.081984.011984.061984.111985.041985.09Effective Exchange Rate DevaluationCommodity Shock+Exchange Rate DevaluationExchange Rate Devaluation 
Table 1 – Unit root tests (exchange rate) 
 

 
Table 2 – Unit root tests (inflation rate) 
 

 
Table 3 – VAR Lag Order Selection Criteria 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

17 

Test statistic1%5%10%ADF-17,14-3,98-3,42-3,13ZA-18,44-5,57-5,08-4,82LS-9,20-6,42-5,65-5,32Critical valuesTest statistic1%5%10%ADF-3,48-3,98-3,42-3,13ZA-6,26-5,57-5,08-4,82LS-4,98-6,42-5,65-5,32Critical valuesVAR Lag Order Selection CriteriaEndogenous variables: IGPDI CAMBIO Exogenous variables: C Sample: 1951M01 1985M12Included observations: 408 LagLogLLRFPEAICSCHQ0-2408,48NA 464,2111,8211,8411,821-2151,31510,57134,1910,5810,6310,602-2132,0238,11124,5010,5010,6010,543-2115,2732,92116,9610,4410,58*10,49*4-2108,7912,67115,5510,4310,6010,505-2106,903,67116,7510,4410,6510,526-2100,7811,85115,5510,4310,6810,537-2099,512,44117,1110,4410,7310,568-2096,236,29117,5210,4410,7810,579-2093,894,46118,4910,4510,8210,6010-2080,8824,68113,3710,4110,8210,5711-2080,370,97115,3410,4210,8810,6012-2069,0721,21*111,29*10,39*10,8810,58 * indicates lag order selected by the criterion LR: sequential modified LR test statistic (each test at 5% level) FPE: Final prediction error AIC: Akaike information criterion SC: Schwarz information criterion HQ: Hannan-Quinn information criterionTable 4 – Vector Autoregression Estimates 
 

 
 
 

 

 

18 

 Vector Autoregression Estimates Sample (adjusted): 1952M01 1985M12t-statistics in [ ] Included observations: 408 after adjustmentsIGPDICAMBIOIGPDICAMBIOIGPDI(-1)0,37-0,05CAMBIO(-4)0,03-0,02[ 7.4][-0.2][ 2.6][-0.4]IGPDI(-2)-0,020,50CAMBIO(-5)0,01-0,05[-0.4][ 1.7][ 0.7][-1.0]IGPDI(-3)0,120,19CAMBIO(-6)0,030,01[ 2.2][ 0.7][ 2.6][ 0.1]IGPDI(-4)-0,020,05CAMBIO(-7)0,01-0,07[-0.3][ 0.2][ 0.5][-1.3]IGPDI(-5)-0,04-0,08CAMBIO(-8)0,02-0,03[-0.6][-0.3][ 2.4][-0.5]IGPDI(-6)0,05-0,08CAMBIO(-9)0,02-0,05[ 0.9][-0.3][ 1.6][-0.9]IGPDI(-7)-0,05-0,18CAMBIO(-10)0,000,19[-0.9][-0.6][ 0.4][ 3.7]IGPDI(-8)-0,050,25CAMBIO(-11)0,000,00[-0.9][ 0.8][ 0.5][-0.1]IGPDI(-9)-0,030,12CAMBIO(-12)0,01-0,09[-0.6][ 0.4][ 1.3][-1.7]IGPDI(-10)0,09-0,29C-0,382,68[ 1.6][-1.0][-1.5][ 1.9]IGPDI(-11)-0,07-0,14TT0,01-0,01[-1.3][-0.5][ 3.9][-0.5]IGPDI(-12)0,200,38DC-1,33-0,74[ 3.8][ 1.4][-3.9][-0.4]CAMBIO(-1)0,020,08DTC-0,010,00[ 1.7][ 1.5][-2.3][ 02]CAMBIO(-2)-0,010,00DTI0,020,06[-0.6][-0.1][ 2.8][ 1.2]CAMBIO(-3)0,00-0,06 R-squared0,810,19[-0.1][-1.2] Adj. R-squared0,790,13 F-statistic56,153,19Roots of Characteristic PolynomialFirst root (Modulus)0,9260,907 No root lies outside the unit circle.0,897 VAR satisfies the stability condition.0,897Table 5 – VAR Granger Causality/Block Exogeneity Wald Tests 

 
Table 6 – Residuals Tests 
 

 

 
Table 7 - System SUR/Wald Tests 

 

 

 

 

19 

VAR Granger Causality/Block Exogeneity Wald TestsDependent variable: IGPDIExcludedChi-sqdfProb.CAMBIO24,17120,02Dependent variable: CAMBIOExcludedChi-sqdfProb.IGPDI11,12120,52Endogenous variables: IGPDI CAMBIO Exogenous variables: C TT DC DTC DTILag specification: 1 to 12LM TestWhite TestLagProbs (chi-square, 4 df)Joint Test (Chi-sq, 165 df)10,10Prob.60,250,00120,23Individual components Chi-sq(55)DependentProb.Jarque-Berares1*res10,00dfProb.res2*res20,9540,00res2*res10,03System SUR/Wald TestsDependent variable: IGPDIExcludedChi-sqdfProb.CAMBIO26,02120,01Dependent variable: CAMBIOExcludedChi-sqdfProb.IGPDI11,97120,45System Weighted Least Squares/Wald TestsDependent variable: IGPDIExcludedChi-sqdfProb.CAMBIO26,02120,01Dependent variable: CAMBIOExcludedChi-sqdfProb.IGPDI11,97120,45