FOLHA DE ROSTO 

 

Lucas’s Early Research in the 1960’s 

 

Danilo Freitas Ramalho da Silva 

 

Universidade de São Paulo 

 

Área 1: História do Pensamento Econômico e Metodologia 

 

RESUMO 
Este  artigo  constrói  uma  narrativa  sobre  os  primeiros  trabalhos  de  Robert  E.  Lucas  Jr.,  no 
final dos anos 1960, que culminaram na modelagem e no teste da hipótese da taxa natural de 
desemprego.  A  modelagem  e  o  teste  da  hipótese  da  taxa  natural  de  desemprego  de  Lucas 
podem ser encontrados, respectivamente, em dois artigos: “Expectations and the Neutrality of 
Money”  (Lucas,  1972a)  e  “Econometric  Testing  of  the  Natural  Rate  Hypothesis”  (Lucas, 
1972b). Esses artigos são a síntese das duas áreas de pesquisa de Lucas à época; uma sobre o 
comportamento do mercado de trabalho e outra sobre o investimento ótimo das firmas. Essa 
síntese  mudou  a  forma  como  a  hipótese  da  taxa  natural  de  desemprego  foi  originalmente 
elaborada  por  Friedman  (1968)  e  Phelps  (1967,  1968),  ao  modelá-la  em  um  arcabouço  de 
equilíbrio  geral  com  expectativas  racionais  e  testá-la  como  uma  restrição  à  relação  entre 
parâmetros de política e de comportamento econômicos. A agenda de pesquisa desenvolvida 
por Lucas no final dos anos 1960 foi resultado de sua interação com Phelps e com Prescott, 
guiada  pela  sua  abordagem  pragmática  de  equilíbrio  da  economia.  Phelps  sugeriu 
explicitamente  uma  abordagem  de  equilíbrio  geral  ao  modelo  de  mercado  de  trabalho  de 
Lucas, enquanto que Prescott o ajudou a lidar com a hipótese das expectativas racionais. 
 
ABSTRACT 
This  paper  builds  a  narrative  on  the  early  work  of  Robert  E.  Lucas  Jr.,  in  the  late  1960’s, 
which culminated in the modeling and testing of the natural rate of unemployment hypothesis. 
Lucas’s  modeling  and testing of the  natural rate of unemployment hypothesis can  be  found, 
respectively, in two papers:  “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money” (Lucas, 1972a) and 
“Econometric Testing of the Natural Rate Hypothesis” (Lucas, 1972b). These papers are the 
synthesis of the two branches of Lucas’s research at that time; one on labor market behavior 
and  other  on  optimal  investment  by  firms.  This  synthesis  changed  the  way  in  which  the 
natural  rate  of  unemployment  was  originally  elaborated  by  Friedman  (1968)  and  Phelps 
(1967,  1968),  by  modeling  it  in  a  general  equilibrium  framework  with  rational  expectations 
and by testing it as a restriction on the relationship between economic policy parameters and 
behavioral parameters. Lucas’s research agenda synthesis in the late 1960’s was the result of 
his  close  interaction  with  Phelps  and  Prescott,  backed  up  by  his  pragmatic  equilibrium 
approach to economics. Phelps explicitly suggested a general equilibrium approach to Lucas’s 
labor  market  modeling,  while  Prescott  helped  him  in  dealing  with  the  rational  expectations 
hypothesis. 
 
Palavras-chave: Robert Lucas, Edmund Phelps, Edward Prescott, taxa natural de 
desemprego, expectativas racionais. 
 
Key words: Robert Lucas, Edmund Phelps, Edward Prescott, natural rate of unemployment, 
rational expectations. 
 
Classificação JEL: B22 
 

 

1 

 

Lucas’s Early Research in the 1960’s  
 
1. Introduction 

This  paper  builds  a  narrative  on  the  early  work  of  Robert  E.  Lucas  Jr.,  in  the  late 
1960’s,  which  culminated  in  the  modeling  and  testing  of  the  natural  rate  of  unemployment 
hypothesis. Lucas’s modeling and testing of the natural rate of unemployment hypothesis can 
be  found,  respectively,  in  two  papers:  “Expectations  and  the  Neutrality  of  Money”  (Lucas, 
1972a)  and  “Econometric  Testing  of  the  Natural  Rate  Hypothesis”  (Lucas,  1972b).  The 
natural rate of unemployment is a concept of major relevance in modern macroeconomics. It 
is part of the theoretical framework that guided scientific research and economic policy from 
the  last  third  of  the  twentieth  century  onwards.  The  idea  that  the  long-run  level  of 
unemployment  is  the  result  of  real  economic  forces  and,  thus,  cannot  be  determined  by 
aggregate demand economic policy is older than this (cf. Simons 1936, 15), but had a specific 
momentum in the postwar economic literature. 

Milton Friedman (1968) and Edmund Phelps (1967,  1968) are usually considered the 
proponents of the concept, while Robert Lucas is supposed to have given it a specific  model 
(Lucas,  1972a)  and  a  specific  test  (Lucas,  1972b).  These  three  Nobel  Prize  laureates  in 
economics mention the discussion over the natural rate of unemployment as a relevant part of 
their  researches  in  their  Nobel  Prize  lectures.  Friedman  (1977)  tells  his  story  about  the 
relation between inflation and unemployment in modern economics placing the natural rate of 
unemployment  in  its  center.  Phelps  (2007:  545)  mentions  the  natural  rate of  unemployment 
while  describing  his  research  in  the  1960’s  and  1970’s,  while  Lucas  (1996:  671)  also 
mentions  the  natural  rate  hypothesis  as  one  of  his  concerns  in  the  late  1960’s  and  early 
1970’s. 

In  his  Nobel  Prize  lecture,  Lucas  (1996:  671)  gives  equal  credit  to  Friedman  (1968) 
and  Phelps  (1968)  for  the  formulation  of  the  natural  rate  of  unemployment  hypothesis  by 
referring  to  it  as  the  “Friedman-Phelps  natural  rate  hypothesis”,  but  claims  that  his 
introduction  of  rational  expectations  was  crucial  to  model  and  to  test  it  correctly,  since  the 
econometric  tests  that  had  rejected  the  “Friedman-Phelps  hypothesis”  in  the  late  1960’s 
depended on  “irrational”  expectations. I will show how Lucas was developing two different 
research  agendas  in  the  1960’s,  one  on  labor  market  behavior  and  the  other  on  optimal 
investment by firms, that led him to model the natural rate of unemployment hypothesis in a 
general  equilibrium  with  rational  expectations  framework  and  to  test  it  as  a  relationship 
between  economic  policy  parameters  and  behavioral  parameters.  I  will  argue  two  things. 
First, that  Phelps was Lucas’s  interlocutor in the  labor market research agenda and played  a 
fundamental  role  in  this  branch  of  Lucas’s  research  by  suggesting  to  him  the  adoption  of  a 
general  equilibrium  approach.  Second,  that  Edward  Prescott  was  Lucas’s  partner  in  the 
optimal  investment  research  agenda  and  played  a  crucial  role  in  Lucas’s  adoption  of  the 
rational expectations hypothesis as a forecasting rule for price formation by debating its actual 
theoretical meaning. 
 
2. Lucas’s labor market research agenda in the late 1960’s 

Lucas’s first work on labor market was his model with Rapping tested for the U.S., for 
the period from 1929 to 1965, which appeared in the September/October of 1969  issue of the 
Journal  of  Political  Economy.  Lucas  and  Rapping  (1969a)  tried  to  reconcile  the  apparent 
contradiction between an elastic labor supply in the short run with an inelastic labor supply in 
the  long run  by  building a  model that described the dynamics  from short run equilibrium to 
long run equilibrium  in the  labor market. The authors also  made an effort to understand the 
empirical negative correlation between inflation and unemployment – the Phillips curve – in a 

 

2 

purely supply-demand  framework, leaving aside  other possible explanations to this  negative 
correlation, such as collective bargaining.1  
 
The model proposed by  Lucas and Rapping (1969a) assumes that the labor market is 
always  in short run equilibrium,  as a result of  simultaneous workers’ utility  maximization – 
supply of labor - and firm’s profit maximization – demand for labor. The workers form their 
expectations  about  future  prices  adaptively,  through  a  weighed  mean  of  the  expectation  of 
future prices made in the previous period and the prices of the current period. Bearing in mind 
that  the  prices  tend  to  some  kind  of  long  run  normal  level,  the  workers  incorporate  these 
expectations  into  their  labor  supply  function.  Thus,  workers  raise  their  labor  supply  during 
inflationary periods, when the current price level is higher than the normal, because they think 
that  the  price  level  will  be  lower  in  the  future  –  go  back  to  its  normal  level.  This  kind  of 
behavior creates a positive correlation between inflation and employment in the short run. It is 
only in the long run, when future prices’ expectations are equal to current prices, that workers 
do not raise their labor supply and there is no tradeoff between inflation and unemployment at 
all. 

It  is  no surprise that Lucas and Rapping’s (1969a:  739) conclusion  is  very similar to 
the ones of Friedman (1968) and Phelps (1967, 1968), that the negative correlation  between 
inflation and unemployment  - the Phillips curve  – is  just a short  run phenomenon and when 
inflation  is  correctly  anticipated  the  rate  of  unemployment  reaches  its  long  run  equilibrium 
value, in a way that economic policy becomes ineffective in determining it. 

Before finishing the paper, however, Lucas and Rapping (1969a: 748) call attention to 
two fundamental questions that should be taken into account in order to better understand the 
labor market behavior, but were not contemplated in the paper. The first is the analysis of the 
labor  market  behavior  in  a  general  equilibrium  framework  and  the  second  is  the  process  by 
which price  expectations  are revised. These two questions would  become the centerpiece of 
Lucas’s  (1972a)  modeling  of  the  natural  rate  of  unemployment  hypothesis  in  his 
“Expectations  and  the  Neutrality  of  Money”.  The  issue  about  price  expectations  would  be 
tackled  with  the  introduction  of  rational  expectations,  an  idea  that  Lucas  was  developing  in 
another  branch  of  his  research  agenda,  with  Edward  Prescott.  The  general  equilibrium 
approach  to the tradeoff  between  inflation  and  unemployment  would  be  strongly  stimulated 
by  Phelps’s  comments  on  Lucas  and  Rapping  (1969a).  I  will  argue  that  the  general 
equilibrium  approach  to the tradeoff  between  inflation  and  unemployment  was  suggested  to 
Lucas by Phelps and it was crucial for modeling the natural rate of unemployment hypothesis 
in Lucas (1972a). 2 

Lucas and Rapping (1969a)  cite the works of  Friedman (1968) and Phelps (1968) as 
references for their research and show personal gratitude to Phelps for his comments in early 
versions  of  it.  To  Friedman  (1968),  the  authors  attribute  the  idea  that  there  is  no  long-run 
trade-off  between  unemployment  and  inflation  (p.  738).  To  Phelps  (1968),  they  attribute  a 
                                                             
1 More than ten years after the publication of the paper,  Lucas (1984: 35-36) recollected how he came up with 
the  idea  of  building  a  purely  supply-demand model  for  the  labor market  and how  he  developed  this idea  with 
Rapping’s  assistance:  “The  labor  part  of  macroeconomic  models,  in  those  days,  was  pretty  disgraceful  […] 
Rapping  and  I  knew  some  labor  economics,  and  it’s  hard  to  get  up  in  front  of  a  class  and  talk  nonsense 
deliberately.  So  we  were  trying  to  cook  up  simple  supply  and  demand  models  which  would  fit  what  you  see 
happening over business cycles. We got interested enough in that so that we thought we’d pursue it as a research 
topic […] In the tradition of Friedmand (sic) and Lewis it is hard to think about labor markets without supply 
and demand. You have to tell how wages and employment arise from shifts in supply and demand curves […] 
We were really developing a supply and demand model for employment and wages. Unemployment gets tacked 
on a side story. We introduced a Phillips curve to make contact with macroeconomic stuff. We wanted to make 
sure that the labor supply piece didn’t assume away business fluctuations”. 

2  The  movement  towards  general  equilibrium  analysis  in  postwar  economics  comes  from  the  neoclassical 
synthesis,  through  models  that  tried  to  incorporate  aspects  such  as  unemployment,  money  and  time  into  the 
general  equilibrium  framework  (Weintraub,  1985).  We  can  say  that  Lucas’s  and  Phelps’s  researches  were 
following this movement. 

3 

 

contribution to the Phillips curve debate in which the motivation is similar to the original ones 
by  Phillips  (1958)  and  Lipsey  (1960),  namely,  the  building  of  an  out  of  equilibrium 
adjustment function for the labor market (p. 722, footnote 2). I will show that although Lucas 
was aware of both Friedman’s and Phelps’s contributions to the literature, it is only with the 
last that he was actually interacting with. 

We  can  start  investigating  the  interaction  between  Lucas  and  Phelps  through  an 
emblematic passage of a Lucas’s interview in the 1990’s, where he recollects the role played 
by Phelps in his research about labor market in the late 1960’s: 
 
 

[Lucas:] My  most influential paper on ‘Expectations and the neutrality of 
money’  [Lucas,  1972a]  came  out  of  a  conference  that  Phelps  organized  where 
Rapping  and  I  were  invited  to  talk  about  our  Phillips  curve  work.  Phelps 
convinced  us  that  we  needed  some  kind  of  general  equilibrium  setting.  Rapping 
and I were  just  focusing on  labor supply decisions. Phelps kept on  insisting that 
these labor suppliers are situated in some economy, and that you have to consider 
the whole general equilibrium looks like, not  just what the labor supply decision 
looks like. That’s what motivated me. [Snowdon and Vane 1998: 126]. 

 
 
 
The  first written contact between  Lucas and Phelps that can  be  found  in the Lucas’s 
archives  is  a  letter  from  the  last  to  the  former,  dated  from  November  17th,  1967,  in  which 
Phelps shows interest exactly  in the work Lucas and Rapping were developing  on American 
labor market.  3 Phelps anticipates and asks  for a first draft of the paper, when  completed. In 
his answer, dated from December 6th, 1967,4 Lucas did  not refer to his paper with Rapping. 
Even  though,  in  a  letter  dated  from  December  12th,  19675,  Lucas  was  invited  by  Phelps  to 
give a talk about his  work with  Rapping  in a  seminar  in the University of Pennsylvania, on 
February 9th, 1968. The title of the talk would be “An Aggregative Model of the U.S. Labor 
Market, 1929-65”, according to a letter from Lucas to Phelps dated from January 18th, 1968.6 
On April 4th, 1968, two months after the talk, Lucas sent a written version of his paper with 
Rapping to Phelps. The letter also contains some lines of thankfulness for Phelps’s comments 
and for his intriguing qualification of their model as “fascinating”: 
 

Dear Ned: 
Enclosed  is  Leonard’s  and  my  labor  market  paper.  We  appreciate  your  plug, 
although the adjective “fascinating” which you apply to our model is an obvious 
hedge. Still, I guess I prefer it to ‘ludicrous’ or ‘bizarre’. 
I doubt if any of your objections will be withdrawn on seeing the written version, 
but some of the material is more carefully developed than was possible orally. We 
would  appreciate  any  further  comments.  [Lucas  Papers,  Box  1,  file  folder 
“1968”]. 

 
 

The qualification of Lucas and Rapping’s model as “fascinating” is intriguing because 
although Phelps could be somehow fascinated by the model, it seems that he had substantial 
objections to it, as mentioned by Lucas in the letter. So, more than fascinated, we should think 

                                                             
3 Robert E. Lucas Jr. Papers, 1960-2004 and undated. Rare Book, Manuscript, and Special Collections Library, 
Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA., Box 1, file folder “1967”. 
4 Lucas Papers, Box 1, file folder “1967”. 
5 Lucas Papers, Box 1, file folder “1967”. 
6 Lucas Papers, Box 1, file folder “1968”. 

4 

 

of Phelps as someone who is skeptical about Lucas and Rapping’s model of the labor market. 
That  was  the  last  correspondence  with  Phelps  found  in  Lucas’s  archives  before  the 
publication  of  his  paper  with  Rapping  in  the  Journal  of  Political  Economy,  in  the 
September/October of 1969 edition. 

However, in the meantime, in January of 1969, Phelps coordinated at the University of 
Pennsylvania  the  conference  mentioned  in  Lucas’s  cited  recollection,  where  Lucas  had  the 
opportunity to present his paper with Rapping. In this same conference, which  gave  origin  to 
the  book  “Microeconomic  Foundations  of  Employment  and  Inflation  Theory”  (Phelps  e  al.,  1970), 
Phelps also presented his paper about labor market (Phelps, 1968, 1970). There is a passage in 
Lucas’s professional  memoir (Lucas, 2001: 19) that mentions the book that came out of this 
conference, which goes in the same direction of Lucas’s recollection quoted before and serves 
as  another  indication  that  Phelps  was  responsible  for  motivating  Lucas  in  placing  his  labor 
market model into a general equilibrium framework: 
 
 

In  the  introduction  to  the  Phelps  volume,  Phelps  had  written  that 
‘…perhaps Lucas and Rapping are 180 degrees to the truth’, by which  he  meant 
that  perhaps  we  should  have  emphasized  income  effects  in  our  theory  of 
employment  fluctuations  rather  than  the  substitution  effects  we  did  emphasize. 
[Lucas, 2001: 19]. 

 
 
The  quotation  “perhaps  Lucas  and  Rapping  are  180  degrees  to  the  truth”  cannot  be 
found in the introduction of the Phelps volume (Phelps et al., 1970), but Lucas does actually 
refer  to  a  Phelp’s  “180  degrees  to  the  truth”  remark  in  a  letter  addressed  to  Phelps,  on 
November, 7th, 1969, only ten months after the conference at the University of Pennsylvania. 7 
More than just referring to the “180 degrees to the truth” remark, Lucas already mentions his 
new paper “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money” (Lucas, 1972a) – attached to the letter 
-  and  discusses  both  the  adoptions  of  the  rational  expectations  hypothesis  and  the  general 
equilibrium approach with Phelps: 

 
 

Dear Ned: 
The two enclosed papers are in a sense ‘spin offs’ from the conference in 

January. I would appreciate any comments you may have on either. 

The paper ‘Expectations…’ [Lucas, 1972a] is, in part, an attempt to get at 
your ‘180 degrees to the truth’ remark on Leonard`s and my first paper [Lucas and 
Rapping, 1969a]. It didn`t seem to me possible to get at the question at the level of 
trying to decide which expectations hypothesis is most ‘reasonable’. So I tried to 
push  the  question  back  to  assumptions  on  the  nature  of  the  underlying 
disturbances which create the forecasting problem in the first place. 

to  be 

The  problem  seems 

that  of  getting  monetary  expansion 
systematically linked, in fact or in people’s minds, with real demand changes. In a 
first  attempt,  I  assumed  that  money  entered  only  to  finance  real  government 
expenditures  (e.g.  wars).  To  get  a  plausible  positive  inflation-real  output 
relationship out of such a scheme, it is necessary to let income effects dominate – 
as  you  proposed  –  and  to  let  expectations  be  sort  of  extrapolative.  That  is,  the 
story  goes:  ‘inflation’  implies  ‘high  government  demand’  implies  (due  to 
autocorrelation)  ‘high  future  government  demand’  implies  ‘capital  loss  to  labor 
suppliers  and  money  holders’  implies  (due  to  income  effect)  ‘increased  labor 

                                                             
7 Lucas Papers, Box 1, file folder “1969”. 

 

5 

supply’.  The  difficulty  with  this  scheme  is  psychological:  people  perceive 
expansionary  periods  as  bad,  depressions  as  good.  A  second  problem  is  the  fact 
that  most  observed  cycles  occurred  when  government  demand  was  too  small  a 
piece of the total to be a plausible triggering force. 

So  this  formulation  was  scrapped  in  favor  of  the  one  described  in  the 

enclosed paper. 

 
 

Lucas  says,  explicitly,  that  the  paper  “Expectations  and  the  Neutrality  of  Money” 
(Lucas, 1972a) is a result of the discussion established in the conference organized by Phelps, 
in January of 1969, at the University of Pennsylvania.  The paper was,  indeed, an attempt to 
make the “180 degrees move to the truth” proposed by Phelps. This move would be a change 
in the explanation given to the empirical evidence of the positive correlation between inflation 
and  employment:  from  a  labor  market  model  in  which  labor  supply  increases  with  inflation 
because  workers  believe  that  their  work  is  better  paid  today  than  tomorrow,  to  a  general 
equilibrium  model  in  which  labor  supply  increases  in  inflationary  periods  because  agents 
cannot identify the source of the rise in the price of their goods, due to information problems, 
so  they  cannot  distinguish  between  a  favorable  change  in  relative  prices  and  a  rise  in  the 
general price level. 
It is a clear signal of the difference between Lucas’s relationship with Phelps and with 
 
Friedman that a  letter was sent to the  last with,  apparently, the  same paper attached (Lucas, 
1972a),  in  the  same  day  of  the  letter  sent  to  Phelps.8  If  on  the  one  hand  Lucas  discusses 
technical aspects of the paper with Phelps through  a whole page, on the other hand  he uses 
just a line and a half to ask for Friedman’s comments:9 
 
 

Dear Professor Friedman: 
I  would  be  grateful  for  any  comments  you  may  have  on  the  enclosed 

paper. 

 
 

There is no answer from any of them in Lucas’s archives and there is no reference to 
any kind of Lucas’s correspondence in the electronic finding aid of Milton Friedman Papers at 
Hoover  Institution.  Despite  the  lack  of  feedback  from  Phelps  and  from  Friedman  on 
“Expectations and the Neutrality of Money” (Lucas, 1972a), Lucas’s archives give us material 
to reconstruct his other branch of research in the late 1960’s, the one shared with Prescott, on 
optimal  investment  and  rational  expectations,  which  is  also  crucial  to  understand  the 
modeling of that paper. 
 
3. The rational expectations hypothesis in Lucas’s research in the late 1960’s 

The  first  Lucas’s  published  paper  in  which  he  refers  to  the  rational  expectations 
hypothesis  is  his  “Adjustment  Costs  and  the  Theory  of  Supply”,  in  the  Journal  of  Political 
Economy, in August of 1967. Lucas (1967: 323, footnote 4) presents Muth’s (1961) rational 
expectations - without actually using it in his model - as an alternative to the hypothesis that 
the  actual  price  level  would  be  maintained  constant  in  the  future,  what  he  calls  “static 
expectations”. With the introduction of rational expectations, the future price level would be 
correctly  anticipated  by  firms,  instead  of  just  being  constant.  In  the  same  footnote,  Lucas 

                                                             
8 Lucas Papers, Box 1, file folder “1969”. 
9 The difference in treatment to Phelps (“Ned”) and to Friedman (“Professor Friedman”) indicates not only that 
Lucas was closer to the first than to the second, but also a generational divide. 

6 

 

refers  to  his  unpublished  paper  “Optimal  Investment  with  Rational  Expectations”  (Lucas, 
1966) for further appraisal on the adoption of the rational expectations hypothesis. 

“Optimal Investment with Rational Expectations” (Lucas, 1966) was a development of 
the first two sections of a paper that Lucas presented in a symposium organized by Hirofumi 
Uzawa,  at  the  University  of  Chicago,  in  August  of  1966.10  In  the  version  presented  at  the 
symposium, Lucas made two different analyses of optimal investment by firms: one for firms 
located in an industry with a dominant firm and the other for a firm located in a competitive 
industry. In both of them, he assumed only “static” expectations by the firms. However, in the 
updated  version  that  became  the  unpublished  Carnegie  Tech  working  paper  “Optimal 
Investment  with  Rational  Expectation”  (Lucas,  1966),  the  analysis  was  made  under  both 
“static” and “rational” expectations, but only for the competitive industry. 

According to Lucas’s professional memoir (Lucas, 2001: 15-16), the discussion about 
the unpublished paper “Optimal Investment with Rational Expectations” (Lucas, 1966) that he 
established  with  Edward  Prescott  during  the  following  years  would  give  origin  to  the  first 
published  paper  in  which  Lucas  –  with  Prescott  –  used,  indeed,  the  rational  expectations 
hypothesis in a model: “Investment under Uncertainty”, of Econometrica, from September of 
1971  (Lucas  and  Prescott,  1971).  In  this  paper,  the  authors  determine  the  behavior,  through 
time, of investment, output and prices in a competitive industry with a stochastic demand. The 
rational  expectations  hypothesis  implies  that  actual  and  anticipated  prices  have  the  same 
probability distribution. This way of modeling expectations must be interpreted as a technical 
device employed by the authors to deal with time series data and forecasts, putting aside the 
discussion  about  the  process  by  which  firms  translate  their  current  information  into  prices 
forecast (Lucas and Prescott, 1971: 660). 

One  have  to  have  in  mind  that  Prescott  entered  the  Graduate  School  of  Industrial 
Administration  at  Carnegie  Institute of  Technology  as  a  graduate  student  in  1963,  the  same 
year that Lucas arrived there as an assistant professor. Prescott was, actually, Lucas’s student 
in  the  graduate  course  of  capital  theory.  Lucas  was  also  a  member  of  Prescott’s  PhD 
dissertation  committee,  in  1967.  It  means  that  Lucas  and  Prescott  were  part  of  the  same 
academic  environment  for  five  years.  In  this  environment,  they  were  exposed  to  Muth’s 
(1961) rational expectation hypothesis and got to know each other’s research, having Muth as 
a senior colleague.11 In 1967, Prescott was already an assistant professor at the University of 
Pennsylvania and from this period on we can reconstruct his cooperation with Lucas through 
their correspondence, found in Lucas’s archives. 

The first written contact between Lucas and Prescott that can be found in the Lucas’s 
archives,  in  which they discuss their researches,  is a  letter from the  last to the  former dated 
from March 16th, 1968.12 Prescott mentions the talk they had at the faculty club of University 
of Pennsylvania, the  month  before, when Lucas  first presented his paper on  labor market to 
Phelps. He shows interest in working on the still unsolved question outlined by Lucas, on the 
behavior of an industry in which there was a dominant firm. Lucas wrote back on March 22th, 
1968, agreeing in pursuing the dominant firm research further with Prescott. He enclosed two 
papers, one with the dominant firm model and other with the competitive industry model. The 
first is the unfinished one he had presented at the conference organized by Hirofumi Uzawa, 
in  August  of  1966,  in  which  he  used  only  static  expectations,  while  the  second  is  the 
unpublished Carnegie Tech working paper “Optimal Investment with Rational Expectations”, 
where  he  uses  both  static  and  rational  expectations.  At  that  moment,  the  most  important 
question for Lucas and Prescott was to solve the model for the industry with a dominant firm, 
while the expectations hypothesis underlying price formation seemed secondary. 
                                                             
10 Letter to Uzawa dated from October 28th, 1966, in Lucas Papers, Box 1, file folder “1966”. 
11 In Hoover and Young (2011), Lucas says that, by the time he entered GSIA, he already knew  about Muth’s 
(1961)  paper.  He  also  mentions  that  Muth  was  a  shy  person  and  that  talking  to  him  was  somehow  awkward, 
since he could be easily pushed around in a conversation, although he knew more than anyone. 
12 Lucas Papers, Box 1, file folder “1968”. 

7 

 

According to Lucas (2001: 15), the dominant firm problem was never solved and had 
to  be  abandoned.  On  the  other  hand,  the  model  of  the  competitive  industry  with  rational 
expectations of “Optimal Investment with Rational Expectations” developed into “Investment 
under  Uncertainty”  and  brought  the  process  of  expectations’  formation  to  the  center  of  the 
discussion.  In  a  letter  addressed  to  Lucas,  dated  from  August  22nd,  1968,  Prescott  refers  to 
“Investment under Uncertainty”, saying that the paper was overall well received at the 1968 
Meeting  of  the  Econometric  Society,  in  Boulder,  Colorado,  but  the  rational  expectations 
hypothesis  had been  motive of conflict among the participants.13  Some of them thought that 
perfect  forecast  in  price  distribution  was  an  extremely  strong  assumption.  So,  Prescott 
suggested  to  Lucas,  in  the  letter,  that  either  they  could  use  Muth’s  definition  of  rational 
expectations to defend the hypothesis or they could argue that people had eventually learned 
about  the  true  distribution  of  prices  after  participating  in  the  market  for  a  sufficient  long 
period.14 

In a letter addressed to Prescott, dated from December 2nd, 1968, Lucas mentions the 
effect caused by the presentation of the same paper in a symposium on uncertainty and capital 
theory,  in Yale,  in  the  end of November of 1968.15 Once again, the adoption of the rational 
expectations  hypothesis  had  been  motive  of  protest  by  the  participants  of  the  seminar. 
According to Lucas, most of the people thought that the hypothesis was  “unreasonable” and 
that they were not being “honest” by postulating equilibrium at each point in time. Basically, 
they wanted to know how firms obtained information to form expectations. 

Nevertheless, these protests did not seem to have affected Lucas’s disposition to keep 
using rational expectations hypothesis in “Investment under Uncertainty” (Lucas and Prescott, 
1971)  and,  later, in  “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money”  (Lucas, 1972a). As we  saw 
from his long letter to Phelps, on November 7th, 1969 – quoted before -, Lucas was not really 
interested  in  discussing  the  reasonability  of  the  rational  expectations  hypothesis  in  realistic 
terms.  He  had  a  more  pragmatic  and  instrumentalist  approach  to  the  use  of  the  rational 
expectations hypothesis. He was interested in building equilibrium models and in dealing with 
forecasting  problems  raised  by  the  adoption  of  adaptive  expectations.  With  adaptive 
expectations,  actual  and  future  prices  would  have  very  little  chance  to  have  the  same 
distribution,  what  would  make  impossible  for  econometric  forecasting.  The  adoption  of 
rational  expectations  hypothesis  assures  that  actual  and  future  prices  have  the  same 
distribution and, hence, allows for econometric forecasting. 
 
4. The merging of Lucas’s researches in the late 1960’s 

On  October  22th,  1968,  in  the  meantime  of  the  discussion  about the  adoption  of  the 
rational expectation hypothesis in his paper with Prescott, Lucas submitted for publication his 
second  paper  on  labor  market  -  with  Rapping.  The  paper  titled  “Price  Expectations  and  the 
Phillips  Curve”  (Lucas  and  Rapping,  1969b)  was  developed  immediately  after  the  first  one 
(Lucas  and  Rapping, 1969a), but was published  before  it,  in  June of 1969,  in the  American 
Economic Review. Lucas and Rapping (1969b) tested their Phillips curve still with adaptive 
expectations to the period between 1904 and 1965, for the U.S.. In this paper, as in their first 
one,  there  are  references  to  Friedman  (1968)  and  Phelps  (1968),  with  special  thanks  to 
Phelps’s comments on early versions of it. But what is most striking is that three months and a 
half  before  the  submission  of  the  paper,  in  a  letter  addressed  to  Rapping,  on  July  8th,  1968, 

                                                             
13 Lucas Papers, Box 1, file folder “1968”. 
14  In the  published  version  of  the  paper, they  chose  to  use  Muth’s  (1961)  definition  to  justify  the  adoption  of 
rational expectations hypothesis (Lucas and Prescott, 1971, p. 660, footnote 4 and p.664, footnote 9). 
15 Lucas Papers, Box 1, file folder “1968”. 

8 

 

Lucas  had already  shown  his  total  dissatisfaction  with the results obtained  from the Phillips 
curve estimation with adaptive expectations: 1617 

 
 

I  guess  I  am  now  convinced  that  our  original  results  (with  lagged  prices 
and  unemployment)  don’t  mean  anything  –  except  possibly  as  part  of  a  general 
argument  to  the  effect  that  estimating  Phillips  curve  is  more  complex  than  is 
generally recognized. The newest results indicate that trying to account for effects 
on unemployment other than expectations simply by postulating serial correlation 
doesn’t  mean  much either. This would  seem to me to add urgency to the search 
for  a  model  which  incorporates  sources  of  persistence  in  unemployment  other 
than the persistence of expectations. 

 
 
 
Despite  Lucas’s  complete  frustration  with  the  results,  the  authors  decided  to  submit 
the  paper  and  were  emphatic  about  the  ineffectiveness  of  the  Phillips  curve  as  a  monetary 
policy weapon (p. 349). However, Lucas and Rapping’s (1969b: 344) strongest criticism was 
really  about  the  use  of  adaptive  expectations,  to  which  they  attributed  the  existence  of  the 
long and short run tradeoffs between inflation and unemployment in the model, and that they 
claimed to be a theoretical deficiency. 

One year and a half after his letter to Rapping, by the end of 1969, Lucas had already 
overcome  his  dissatisfaction  with  the  adaptive  expectations  hypothesis  in  dealing  with  the 
tradeoff  between  inflation  and  unemployment  by  replacing  it  by  the  rational  expectations 
hypothesis.  During  this  period,  the  meaning  of  the  rational  expectations  hypothesis  was 
substantially debated by Lucas and Prescott – as shown before. During the same period, Lucas 
had  also  moved  his  analysis  of  the  tradeoff  between  inflation  and  unemployment  from  a 
partial equilibrium labor market framework to a general equilibrium framework, as suggested 
by Phelps. Proceeding this way, Lucas had just tackled the two issues raised in his first paper 
with Rapping (Lucas and Rapping, 1969a: 748). The evidences for these complete change can 
be  found  in  the  long  letter  sent to  Phelps,  on  November  7th,  1969  –  quoted  before  -,  with  a 
copy of the brand new “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money” attached on it. There is the 
merging of Lucas’s two research agendas in the late 1960’s. 
 
“Expectations  and  the  Neutrality  of  Money”  was  first  submitted  to  the  American 
Economic  Review  on  January  30th,  1970,  suffering  a  “withering  rejection”,  according  to 
Lucas (1981: 10). That is an indication of how innovative and restricted to the knowledge of a 
small  group of  economists  was  the  technical  approach  present  in  the  paper.18  It  was  finally 
submitted and accepted by the Journal of Economic Theory in the same year, and published in 
the April of 1972 issue of the journal (Lucas, 1972a). 

In the paper, Lucas explains the positive correlation between nominal prices and real 
output.  Monetary  shocks  have  real  effects  in  the  short  run  because  agents  have  information 
problems;  they  cannot  distinguish  whether  the  price  change  of  their  products  is  relative  or 
absolute. In the long run, however, the neutrality of money applies. Lucas (1972a: 103-4) says 
that his work is similar to  Friedman (1968a) and that it presents some of Friedman’s (1968) 
propositions about the American economy in a rigorous way.19 It is also said in the paper that 
another  precursor  of  his  work  is  Phelps  (1968,  1970),  because  he  shows,  just  like  Lucas 

                                                             
16  Rapping  had  written  to  Lucas,  previously,  saying  that  he  thought  to  be  “...possible,  as  you  suggested,  to 
rationalize the presence of a lagged unemployment in our Phillips curve in terms of the search process” (Lucas 
Papers, Box 1, file folder “1968”). 
17 Lucas Papers, Box 1, file folder “1968”. 
18 See Gans and Shepherd (1994: 172) for more details about this rejection. 
19 See De Vroey (2001) for details about the methodological differences between Lucas (1972a) and Friedman 
(1968). 

9 

 

(1972a),  the  existence  of  the  Phillips  curve  in  a  framework  in  which  all  the  neoclassical 
postulates are assumed, except the perfect information one. Lucas (1972a: 104) argues that his 
concept  of  equilibrium  is  new,  although  it  resembles  the  equilibrium  in  dynamic 
programming,  the  one  used  by  Phelps  (1967,  1968,  1970).  His  equilibrium  prices  and 
quantities  are  functions  of  the  possible  future  states  of  the  economy,  what  makes  rational 
expectations  more  suitable  than  adaptive  expectations  to  relate  information  available  to  the 
agents to their forecasts. 
 
According to Lucas (2001: 21), in a deliberated effort to make “Expectations and the 
Neutrality  of  Money”  accessible  to  a  larger  audience,  Lucas  himself  prepared,  during  the 
summer  of  1970,  a  paper  called  “Econometric  Testing  of  the  Natural  Rate  Hypothesis” 
(Lucas, 1972b), which would be presented at the Fed conference “The Econometrics of Price 
Determination”,  in  Washington,  D.C.,  in  October  of  the  same  year.  In  the  paper,  Lucas 
(1972b:  90)  says  that  there  is,  indeed,  a  negative  correlation,  in  the  U.S.  data,  between 
inflation  and  unemployment  and,  so,  he  poses  two  questions  to  be  answered  by  the  natural 
rate  of  unemployment  advocates.  The  first  is  about  econometric  testing:  if  this  correlation 
does not proof the existence of an exploitable tradeoff between inflation and unemployment, 
should the natural rate of unemployment be judged only on theoretical grounds? The second 
is  about  policy  evaluation:  if  monetary  policy  cannot  be  evaluated  by  extrapolating  this 
negative correlation, should quantitative policy evaluation be abandoned? According to Lucas 
(1972b:  91),  the  answers  to  these  questions  would  depend  on  how  one  would  translate  the 
natural rate of unemployment hypothesis into theory. 
 
The  first  device  Lucas  (1972b:  91  footnote  2)  used  to  translate  the  natural  rate  of 
unemployment hypothesis into theory was to treat observed prices and quantities as the result 
of  market  clearing  equilibrium.  According  to  the  author,  the  discussion  whether  observed 
prices and quantities are, indeed, market clearing outcomes creates more heat than light. So, 
one should simply assume that they are market-clearing outcomes for two basic reasons: first, 
because the alternative hypothesis (non-market equilibrium) would bring logical difficulties to 
the analysis; and, second, because it would allow dealing with intertemporal substitution and 
expectations  questions,  by  eliminating  the  standard  dynamical  prices  and  quantities 
adjustment (tâtonnement process). 
The  second  device  used  by  Lucas  (1972b:  95-6)  was  the  adoption  of  the  rational 
 
expectations hypothesis to determine expected prices. With this kind of expectation, a relation 
between  actual  and  expected  prices  is  established  in  a  way  that  the  expectation  of  the 
difference between actual and expected prices equals zero. 

Based  in  a  model  that  contains  these  two  devices,  Lucas  (1972b)  answers  the  two 
questions  posed  to  the  natural  rate  advocates.  First,  the  natural  rate  hypothesis  can  also  be 
judged  on  empirical  grounds,  through  a  test  on  the  parameters  of  a  model  that  contains 
simultaneous equations not only for inflation and unemployment, but for policy too. Second, 
evaluation  could  be  made  comparing  the  values  of  the  parameters  of  the  models  containing 
different  policies.  In  short,  policy  should  be  part  of  the  model  and  should  be  tested  with 
inflation  and  unemployment.  It  should  not  be  derived  from  a  model  of  inflation-
unemployment tradeoff. 
 
5. Conclusion 

“Expectations and the Neutrality of Money” (Lucas, 1972a) and “Econometric Testing 
of the Natural Rate Hypothesis” Lucas (1972 b) are the culmination of Lucas’s research in the 
late  1960’s.  These  papers  are  the  synthesis  of  the  two  branches  of  Lucas’s  research  at  that 
time; one on labor market behavior and other on optimal investment by firms. This synthesis 
changed  the  way  in  which  the  natural  rate  of  unemployment  was  originally  elaborated  by 
Friedman  (1968a)  and  Phelps  (1967,  1968),  by  modeling  it  in  a  general  equilibrium 
framework  with  rational  expectations  and  by  testing  it  as  a  restriction  on  the  relationship 
between economic policy parameters and behavioral parameters. 

10 

 

Lucas’s  research  agenda  synthesis  in  the  late  1960’s  was  the  result  of  his  close 
interaction  with  Phelps  and  Prescott,  backed  up  by  his  pragmatic  equilibrium  approach  to 
economics,  concerning  modeling,  econometric  estimation  and  testing.  Phelps  explicitly 
suggested  a  general  equilibrium  approach  to  Lucas’s  labor  market  modeling,  while  Prescott 
helped  him  in  dealing  with  the  rational  expectations  hypothesis.  When  Lucas  managed  to 
merge the rational expectation hypothesis  into his general equilibrium approach, he was able 
to establish the macroeconomic framework in which the natural rate of unemployment and the 
negative correlation between inflation and unemployment could coexist. 
 
6. References 
De  Vroey,  M.  (2001).  Friedman  and  Lucas  on  the  Phillips  Curve:  from  disequilibrium  to 
equilibrium approach. Eastern Economic Journal 27 (2): 127-148. 
Friedman, M. (1968). The Role of Monetary Policy. American Economic Review 58 (1): 1-17.  
Friedman,  M.  (1977).  Nobel  Lecture:  Inflation  and  Unemployment.  Journal  of  Political 
Economy 85 (3): 451–472. 
Gans, J. S., Shepherd, G. B. (1994). How Are the Mighty Fallen: Rejected Classic Articles by 
Leading Economists. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 8 (1): 165-179. 
Hoover,  K.  and  Young,  W.  (2011).  Rational  Expectations:  Retrospect  and  Prospect.  Panel 
discussion marking  the fifth anniversary of John Muth´s  (1961) “Rational Expectations and 
the Theory of Price Movements”, held in a session of the History of Economics Society at the 
ASSA Meetings. Colorado, USA. 
Lipsey,  R.  G.  (1960).  The  Relation  between  Unemployment  and  the  Rate  of  Change  of 
Money  Wage  Rates  in  the  United  Kingdom,  1862-1957:  a  Further  Analysis.  Economica  27 
(105): 1-31. 
Lucas,  R.  E.  Jr.  (1966).  Optimal  Investment  with  Rational  Expectations.  Unpublished, 
Carnegie Tech. 
Lucas, R. E. Jr. (1967). Adjustment Costs and the Theory of Supply.  The Journal of Political 
Economy 75 (4): 321-334. 
Lucas,  R.  E.  Jr.  (1972a).  Expectations  and  the  Neutrality  of  Money.  Journal  of  Economic 
Theory 4 (2): 103-124. 
Lucas, R. E. Jr. (1972b). Econometric Testing of the Natural Rate Hypothesis, in R. E. Lucas 
Jr.  (ed.),  Studies  in  Business-Cycle  Theory.  Oxford:  Basil  Blackwell,  1981,  pp.  90-103. 
Reprinted  from  Otto  Eckstein  (ed.)  The  Econometrics  of  Price  Determination  Conference. 
Washington D. C. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 50-9.  
Lucas,  R.  E.  Jr.  (1981).  Introduction,  in  R.  E.  Lucas  Jr.  (ed.),  Studies  in  Business-Cycle 
Theory. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1981, pp. 1-18. 
Lucas,  R.  E.  Jr.  (1984).  Robert  E.  Lucas  Jr.,  in  A.  Klamer  (ed.),  Conversations  with 
Economists. USA: Rowmand & Allanheld. 
Lucas,  R.  E.  Jr.  (1996).  Nobel  Lecture:  Monetary  Neutrality.  Journal  of  Political  Economy 
104 (4): 661-82. 
Lucas, 
R. 
(http://home.uchicago.edu/~sogrodow/homepage/papers.html). 
Lucas, R. E. Jr., Prescott, E. C. (1971). Investment under Uncertainty. Econometrica 39 (5): 
659-81. 
Lucas, R. E. Jr., Rapping, L. A. (1969a). Real Wages, Employment and Inflation.  Journal of 
Political Economy 77 (5): 721-754. 
Lucas, R. E. Jr, Rapping, L. A. (1969b). Price Expectations and the Phillips Curve. American 
Economic Review 59 (3): 342-350. 
Muth, J. F. (1961). Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price Movements. Econometrica 
29. 
Phelps, E. S. (1967). Phillips  Curves, Expectations of Inflation and Optimal Unemployment 
over Time. Economica  34 (135): 254-281. 

Professional 

Memoir, 

mimeo, 

(2001). 

Jr. 

E. 

 

11 

Phelps,  E.  S.  (1968).  Money-Wage  Dynamics  and  Labor-Market  Equilibrium.  Journal  of 
Political Economy 76 (4): 678-711. 
Phelps, E. S., et al. (1970). Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and Inflation Theory. 
New York: Norton, 1970.  
Phelps, E. S. (2007). Macroeconomics  for a Modern Economy.  American Economic Review 
97(3): 543-561. 
Phillips,  A.  W.  (1958).  The  Relation  between  Unemployment  and  the  Rate  of  Change  of 
Money Wage Rates in the United Kingdom, 1861-1957. Economica 25 (100): 283-299. 
Simons,  H.  C.  (1936).  Rules  versus  Authorities  in  Monetary  Policy.  Journal  of  Political 
Economy 44(1): 1-30. 
Snowdon, B., Vane, H. R. (1998). Transforming macroeconomics:  an  interview with Robert 
E. Lucas, Jr.. Journal of Economic Methodology, 5 (1): 115-46.  
Weintraub,  E.  R.  (1985).  General  Equilibrium  Analysis:  studies  in  appraisal.  Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 

 

12 

