Arguments on non-metallic money (1650 – 1750)* 

Mauricio C. Coutinho 
UNICAMP.  
Email: mcout@eco.unicamp.br 
Financial support by FAPESP is acknowledged 

 

 

 
 
Resumo  
O  trabalho  trata  dos  temas  centrais  da  economia  monetária  no  periodo  1650-1750: 
valor  da  moeda,  debasement,  cunhagem,  escassez  de  meio  circulante,  definições  e 
funções do dinheiro. Os autores considerados são Davanzati, Potter, Montanari, Rice 
Vaughan, Davenant, Locke, Dudley North, Barbon, Law, Galiani e Harris. O ponto de 
convergência  de  tão  variados  temas  monetários  são  os  argumentos  em  objeção  ou 
aceitação ao dinheiro não-metálico. Procura-se argumentar que a função de medida de 
valor  da  moeda  é  uma  questão  ineludível  na  época,  seja  devido  aos  frequentes 
debasements,  seja  porque  os  sistemas  monetários  metálicos  repousavam  na 
contraposição entre unidade de conta nacional e peças monetárias propriamente ditas. 
 
 
Summary 
The paper discusses the central issues in debate in 1650-1750 monetary economics: 
value of money, debasement, coinage, scarcity of money, definitions and functions of 
money. Authors considered: Davanzati, Potter, Montanari, Rice Vaughan, Davenant, 
Locke, Dudley North, Barbon, Law, Galiani and Harris. Arguments on non-metallic 
money, either accepting or rejecting it as money proper, are the focus of the paper. It 
is  argued  that  the  role  of  ‘standard  of  measure’  of  money  is  decisive  and  even 
indelible, be it in view of the frequent debasements, be it because metallic monetary 
systems were characterized by the duality coin (currency) / monetary standard (unit of 
account).  
 
 
Palavras-chave 
Debasement, valor da moeda, escassez de dinheiro, economia monetária do periodo 
1650-1750, dinheiro não-metálico 
 
 
Keywords 
Debasement, value of money, money scarcity, 1650-1750 monetary economics, non-
metallic money 
 
 
Trabalho  submetido  à  area  de  História  do  Pensamento  Econômico  e  Metodologia 
Econômica 
 
JEL: B11 
 
                                                 
* This is a second draft. A first draft was presented at the  History of Economics Society Conference, 

1. Introduction 
From  1650  to  1750,  roughly,  the  two  major  (and  interconnected)  issues  in 
debate in monetary writings were debasement and scarcity of money, although there 
are  some  exceptions,  that  is,  authors  and  texts  not  concerned  with  debasement  or 
overwhelmed  by  the  possibility  money  becomes  scarce.  Cantillon  is  one  of  these 
exceptions, and an outstanding one. The same applies to Hume, whose approach to 
the ‘value of money’ is entirely circumscribed by the quantity theory framework, and 
to  whom  any  preoccupation  with  scarcity  of  money  is  downplayed  by  the  price-
specie-flow mechanism. However, acknowledging the few exceptions, a long line of 
monetary  theorists,  from  Davanzati1 to  Harris,  including  Potter,  Montanari,  Rice 
Vaughan, Davenant, Locke, Dudley North, Barbon, Law, and even Galiani, developed 
their  quite  varied  approaches  to  monetary  phenomena  by  means  of  a  debate  on 
debasement and/or as responses to questionings about the adequate quantity of money 
in circulation. 

It is worth noting that the above list includes staunch supporters of metallic 
money, like Locke, as well as radical proponents of paper money, like Law. Locke’s 
stands on the value of money in Some Considerations… (Locke, 1692), as well as his 
objections to debasement, in Further Considerations… (Locke, 1696), are part of his 
pondering over the consequences of scarcity of money – the same pondering that led 
him to reject the possibility paper money might act as a proper substitute for specie. 
Law, on the other extreme, in considering how to circumvent Scotland`s scarcity of 
money and its harmful effects upon trade, argued in Money and Trade Considered… 
(Law, 1705) the superiority of paper money over silver money. This superiority was 
based  on  the  presupposition  land  notes  would  keep  their  value  stable,  while  silver 
money’s value was inherently unstable. By the way, Locke’s defense of silver money 
and  Law’s  stand  on  the  inadequacy  of  any  unstable  standard  of  value  is  well 
representative of another relevant theme: ‘value of money’, a permanent seventeenth 
and  eighteenth  century  economics  issue,  strictly  related  to  the  definition  of  money 
itself,  and  to  descriptions  of  money  functions.  Any  of  the  above  listed  monetary 
writers defined money and described or listed the roles it should perform, in debating 
the value of money. 

In  what  concerns  money  functions,  we  all  acknowledge,  after  Schumpeter 
(1954),  the  difficulties  in  transposing  modern  economic  theory  concepts  into 
seventeenth and eighteenth century monetary parlance, simply because in these times 
concepts  were  in  building,  thus  lacking  a  precise  meaning.  That  is,  we  should  be 
cautious  in  equating  means  of  exchange,  store  of  value,  unit  of  value,  to  ‘pawn’, 
‘pledge’,  ‘security’,  ‘counters’  ‘tickets’  –  some  of  the  terms  in  usage.  Having 
Schumpeter’s warning in view, it is important to pay attention to the roles or functions 
attributed  to  money  by  monetary  theorists  of  the  past,  because  in  most  cases  the 
acceptance or rejection of paper money as proper money may be inferred from these 
functions. Unit of value or standard of measure – under whatever denomination – was 
an  especially  critical  issue,  in  a  century  overwhelmed  by  debasement.  It  will  be 
argued that the admitted stability (or, contrariwise, instability) of money’s value along 
time affected not only the understanding of money as a standard measure, but also the 

                                                 
1 A Discourse upon Coins (1588) antedates our reference period, and has been included in the list of 
representative  monetary  writings  for  two  reasons:  Davanzati  advances  many  arguments  of  further 
debates on debasement; his text is also a a crucial reference to the understanding of Locke’s position on 
money’s value.   

 

2 

perception of how could money act as a due instrument for contracting, as well as a 
due exchange instrument, whenever the elapsing of time or the temporal disjunction 
between buying and selling was at stake. 

Although  the  points  to  be  developed  in  this  paper  are  enmeshed  in  the  just 
signaled issues – definitions and functions of money, debasement, scarcity of money – 
it  will  be  attempted  to  relate  them  to  a  singular  question:  what  were  the  main 
arguments  on  non-metallic  money,  advanced  both  by  economists  aware  of  the 
decisive role of paper credit (and/or prone to admit the substitution of paper money 
for  specie),  as  well  as  by  adversaries  of  (or  skeptical  about)  paper  money.  These 
arguments, spread throughout the paper, are revealing of the different conceptions of 
money sustained by monetary thinkers in the period under consideration. 

The  paper  will  be  especially  attentive  to  the  characteristics  of  metallic 
monetary systems, most of all the existence of a dual monetary structure, comprising 
unit of account and specie proper (silver and gold coins). It will be argued that the 
intrinsic  characteristics  of  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  century  monetary  systems 
defined much of the arguing of the times; which means, many monetary concepts, in 
their inception, owe a lot to the peculiar seventeenth and eighteenth century monetary 
ambience. 

  
Besides this introduction, the paper contains four more sections. The second 
one contrasts Locke and Law, in order to set the main issues in debate. In this sense, 
Locke  and  Law  are  singled  out  as  archetypical  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  century 
monetary thinkers. The third section situates debasement as a decisive component of 
monetary controversies, in order to stress the importance of the more than one century 
long debates on debasement upon monetary thinking - needless to say, upon economic 
theory  in  general.  The  fourth  section  will  review  some  conjectures  on  coinage  and 
seigniorage, as well as present different concepts of money, including its nature and 
functions. Definitions of money are deeply considered in section five, that will try to 
summarize to what extent, and in which terms, paper money was admitted as money 
proper by significant authors.  

 
2. Locke and Law 
Locke’s arguing against the possibility bills of exchange, and paper money in 
general, be considered as surrogates for specie, is twofold. In one sense, he restricts 
the  extent  bills  of  exchange  may  represent  money  in  international  trade.  Whenever 
there is a cumulative balance of trade deficit, says Locke, bills of exchange will not 
pay our debts abroad – money (he means specie) or metal must be sent to keep the 
credit. In this sense, “It is ridiculous to say, that bills of exchange shall pay our debts 
abroad: that cannot be, till scrips of paper can be made current coin.” (Locke, 1692, 
p.13) In fact, adds Locke, these bills do not have ‘intrinsic value’. They serve only as 
instruments to redirect credit, or to direct money to whom it is due. 

In another context, Locke adds that even in internal circulation, paper money 
is  not  a  surrogate  for  specie.  The  context  is  the  relation  of  money  to  trade,  or  the 
necessity  of  a  ‘certain  proportion’  of  money  to  trade.  Locke  presents  his  view  on 
circulation:2 money goes from hand to hand, serving ‘for counters and for pledges’, 
                                                 
2 I’ve developed this point further in Coutinho (2012) and Coutinho (2011). 

 

3 

implying ‘reckoning and security’. Having assigned functions to money, he explains 
what he means by ‘security’: it is the property that “… he that receives it shall have 
the  same  value  for  it  again,  of  other  things  that  he  wants,  whenever  he  pleases.” 
(Locke, 1692, p.13) Reckoning may be performed by stamp and denomination, while 
security implies intrinsic value, “…which is the quantity.” (Locke, 1691, p.14). It will 
be seen that, under different designations, Locke’s understanding of ‘security’ is well 
spread in monetary texts. 

Letting  aside  for  the  moment  intrinsic  value  as  ‘quantity’  and  the  fact  that 
Locke attaches to ‘security’ the property of keeping value along time, let us focus on 
Locke’s  ‘pledge’.  Bills  may  be  suitable  as  ‘counters’,  since  “… reckoning may be 
kept,  or  transferred  by  writing,…”  (Locke,  1692,  p.15),  but  money  as  a  ‘pledge’ 
requires metal; more precisely, the metals (gold and silver) mankind has consented to 
attribute an ‘imaginary value’ to, by ‘common consent’.  

Locke  harshly  denies  that  any  kind  of  paper  money  may  be  taken  as  a 
‘pledge’.3 The  lack  of  security  is  a  characteristic  of  “… bill, bond, or other note of 
debt,…” (Locke, 1692, p.15), even when bills are issued by public authority. Locke is 
expressing the idea that national bills cannot be imposed upon foreigners, and goes 
further: even internally, however acceptable, “… they are liable to unavoidable doubt, 
dispute, and counterfeiting…” (Locke, 1692, p.16). 

In  listing  and  defining  the  functions  of  money,  in  Some  Considerations…, 
Locke  was  responding  to  the  enactment  of  a  legal  ceiling  to  the  interest  rate  by 
Parliament.  In  his  view,  the  interest  rate  defined  the  ‘value  of  money’.4 Fixing  it 
below  its  natural  rate  would  reduce  the  price  of  money,  thus  contracting  money 
lending.  Besides  affecting  circulation,  this  reduction  of  the  price  of  money  would 
harm  interest  receivers  (widows,  orphans,  creditors)  and  divert  part  of  the  lending 
activity  into  obscure  channels,  stimulating  illegal  behavior.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
reduction  of  the  value  of  money  would  raise  the  price  of  commodities  in  general, 
since  money  is  “…  the  counter-balance  to  all  other  things  purchaseable  by  it,…” 
(Locke, 1692, p.19). 

In  Locke’s  view,  similar  consequences  –  reduction  of  the  value  of  money, 
imposition of a loss upon creditors, the sanctioning of malfeasance (money clipping) 
– emerged from debasement. In fact, Further Considerations… (Locke, 1696) fierce 
criticism of debasement shares the same philosophical and analytical underpinning of 
the 1692 text, especially in what refers to the value of money.  

To begin with, debasement, as well as clipping, defrauds the ‘public voucher’ 
inherent in a stamped coin, which concerns the quantity of silver contained in it.5 In 
what refers to the intrinsic value of money, Locke insists in ‘common consent’ and 
‘quantity’: “The intrinsic value of silver, considered as money, is that estimate which 
common  consent  has  placed  on  it,  whereby  it  is  made  equivalent  to  all  other 
things…”(Locke, 1696, p.82). Or, “Silver is the measure of commerce by its quantity, 
which is the measure also of its intrinsic value”. (Locke, 1696, p.82)  

                                                 
3 He also denies paper money may be considered in computing the ‘certain proportion’ of money to 
trade. 
4 Locke’s  ‘dual  theory’  of  value  of money establishes  that the value of money consists  in  providing 
interest and giving access (by exchange) to other commodities. 
5 “The stamp is a mark, and as it were, a public voucher, that a piece of such denomination is of such a 
weight, and of such a fineness, e.e. has as much silver in it.” (Locke, 1696, p.84)  

 

4 

Although  in  his  chastisement  of  debasement,  in  Further  Considerations…, 
Locke was less specific on non-metallic money, he was not entirely silent. According 
to  him,  credit  would  not  be  able  to  counterbalance  the  lack  of  cash  produced  by 
debasement.6 Additionally, credit – more specifically, bills of exchange - would not 
substitute hard money in international trade, whenever trade was unbalanced.7 In what 
refers to the connection between money and balance of trade, Locke simply recurs to 
a  frequently  rephrased  mercantilist  truism,  which  posits  that  balance  of  trade 
unbalances imply bullion or cash transfers, from debtors to creditors.  

Yet,  Locke’s  objection  to  the  possibility  that  credit  instruments  were 
considered  a  component  of  money  supply  in  the  internal  market,  depends  on 
‘principles’ not always supported by economic reasoning. First of all, the objection is 
connected to his understanding of money as a ‘pledge’, which, as mentioned, implies 
universal  acceptance  and  stability  of  value.  Nor  money,  neither  any  commodity,  is 
stable in value.8 In his pursuit of a stable measure of value, Locke ends up sliding into 
a  physical  measure:  weight.  Value  of  money  is  ‘quantity’  and  thus,  weight,  in  a 
double sense: a physical measure may be taken as invariable and, on the other hand, 
considering money’s weight in pure gold or silver its ‘intrinsic value’ was common 
parlance, in seventeenth and eighteenth century.9  

Additionally, and most of all, a permanent concern with pure metal weight was 
one of the consequences of debasement. In the end of the day, debasement meant a 
loss of silver and gold content in money – or an attempt to keep old denominations in 
new  (and  thinner,  in  terms  of  pure  metal)  coins.  Debasement  is  a  loss  of  value  of 
circulating  media,  relatively  to  the  unit  of  account  and  to  any  commodity.  In  this 
sense,  there  were  two  ways  to  evaluate  debasement;  it  could  be  considered  an 
adaptation to the changing value of metals, and/or a necessary reaction to neighboring 
countries  debasements;  it  could  also  be  seen  as  an  instrument  for  devaluing  public 
debt and/or enhancing public revenue. Both evaluations will be dealt with below. 

 
Law’s  proposal  of  transforming  Scotland’s  money  into  paper  money,  or  of 
adding land-money to Scotland’s circulating media, however innovative in its overall 
understanding  of  money  and  in  its  acknowledgement  of  credit  money,  was  overtly 
motivated by a traditional issue: the pursuing of a stable money. According to Law, 
silver money’s value was very unstable, thus unable to provide a due standard to the 
monetary system.  Paper money would not only add to the circulating media; it would 
represent a better money, since it didn’t partake silver money’s value unstableness, 
taken as its most evident defect. 

Law’s  monetary  analysis  combines  tradition  and  innovation.  His  account  of 
the evolution of money, from barter to gold or silver pieces stamped by government, 

                                                 
6 “Credit will supply the defect of it (money) to some small degree, for a little while. But, credit being 
nothing but the expectation of money within some limited time, money must be had, or credit will fail.” 
(Locke, 1696, p.87) 
7 .“…where the over-balance, on either side, demands payment, there bills of exchange can do nothing; 
but bullion, or money in specie, must be sent.” (Locke, 1696, p.89) 
8 As  Locke  acknowledges  in  passages  compatible  with  the  quantity  theory  of  money  approach  –  in 
these passages, value is dependente on supply versus demand (literally, ‘quantity versus vent’). 
9 Montanari (1668) and Cantillon (1755)  didactically explain that, in plain monetary market parlance, 
‘intrinsic  value’  was  weight  in  gold  or  silver,  and  ‘extinsic  value’  was  the  value  attributed  by  the 
authority’s stamp. 

 

5 

is quite traditional.10 The inconveniences of barter and the uncertainties of contracts 
made  payable  in  goods  (goods  of  the  same  kind  differ  in  value)  are  the  point  of 
departure. In a second phase, silver imposes itself, due to convenience derived from 
its  uniformity,  divisibility,  conservation…  qualities  that  led  silver  to  be  used  as 
money, even previously to coinage. In this precise point, Law defines money: it is “… 
the measure by which goods were valued; the value by which goods were exchanged; 
and in which contracts were made payable.” (Law, 1705, p.2). It is worth noting that 
a special stress is put on money as an instrument for contracting. Instability in value 
hampers,  most  of  all,  silver’s  ability  to  be  used  as  an  instrument  to  denominate 
commercial deals, including deals that extend across time. 

According  to  Law,  the  value  of  any  commodity  depends  on  demand  and 
supply. Silver, and silver-money, don’t stay aside the general rule. In this sense, and 
overtly, Law rejects Locke’s conception of money as a pledge. It is noteworthy that, 
although  rejecting  Locke’s  formula,  he  slips  into  the  entirely  disputable  Lockean 
solution: money must keep the capacity of buying the same goods, or goods equal in 
value,  “…  as  his  occasions  require”.  But  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  Law 
attenuates Locke’s equal value by adding a escape clause: money is only “least liable 
to a change in value”. 11(Law, 1705, p.26) 

However, and the adhesion to the Lockean solution notwithstanding, Law ends 
up admitting that the stability of the value of money would not exempt its owner – 
who sold a good and is a buyer in perspective – of alterations that might occur in the 
value of the goods aimed at. In this precise sense, Locke’s (and Law’s) purpose of 
assuring  “… equal quantity of the same goods he has sold, or other goods equal in 
value…”  is  untenable.  But  we  should  stick  to  the  fact  that,  despite  relaxing  an 
impossible  clause,  the  obsession  with  a  stable  standard  of  measure  is  pervasive  in 
Law’s analysis. As mentioned, stability stands out as the leitmotif of his 1705 paper 
money proposal. 

It is not our purpose to review or question the solidity of Law’s 1705 paper 
money  proposal.  It  is  well  acknowledged  (Murphy,  1997;  Boyer,  2003)  that  Law’s 
solution  is  complex,  not  to  say  unreasonable,  since  he  couldn’t  demonstrate  that  a 
wise administration of land-money was all that was required to guarantee monetary 
stability  in  any  condition.  Even  if  we  let  aside  a  critical  issue,  represented  by  the 
practical and theoretical hurdles posed by balance of trade unbalances and exchange 
rate fluctuation, keeping money issuing in balance with demand is a difficult task in 
itself. How to gauge demand? Besides, once the interest rate decreases, as it is likely 
to happen when money extreme supply constraints are relaxed, the uniqueness of the 
new  credit  money  value  disappears  at  once.  Anyhow,  and  letting  aside  the 
complexities of Law’s proposal, it is not difficult to hold that scarcity of money and 
value of money, two standard 1650-1750 monetary debate issues, are inherent in his 
arguing. 

                                                 
10 In this sense, I disagree with Karimzadi (2013), who envisages Law’s version of the traditional tale 
of the evolution of money, from barter to paper money, as innovative.  
11 Precisely: “Money is not a pledge, as some call it. It’s a value payd or contracted to be payd, with 
which, it is supposed, the receiver may, as his occasions require, buy an equal quantity of the same 
goods he has sold, or other goods equal in value to them: and that money is the most secure value, 
either to contract for, or to value goods by; which is least lyable to a change in value.”  (Law,  1705, 
p.26) 
  

 

6 

Just  to  conclude  this  section,  it  is  important  to  remark  that  Law’s  solution 
implied  the  acceptance  of  credit  money  as  full  money.  Additionally,  his  text 
acknowledges fractional reserve banking and describes the activities of typical banks - 
such as Bank of Amsterdam, Bank of England and Italian banking. He arrived at the 
conclusion that traditional banking could not provide an alternative to the scarcity of 
money in Scotland, simply because the absence of a dynamic trade enfeebled Scottish 
banking  activities  themselves.  Traditional  credit  was  a  good  strategy,  but  not  bold 
enough to Scotland. A much more daring solution was claimed for, and he presented 
his alternative. 

 
3. Debasement, a critical and pervasive issue12 
Law’s  barrage  of  objections  against  silver  money  included  debasement:  “… 
Silver  Money  is  an  uncertain  value;  because  liable  to  be  alter’d  in  the  fineness  or 
denomination by the prince.” (Law, 1705, p.32) As a matter of fact, debasement was 
a pervasive issue in monetary writings. More than a century before Law, Davanzati 
chastised debasement, which he matched with traditional mischiefs  (counterfeiting, 
monopolizing, simony, usury…) associated to money. The loss of weight of coins in 
circulation,  said  Davanzati,  leads  officers  of  the  mint  to  ill-advise  his  masters:  “… 
Since  your  money  …  is  one  grain  lighter,  ‘tis  fitter  you  should  get  by  it,  than  that 
others  clip  it;…”  (Davanzati,  1588,  p.19);  which  starts  a  competition  among 
neighboring states. 

The consequences of debasement, according to Davanzati, were a decrease in 
public revenues, losses imposed on creditors and a general rise in prices. By debasing, 
he proceeds, the sovereign gains once, but in the long run he suffers a permanent loss. 
Besides, confusion concerning the alteration of coins and prices unsettles contracting, 
making people “… strangers in their own country;…” (Davanzati, 1588, p.21).13  

Davanzati’s precocious criticism of debasement was to be followed by many 
economists. One century later, in his magnificent Mercantile Treatise – Della Moneta, 
Montanari  (1683)  restates  Davanzati’s  complaints  against  bankers  and  ill-advised 
monetary  consultants.  In  a  telling  example,  he  describes  the  behavior  of  the 
inhabitants  of  cosmopolitan  Dantzig,  that,  anticipating  the  dire  consequences  of  a 
projected debasement, opposed it. Since the debasement was nonetheless imposed by 
the ruler, the outcome was inevitable: as an active international trade center, Dantzig 
saw, in a short lapse of time, ‘good money’ being sent abroad.  

The consequences of debasement, according to Montanari, were reduction of 
public revenue, losses imposed upon those entitled to receive their earnings in cash, 
advantages  to  debtors;  all  in  all,  however,  a  general  loss,  because  debasement 
unsettled trade and led arts to vanish, to the advantage of competing states. 

But Montanari was cautious in not crediting all responsibility to profiteers and 
ill-advised  consultants.  The  ruler  opts  for  debasement  either  because  he  doesn’t 
understand  its  ultimate  consequences,  or  because  he  is  “… forced by necessity, the 
fierce tyrant of kings…”. (Montanari, 1683, p. 122)14 
                                                 
12 This paper concentrates on the economist’s arguments on debasement, letting aside the historical 
context, or debasement in history. For a classic historical assessment of debasement in England, see 
Feaveryear (1963).  
13 The coincidence between Locke’s and Davanzati’s arguments is astounding.   
14 Translation of Montanari’s text into English, by the author. 

 

7 

Necessity  was  also  Galiani’s  motto,  in  Della  Moneta  (1751).  According  to 
him,  the  princes  opt  for  debasement  when  public  debt  is  excessive  and/or  it  is 
impossible to raise taxes accordingly. Raise the money is raison d’état. Unlike Locke, 
Galiani doesn’t devise rulers as potential breakers of the social bond – as a general 
rule, they are committed to public interest. 

Of course, Galiani’s solution was not only based on his political conceptions. 
It was attuned to his understanding of relative prices, as well as of existing lags in 
price  and  income  adjustments.  His  definition  of    ‘raising  the  money’  unveils  his 
analytical  stand:  it  is  “… a gain that the prince and the state obtain from the slow 
pace  of  the  collectivity  in  changing  the  connection  of  ideas  concerning  prices  of 
commodities and of money.”  (Galiani,  1751,  p.  231)15 That  is,  prices  are  sticky,  or 
markets  adjust  slowly.  Through  debasement,  the  prince  effectively  reduces,  at  least 
temporarily,  his  debts  and  the  monetary  burden  with  public  servants  and  public 
services.  Additionally,  as  far  as  Galiani  considers  taxes  reduction  a  benefit  to  the 
public, he doesn’t take decrease in public revenue (in terms of metal, in the long term) 
as an evil in itself. 

Before  continuing  with  Galiani,  it  is  interesting  to  observe  that  we  have 
straddled almost two centuries – from Davanzati (1588) to Galiani (1751), or even to 
Harris  (1757/58)  –  with  debasement  in  the  center  of  the  monetary  debates.  
Effectively,  although  disagreeing  on  its  effects,  economists  conferred  debasement  a 
central position in monetary economics. In this respect, Dudley North may be taken as 
a rare example of a first grade economist not to situate debasement in the center of his 
arguing.16 Economists’  disagreement  on  the  consequences  of  debasement  mostly 
stemmed  from  their  different  assessments  of  the  pace  of  price  reactions.  Some 
economists,  like  Davanzati,  Locke,  Harris,  either  tied  their  analyses  to  long  term 
adjustments,  and/or  supposed  an  immediate  reaction  of  prices.  Others,  as  Galiani, 
envisaged the sluggishness of price adjustments, or the imperfections of the several 
markets and the importance of contractual prices and incomes. Anyway, and as a first 
and general approach to points to be developed in other sections, the consequences of 
debasement may be grouped in three classes.  

First  of  all,  reactions  in  prices,  exchange  rates,  and  gold  and  silver  flows 
across  countries.  The  contrasting  positions  in  the  English  monetary  debates  of  the 
1690s are illustrative17: while Locke (Locke, 1696) thought the debasement proposed 
by Lowndes would not bring silver back and would likely contribute to aggravate its 
drainage,18 defendants  of  debasement,  like  Barbon  (Barbon,  1696)  concluded  that  a 
correction of the mint rate was indispensable to attune ‘value of money’ with the truly 
existing weight of coins, prompting silver outflows to stop. 

Comparisons of mint patterns across countries, as well as comparisons of the 
efficiency of debasing as a means to attract bullion, were issues permanently under 
debate.  Even  Barbon,  the  author  who  most  fiercely  defended  value  of  money  was 
established by law, irrespectively of the metallic content of the coins, at last admitted 
(Barbon, 1996) that international competition kept monetary standards and currencies 

                                                 
15 Translation of Galiani’s text into English, by the author. 
16 However,  in  Discourses upon Trade    he  shares  the  mainstream  view,  criticizing  debasement  and 
admitting that “...the price of bullion answers.” (North, 1691, PS) 
17 Feaveryear (1963) and Eltis (1995) provide good accounts of English circumstances in the 1690s. 
18 In Locke’s view, the only way to to attract bullion was a balance of trade surplus, not to be obtained 
by debasement. 

 

8 

across  countries  tied  –  he  allowed  for  small  discrepancies  in  value.  As  we  have 
already seen, Davanzati affirmed that international competition furthered debasement. 
He was not an isolated voice: Montanari and Rice Vaughan, (Vaughan, A Discourse 
of  Coin  and  Coinage,  1675),  among  others,  echoed  the  theme.  In  most  cases, 
statements about bullion drainage through international competition were interrelated 
to a major seventeenth and early eighteenth century concern: scarcity of money and 
its impacts on trade. This was the backdrop of Locke’s monetary writings, as well as 
of Barbon’s responses to Locke, and of Potter’s (1665), Law’s (1705) and Berkeley’s 
(1735) paper-money proposals. In this sense, and once more, Dudley North was ahead 
of his time, since his approach to the money versus trade conundrum, in a (remote) 
sense, antedates Hume’s unworried attitude concerning scarcity of money.19  

The  second  class  of  debasement-associated  items  encompasses  seigniorage 
and mint practices. The states’ capacity of arbitrating the ‘value of money’, or at least 
of establishing a distinction between the value stamped on a piece of money and the 
market value of the gold or silver melted into coins – that is, between coined metal 
and bullion – was long acknowledged.20 First of all, the public character of the seal, 
and  of  mint  activities,  was  taken  as  a  state  prerogative.  Economists  accepted  as  a 
general stand that, as much as law enforcement and keeping military forces, coinage 
was up to the state, or to its agents.  Secondly, economists added to this legal and/or 
political  conclusion,  an  argument  based  on  utility,  that  goes  as  ‘once  money  is 
indispensable for trade and entails a special utility, a governmental charge is due to 
mint  activities’.  In  other  words,  coinage  can  be  converted  into  a  revenue  raising 
capacity: seigniorage. This combination of state prerogatives, utility of coined money, 
and  revenue  raising  capacity  of  coinage,  is  the  nucleus  of  the    explanation  for 
seigniorage  shared  by  a  wide  range  of  monetary  economists,  including  Montanari, 
Barbon,  Dudley  North,  Rice  Vaughan,  Harris.  Needless  to  say,  the  acceptance  of 
seigniorage as a typical fund raising device was almost certainly a reflex of reality.21  
It  is  noteworthy  that  this  class  of  seigniorage,  much  debated  by  monetary 
economists,  was  associated  to  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  century  monetary 
system  characteristics.  Coinage  had  a  cost,  public  stamps  were  indispensable,  but, 
most of all, the existence of a dual system, combining non-material national monetary 
standards and real metallic pieces – ‘ideal money’ versus ‘real money’ -, allowed for 
debasement and also for a permanent difference between the ‘value of money’ and the 
market  price  of  bullion.  The  administration  of  the  mint  rate  was  exactly  the 
mechanism to make debasement, and seigniorage, softly applied.  

Rice Vaughan’s insightful analysis of debasement combined two phenomena, 
public funds raising capacity and international competition. As we have already seen, 
debasement  ensued  across-borders  reactions.  According  to  Vaughan,  raising  the 
money was provoked by the necessity of providing gains to the state and by a “… 
second and most frequent cause, an art which states have used to rob one another of 
their money, by setting on higher prices upon it;…”.  (Vaughan,  1675,  p.9)  And  he 
                                                 
19 “... since the increase of trade is to be esteem’d the only cause that wealth and Money increase...” 
(North,  1691,  p.  14).  According  to  North,  appetites  of  men  further  industry  and  ingenuity,  and  then 
trade. 
20 On  seigniorage  and  mint  practices  across  centuries,  Feaveryear  (1963).  Locke  (1696)  and  Harris 
(1757-58), among others, echo the pervasive English debates on mint practices. 
21 Although  in  England,  from  1666  on,  the  industrial  burden  of  coinage  had  been  diverted  into  a 
specific tax revenue. The real or supposed interest of mint officials in recoinage is an additional issue, 
typical of the English monetary debates. See Locke (1696) and Harris (1757/58). 

 

9 

harshly concluded: “All these parts of the world, for some few hundred of years, have 
done nothing but vye one upon another who shall raise their money highest, which 
hath brought great confusion in all states;…”.(Vaughan, 1675, p.9) 

Vaughan’s ‘confusion in all states’ possibly matches our third and last point: 
debasement unsettled monetary standards, disorganizing trade. As already mentioned, 
in  saying  debasement  made  people  “…  strangers in their own country”,  Davanzati 
pointed to the harm produced by the loss of a stable measure of value. Locke’s point 
(Locke,  1696)  was  quite  the  same,  and  he  went  further:  debasement  harmed  the 
recipients of fixed (in terms of contractual money) incomes, and disorganized market 
transactions,  since  it  led  to  silver  outflows,  producing  scarcity  of  hard  cash.  In 
Locke’s view, once money lacked, one of the major benefits of a monetary economy - 
the impersonality of market transactions - would be lost. 

Harris  echoes  Locke:  “Established standards should be inviolably kept, and 
more especially that of money”, adding that deviations from the standard measures – 
he  included  money  among  them  –  would  “… disturb the arithmetic of the country, 
confound settled ideas, create perplexities in dealings, and subject the ignorant and 
unwary to frauds and abuses.” (Harris, 1757/58, II, p. 30) 

To Harris, as to Locke and Vaughan, there is no other road to keep monetary 
standards  than  measuring  the  ‘intrinsic  value’  of  money  by  its  weight  in  precious 
metal. Galiani explains that the ‘value as weight’ approach to the value of money is a 
consequence of an important attribute of gold and silver: physical homogeneity. As 
many economists emphasized, a piece of gold can be considered equal to any identical 
weight piece of gold, while, for instance, a cow differs from another cow. But this 
conclusion – value as weight – is linked to the necessity (and possibility) of a stable 
measure of value, a point to be commented in the next section.  

 
4. Coinage and seingoriage: defining money 
Section 2 has already presented Law’s definition of money, as well as Locke’s 
views  on  the  nature  and  functions  of  money,  and  it  was  argued  that  Locke’s 
conception of money as ‘pledge’ and ‘security’ led him to downplay paper money. In 
section  3  we’ve  seen  that  economists  admitted  seigniorage,  on  the  grounds  of  the 
necessity of a ‘public voucher’ of weight and fineness of gold and silver turned into 
coins,  that  enhanced  their  utility  and  value  relatively  to  bullion.  In  fact,  to  most 
economists,  the  definition  of  money  itself  implied  a  public  stamp:  the  difference 
between  bullion  and  coined  metals  resided  in  the  public  seal.  As  it  will  be  argued, 
public  stamp  was  an  indispensable,  and  decisive,  issue  in  seventeenth  and  early 
eighteenth century monetary economics.22   

Once more, Barbon’s extreme and peculiar position - “money is a value made 
by a law…”23 - is illustrative of the role of public stamp. According to Barbon, since 
gold and silver are commodities as any others, their value oscillates. Yet, money is 
not  a  profane  commodity,  and  in  this  sense  it  differs  from  their  constituent  metals. 
Money  is  measure  of  value  and  means  of  exchange,  and,  for  this  reason,  its  value 
must be “… made certain by law,…”. (Barbon, 1691, p.7) From this peculiar stand, 
                                                 
22 In fact, the acknowledgement of public stamp goes back at least to Aristotle, but we will stick to the 
seventeenth and eighteengh century boundaries. On the antiquity of this issue, see Karimzadi (2013). 
23 “Mony is a value made by a law; and the difference of its value is known by the stamp, and size of 
the piece.” (Barbon, 1691, p. 7) 

 

10 

Barbon  concluded  that  money  should  not  necessarily  be  manufactured  in  gold  or 
silver – any publicly stamped material is apt to play the role of money.24  

It  might  be  argued  that  Barbon  was  a  conceptual  non-metallist,  although  he 
pragmatically  bowed  to  the  dominance  of  gold  and  silver  money,  and  ultimately 
admitted  the  importance  of  precious  metals  in  international  trade.  But  it  must  be 
acknowledged  that  many  other  monetary  economists,  non-adherent  to  Barbon’s 
legalist fetishism, and metallists de facto, also emphasized public seal. 

Davanzati  was  a  precocious  and  upfront  defendant  of  the  perspective  public 
stamp  is  inherent  to  money.  More  precisely,  he  said  that,  although  gold  and  silver 
were chosen as money by the ‘consent of nations’, the public stamp is indispensable: 
“Money … is gold, silver, or copper coined by publick authority at pleasure, and by 
the  consent  of  nations  made  the  price  and  measure  of  things,  to  contract  them  the 
more easily.” (Davanzati, 1588, p.12) Coins based on other materials, being not part 
of the ‘common consent’, were not ‘universal’. They were only tallies, countermarks, 
notes or bills from the prince, “... obliging him to pay as much good money when he is 
able”  (Davanzati,  1588,  p.12);  that  is,  these  instruments  are  only  temporary 
representatives of gold and silver money. 

In Davanzati, as ultimately in Locke, the idea of ‘common consent’ and the 
acknowledgement  of  the  universal  acceptance  of  gold  and  silver  as  exchange 
instruments, add up to stamp, considered by them an official certificate of weight and 
fineness. Although Davanzati and Locke were metallists, it is arguable that the official 
seal was taken as an important element by non-strict metallists too - and here we are 
not  only  referring  to  Barbon’s  legalist  fetishism,  but,  for  instance,  to  Montanari’s 
much more balanced, and broad, stand on money. 

 According to Montanari, money is “… any metal or object that, stamped or 
by any means certified by public authority, may act as price and measure of sellable 
things, in order to facilitate commerce.”  (Montanari,  1683,  p.28/29)  Of  course,  this 
definition  breaks  with  Davanzati’s  exigency  of  gold  and  silver  as  indispensable 
money  materials,  but  it  is  attuned  with  the  idea  that  the  “essence of money”  or  its 
“formal  reason”  lies  in  the  placet  of  the  sovereign  –  without  the  prince’s 
endorsement,  any  material  taken  as  money  would  not  be  able  to  act  as  “price and 
measure” of things. 

In what refers to the possibility of using instruments apart from gold and silver 
as  money,  Montanari  adopts  an  usual,  and  decisive,  formula:  in  a  closed  economy, 
any  material  is  acceptable;  in  an  open  economy,  gold  and  silver  are  required,  and 
always  in  accordance  with  their  ‘intrinsic  value’.  To  Montanari,  this  is  the  reason 
why, making allowance for a small seigniorage, the prince should stick to the intrinsic 
value  of  the  metals.25 In  this  sense,  external  trade  pull  us  back  to  Davanzati’s  (or 
Locke’s) formula. 

Adding another important point, Montanari immediately connects ‘measure’ to 
its  intellectual  origins:  Aristotle.  Money  measures  all  things,  said  Aristotle  (apud 
Montanari).  As  any  measure,  money  is  a  tertius,  or  a  standard  the  exchangeable 

                                                 
24 According to Barbon, the only advantages in using precious metals as materials for making money, 
were the difficulties in counterfeiting, and the facility in transporting and making arbitrage, due to the 
general acceptance and high value (in small bulk) of these metals. 
25 This is the reason of Montanari’s skeptcism about debasement, and of his eulogies of Venice’s stable 
monetary practices.  

 

11 

commodities  must  be  compared  with.26 It  is  significant  that,  in  defining  money’s 
functions, Montanari stressed ‘measure’, and not means of exchange. 

Harris is a good instance of the preference for an ampler formula. According 
to him, money performs three tasks: it is the standard measure, means of exchange, 
and  instrument  for  contracting.27 For  Harris,  as  for  Locke,  the  dilemma  was  that 
money was not only the “… thing bargained for…”, but also the “… measure of the 
bargain…”.  As  measure,  money  should  be  invariable  (in  value)  -  a  property 
achievable only if we take a physical measure, as weight, as measure of value. 

In Harris, we are back to an ancient formula: the value of precious metals is 
defined  by  their  weight.  Even  if  we  accept  Galiani’s  teaching  that  the  ‘value  as 
weight’  approach  derives  from  the  homogeneity  of  gold  and  silver,  we  must  admit 
that  it  is  also  associated  to  the  search  of  an  invariable  standard.  Moreover,  and  as 
above remarked, to take ‘intrinsic value of money’ as its weight in pure gold or silver 
was also popular usage. In this precisely defined sense, ‘intrinsic value’ contrasted to 
‘extrinsic value’, which was the official value, conferred by the seal.28  

As to its ‘extrinsic value’, so defined, it is possible that a divergence between 
the market value of metals and the ‘value of money’ emerges, if by the latter we mean 
value  in  terms  of  the  exchange  rates  between  the  coined  pieces  proper  and  the 
monetary unit of the country. Episodes like the English monetary crisis of the 1690s 
(the  backdrop  of  Locke’s  and  Barbon’s  disputes),  that  involved  scarcity  of  silver 
money, evasion of silver, money clipping, and a long term low mint rate for silver, are 
instances of this divergence. 

 
As discussed above, even letting aside a clear understanding of credit money, 
non-metallic  money  was  admitted  by  many  writers  as  money  in  a  special  case,  or 
under  special  conditions.  Economists  developed  a  kind  of  genealogy  of  money,  in 
which  gold  and  silver  ultimately  imposed  their  dominance,  especially  under  the 
pressure of international trade constraints. This adhesion to metallic money, as well as 
the allowance non-metallic money should have been dominant in certain periods and 
societies,  is  part  of  the  traditional  and  always  recounted  tale  of  the  evolution  of 
money, from barter to gold and silver money. 

Slightly different versions of this well-known tale spread throughout monetary 
writings,  and  we  have  already  passed  through  some  of  them.  A  sort  of  schematic 
version goes as follows: in the beginning men bartered; the inconveniences of barter 
soon led society to chose a standard commodity as money, generally an indispensable 
or diffused one – for instance, salt, cattle.29 Due to their rarity, general acceptance and 

                                                 
26 On the Aristotelian connections of the concept of money as a ‘measure’, see Karimzadi (2013) and 
Meikle (1994). 
27 “Money is a standard measure, by which the values of all things, are regulated and ascertained; and 
is  itself,  at  the  same  time,  the  value  or  equivalente,  by  which,  goods  are  exchanged,  and  in  which 
contracts are made payable”. (Harris, 1757/58, p.37) 
28 Montanari  (1783)  explains  the  popular  meaning  of  ‘intrinsic’  and  ‘extrinsic’  value  of  money. 
Cantillon (1755) also remarks that, when referring to money, by ‘intrinsic value’ people meant the gold 
or silver content of the coin, and not intrinsic value per se – in Cantillon’s formula, labour and land 
involved in the production of the coin. 
29 It is interesting to note that this standard commodity was not only a convenient means of exchange – 
it performed the role of standard of measure, too. Turgot refers to the fact that in rural France lamb 
(mouton)  was  the  unit  of  account, the  same  happening,  in  West  Indies  slave  trade,  to  a  ‘piece  from 

 

12 

physical qualities (divisibility, uniformity, durability…), gold and silver were singled 
out  as  the  standard  commodity,  acting  as  money.  A  further  step  introduces  the 
stamping  of  pieces  of  metal  by  public  authorities,  in  order  to  avoid  suspicion, 
disagreement and doubts concerning weight and fineness. Finally, an (optional) step 
recalls  the  possibility  –  again,  for  the  sake  of  security  and  functionality  –  precious 
metal coins be ‘represented’ by written receipts, which certify their existence and safe 
storage. 

This  tale  admits  of  two  qualifications.  One  of  them  points  to  the 
embarrassments brought about by money scarcity, and leads to the quantity theory of 
money. It states that, in a closed economy, the proportion of money to commodities is 
irrelevant or, as Locke pondered, “… any quantity of that money (if it were so much 
that  every  body  might  have  some)  would  serve  to  drive  any  proportion  of  trade, 
whether more or less.”(Locke, 1692, p.30) Yet, in an open economy the irrelevance of 
money  quantity  does  not  apply  anymore.  Metal  flows  disturb  trade,  and/or  ensue 
corrective  mechanisms  –  we  are  now  in  the  antechamber  of  the  price-specie-flow 
mechanism. 

The  other  qualification,  much  more  relevant  to  the  origin  of  money’s  tale, 
follows suit. Taking again Locke’s lead, in an isolated economy, any durable material 
would appropriately act as money. It is in this closed economy setting that economists 
develop most of their considerations on the possibility any material should perform 
the role of money. Montanari is concise: “If a state had no external trade and lived 
only of the goods internally produced … the prince could evaluate his money as he 
wanted,  and  the  material  used  to  make  money  would  be  indifferent.”  (Montanari, 
1683, p.76) 

 Among  the  various  illustrations  of  monetary  options  available  to  closed 
economies,  an  amazing  one  is  in  Berkeley’s  (1735/1750)  recount  of  the  history  of 
money.  Despite  of  being  quite  conventional  (from  barter  to  paper  notes…), 
Berkeley’s account adds a special proviso, convenient to his proposal of issuing paper 
money  in  order  to  bypass  inconveniences  brought  about  by  scarcity  of  hard  cash. 
Berkeley’s  account  stages  castaways,  secluded  in  an  island  after  a  shipwreck  – 
nothing  would  block  they  produce,  exchange,  and,  in  order  to  facilitate  exchanges, 
chose a local material, like shells, or written tallies, to act as money.30 Metals were 
unnecessary, is Berkeley’s message. 

Rice Vaughan admits that, in ancient times and even in his days, objects other 
than gold, as shells, cocoa, salt, were in many countries used as money. Yet, “… they 
cannot be without gold and silver money, unless they will barr themselves from all 
commerce with other nations…”  (Vaughan,  1675,  p.3).  Additionally,  he  adds,  gold 
and silver are accepted in international trade by their ‘universal value’, and not by the 
value attributed to them by the prince. 

                                                                                                                                          
India’ – a standard male African slave. Nor ‘lamb’ neither ‘piece from India’ were physical animals or 
men; they were typical, or standard, measures. See Turgot (1766). 
30 “Whether  such  men  would  not  all  set  themselves  to  work?  Whether  they  would  not  subsist  by  the 
mutual participation of each other’s industry? Whether, when one man had in his way procured more 
than he could consume, he would not exchange his superfluities to supply his wants? Whether this must 
not produce credit? Whether, to facilitate these conveyances, to record and circulate this credit, they 
would not soon agree on certain tallies, tokens, tickets, or counters?” (Berkeley, 1750, Q 47). 

 

13 

That is, irrespectively of the realism or non-realism of the tale of the origins 
and  evolution  of  money,  all  economists  bow  to  reality,  or  end  up  admitting  that 
international trade and international monetary flows ultimately impose gold and silver 
money all over the civilized globe. Non-metallic money is seen as a possible ancestor 
of specie – although such an ancestor might be alive in secluded communities and/or 
in  some  colonial  American  spots.  Paper  money  existence  is  confined  to  two 
circumstances:  either  it  is  a  representative  of  ‘real  money’,  a  kind  of  receipt  of 
metallic money piled up somewhere; or, as in the arguments of non-metallists (Potter, 
Law, Berkeley), credit money is seen as an heroic alternative to circumvent scarcity 
of money. 

However, it is worth stressing that, even when paper money is presented as a 
better money and fractional reserve banking is openly admitted, as in Law’s solution, 
a  standard  of  measure,  or  a  national  unity  of  account,  is  indispensable.  Law’s 
formulation  is  suggestive  because,  although  it  points  to  the  dominance  (or  even 
exclusivity)  of  paper  money  in  circulation,  it  is  silent  about  the  coexistence  of 
circulating  media  and  the  national  unit  of  account.  In  seventeenth  and  eighteenth 
century monetary systems, this unit of account (‘ideal money’), that is, the national 
monetary standard, measured the ‘value’ of coined pieces. Even if the latter weren’t 
available in national territory, foreign coins were known and bullion was pervasive; 
which means the exchange rate between paper money, unit of account, and bullion or 
gold or silver coins, would always be at stake. Most of all, the exchange rate was an 
unavoidable variable, as hurtfully proved by the demise of Law’s Mississipi System 
experience  in  France  (Murphy,  1797).  As  already  pointed  at,  standard  of  measure 
leads us to stability: how to allow for a standard of value that is variable in terms of its 
relation to hard cash (or bullion)?  

To take ‘intrinsic value’ as weight is, in theoretical terms, a non-solution, since 
the  value  of  silver  and  gold  oscillates  and  the  ‘value  of  money’  (exchange  ratio 
between coins and national monetary unit) cannot stay still. As we will see, Locke, as 
Harris, sacrificed logic in saying that contracts were, ultimately and under a subjacent 
but valid convention, referred to weight. 

Anyway, in seventeenth and eighteenth century, paper money was an evident 
component of the circulating media, and no economist could deny its existence. How 
to  combine  the  realities  of  metallic  systems  with  paper  money,  is  the  question  that 
will be addressed in the following, and conclusive, section. 

 
5. Paper money - conclusions 
As mentioned, Locke took for granted that no kind of paper money could be 
accepted as ‘pledge’, since it didn’t assure its owner that commodities equal in value 
would be obtained in exchange, at any moment. ‘Pledge’ was a repeatedly mentioned 
attribute of money. Rice Vaughan says that “The first invention of money was for a 
pledge and instead of a surety…” (Vaughan, 1675, p.2), in the case transactions were 
not  cleared  instantaneously.  Although  money  serves  first  of  all  for  exchanges,  he 
adds,  in  a  mercantile  society  “… all exchange is either by the actual or intellectual 
valuation of money…”, (Vaughan, 1675, p.2), which reminds us of measure, that is, 
comparability. And Vaughan adds a geometrical gist to his Aristotelian argument: “… 
and Practice hath found out that in values, which the geometricians have found out in 
quantities, that two lines which are equal to a third line, are equal to one another; so 

 

14 

is money a third line by which all things are made equal in value…”. (Vaughan, 1675, 
p.2) 

Writing a century later, Harris, contrariwise, rejects the possibility money may 
be  considered  a  pledge.  For  him,  pledge  implies  redemption,  and  money  is  not 
afterwards  redeemed.  He  defines  money  broadly,  beginning  by  its  role  as  standard 
measure:  “Money  is  a  standard  measure,  by  which  the  values  of  all  things  are 
regulated and ascertained, and is itself, at the same time, the value or equivalent, by 
which,  goods  are  exchanged,  and  in  which  contracts  are  made  payable.”  (Harris, 
1757/58, p.37) This approach to money was instrumental to his attack on debasement, 
to  be  developed  in  Part  II  of  An  Essay  upon  Money  and  Coins.  Anyway,  he 
proceeded,  money  is  “an  equivalent  and  a  measure”,  and  also  “…  the  very  thing 
usually  bargained  for,  as  well  as  the  measure  of  the  bargain:…”,  a  truly  Lockean 
dilemma.  (Harris,  1757/58,  p.37)  Even  when  we  have  a  barter,  he  continues,  the 
quantity  of  money  is  the  “…measure  of  the  bargain”.  (Harris,  1757/58  p.37). 
Effectively, Harris’ barter is not a strict barter, but what Cantillon termed ‘exchange 
by  valuation’,  an  exchange  not  mediated  by  monetary  instruments  but  that  had 
monetary units, thus prices, as reference. As a measure, according to Harris, the value 
of money is unalterable, which, once again, points to quantity.31  

Additionally,  money  has  ‘intrinsic  value’,  and  this  is  the  true  difference 
between  money  and  bills.  The  latter  are  “…  mere  promises  or  obligations  of 
payment…” (Harris, 1757/58, p. 43), although they count as circulating media. When 
Harris states his version of the quantity theory, saying that “… the value of a given 
sum  of  money  will  be  always  pretty  exactly,  in  a  reciprocal  proportion  to  the  sum 
total, or the whole quantity in circulation …”, (Harris, 1757/57, p. 68) he includes in 
the ‘sum of money’ private and public bills, or ‘substitutes of coins’, even considering 
the  possibility  paper-bills  might  become  ‘artificial  substitutes’,  or  paper-bills  that 
have “… no bullion locked up in their stead…”. (Harris, 1757/58, p. 95-96)32 

In  another  context,  in  addressing  banks,  Harris  admits  that  hundred  percent 
reserve  banks  are  safe  and  quite  convenient,  but  the  emission  even  of  ‘bills  of 
undoubted credit’ should be kept under control, because they can increase the quantity 
of circulating cash ‘beyond its natural level’, and also endanger credit. In the same 
thread, he concluded that bills of exchange are useful, as far as they spare costs of 
transporting money in internal and international trade. However, bills of exchange are 
substitutes for bullion, and‘… as much a commodity as bullion…’, (Harris, 1757/58, 
p.120), in the sense their value oscillates. This is an additional reason to separate them 
from money. 

Harris’ An Essay upon Money and Coins is a sort of paradoxical text because, 
having  been  written  in  the  second  half  of  the  eighteenth  century,  it  assumes  the 
variety of credit instruments a developed monetary system holds, hardly mentioning 
credit, and not taking into consideration the meaning and consequences of fractional 
reserve  banking.  Yet,  many  decades  earlier,  Charles  Davenant  had  been  more 
specific.  Combating  scarcity  of  money,  he  urged  the  necessity  of  creating  “… 
something  in  the  room  of  money  …  make  it  in  common  estimation  of  equal,  if  not 
                                                 
31 “Money also differs from all commodities in this, that, as such, its value is permanent or unalterable; 
that  is,  Money  being  the  measure  of  the  values  of  all  other  things,  and  that,  like  all  other  standard 
measures, by its quantity only; its own value is to be deemed invariable...”. (Harris, 1757/58), p.40. 
32 In its effects, Harris is equating debasement to “... bills (be) passed to a greater value than there is 
bullion in their stead.” (Harris, 1757/58, p.98). 

 

15 

superior  value  to  money  itself.”  (Davenant,  1697/98,  PS  p.3)  In  his  defense  of 
national credit, he saw the Bank of England initiatives, as well as the use of exchequer 
bills in commerce, as a valuable contribution to enhance the supply of money. Bills of 
the  exchequer  in  fact  “… had … gained that common estimation to be preferred to 
money…”. (Davenant, 1697/8, PS, p.9) 

Davenant was making a defense of credit, proposing its ‘restoration’, and had 
certainly  been  influenced  by  his  master,  Petty,  who,  in  many  writings,  proved  his 
awareness of credit and of the possibility instruments other than specie were used as 
money.33 Indeed,  Political Arithmetick (1696)  contains  a  very  clear  statement  about 
fractional reserve banking.34 Davenant was certainly much more emphatic on credit 
than his contemporary Barbon, who, after acknowledging the importance of credit - 
“Credit is a value raised by opinion, it buys goods as money does; and in all trading 
citys, there’s more wares sold upon credit, then for present money”,  (Barbon,  1690, 
p.8) - didn’t proceed, or didn’t go deeper in his treatment of credit. Although Barbon 
had a clear idea of how spread credit was, he was most of all interested in contrasting 
money (‘value made by a law’) to credit (‘value raised by opinion’). 

Not  even  Montanari  went  much  further.  He  mentioned  giro-banks, 
acknowledged  paper  money  and  admitted  that  “…there  is  almost  no  difference 
between  the  use  of  money  and  of  merchant’s  bills…”  (Montanari,  1683,  p.77). 
Nevertheless, he scarcely mentioned credit, let alone considered its meaning deeply. 

Galiani is a special case, because, in spite of his sophisticated perspective on 
money  and  of  his  non-Lockean  stand  in  most  monetary  questions,  he  considered 
‘intrinsic  value’  an  indelible  property  of  money.  The  absence  of  ‘intrinsic  value’ 
hampered  non-metallic  symbols  permanent  existence  as  money  –  they  weren’t  but 
temporary  substitutes  for  specie.35 According  to  him,  gold  and  silver  are  not  only 
‘naturally money’: to a certain extent, they are irreplaceable. 

By  the  way,  Galiani  defined  money  in  at  least  two  senses:  i)  “Money is a 
common measure to allow us to know the price of all things.” (Galiani, 1751, p.104); 
ii) Money is “… pieces of metal the authority divides in equal or proportional parts, 
and that are quietly given and accepted as pledge and perpetual pawn of receiving 
from other, whenever wished, an equivalent of what was given in exchange of these 
pieces of metal.” (Galiani, 1751, p.110) The first definition points to measure and to 
the relational character of price (and value); the second one, to the (im)possibility of 
keeping  value  along  time  -  in  short,  the  Lockean  ‘pledge’  and  ‘security’  trap. 
Curiously, this trap was in a good number of passages dismissed by the same Galiani, 
based on a strong argument: the value of all things, money included, fluctuates, this 
fluctuation  doesn’t  damaging  money’s  character  of  measure.  What  matters  is  the 
relative  position  of  commodities.  Relative  positions  are  adequately  measured  by 
money,  however  its  value  changes  –  ‘value  is  a  relation’,  as  Galiani  insistently 
phrased. 

 Galiani’s  ‘intrinsic  value’  in  some  circumstances  led  him  to  dead  ends, 
although  he  insisted  in  the  relational  character  of  value  (including  money’s  value), 
                                                 
33 “Nor is Money wanting ... nor were in hand to substitute in the place of Money ... what should be 
equivalente unto it.” (Petty, 1691, p.14) 
34 In discussing the quantity of Money necessary to circulation, Petty argues that there are substitutes 
to hard cash. See Coutinho (2012).  
35 “...  for  this  reason,  no  country  can  use  leather  and  paper-money  as  money  for  a  long  period.” 
(Galiani, 1751, p.111) 

 

16 

and was certainly aware of the importance of commercial bills, banking activities and 
paper money. These instruments and institutions are quite well described in a chapter 
on ‘representations of money’ (Galiani, 1751, Book IV, chapter IV), that suggestively 
begins  by  a  clear-cut  statement  of  the  role  of  public  and  private  debts  in  creating 
money  -  “The representations of money aren’t but expressions of a debt”  (Galiani, 
1751, p.310). However, the possibility written documents became counterfeited was a 
strong preoccupation – and this possibly is the reason of Galiani’s frequent appeal to 
‘intrinsic value’, in discussing credit documents as alternatives to specie. 

Let  us  go  back  to  the  tale  of  the  origins  of  money,  from  barter  to  stamped 
money,  or  even  to  ‘substitutes’  of  money,  as  paper  money.  In  this  tale,  a  crucial 
passage is the choice (by ‘common consent’, or by any means) of a unique symbol or 
material to personify money, in order not only to facilitate exchanges,  but to make 
them feasible in general – to create a Smithean ‘commercial society’, which implies a 
common  measure.  Thus,  money  necessarily  implies  its  general  acceptability  as 
measure, that is, as an instrument able to express the ordering of commodities along 
their  value  spectrum.  In  reality,  this  ‘choice’,  the  singling  out  of  a  commodity  as 
money,  many  times  implies  a  state  action.  Rulers  not  only  guarantee  the  metallic 
content  of  the  instrument  (public  coinage),  as  economists  admit,  but  press  the 
enforcement of this instrument, by pushing it through all transactions; for instance, by 
establishing (by law) that contracts should be firmed up in the monetary unit, as well 
as debts should be extinguished or liquidated in national money and/or taxes paid in 
money. In short, common consent is not always enough, and public action is many 
times called forth in order to impose a monetary unit, which doesn’t imply Knapp’s or 
any other author concept of ‘state money’.36 

However, the stability of this monetary unit cannot be guaranteed. As a matter 
of fact, if we think of debasement, the metallic content of the instrument is always at 
risk.  Additionally,  the  value  of  money  oscillates,  be  it  due  to  debasements,  be  it 
because the values of gold and silver fluctuate. Here lays the temptation to firm up 
contracts in metal weight (as Harris proposed), or to suppose any contract, although 
expressed  in  national  monetary  standard  or  in  national  currency,  presupposes 
determinate weight in pure precious metal (Locke). 

Galiani,  once  more,  annuls  this  illusion:  “… the majority of authors affirms 
that the devolution of an equal weight is in accordance with natural justice, being the 
subjects  not  obliged  to  obey  the  prince  (whenever  the  standard  changes)”.  These 
authors  are  wrong,  he  proceeds.  “The  fact  of  the  intrinsic  value  being  almost  as 
variable as the extrinsic, destroys all equality”. (Galiani, 1751, p.347). And Galiani 
adds  that,  in  a  hundred  years  span,  all  values  change  –  that  is,  the  ordering  of 
commodities itself is mutable. This sort of intrinsic instability of prices and, to some 
extent, of monetary systems, neither blocks contracting nor unsettles monetary order.   

 
I’ve tried to argue that, however questionable in their logic, arguments about 
weight, need of a stable measure, unreasonableness of debasement, character of the 
stamp,  etc,  are  the  basis  of  seventeenth  and  early  eighteenth  century  monetary 
economics.  I  venture  these  questions  project  themselves  into  middle  and  late 
eighteenth century economics – Harris is well representative of this guess -, but this is 
a matter for additional and specific studies. In this paper, I’ve tried to show that these 
                                                 
36 On ‘state money’, see Knapp (1924) and Karimzadi (2013). 

 

17 

disputed questions represented more than theoretical quibbles: they were grounded on 
the reality of the monetary systems of the times, especially in the ‘ideal money’ / ‘real 
money’ divide. In the same line, the permanent concern with ‘measure of value’ is not 
only an Aristotelian reminiscence. It is an exigency of a complex monetary system, 
that had as a structural element the coexistence of national monetary standards and 
coins proper, not to mention the fact that gold and silver are commodities that have 
specific and variable market prices. 

If my guesses are correct, we have new clues to understand the inception of 
monetary  economics,  and  especially,  the  difficulties  of  ‘credit  theories  of  money’ 
(Schumpeter, 1954; Arnon, 2011) imposing themselves in early monetary theory. To 
put it simply, the admission that credit is money doesn’t efface the complexities of the 
monetary systems of the times, which comprise unstableness of monetary standards, 
scarcity of money, mint rate, price of bullion, international flows of commodities and 
money… These were the complex facts monetary economists of the period 1650-1750 
were concerned with. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

18 

REFERENCES 

The 

Lord 

1905. 

Press, 

Available 

Baltimore 

ARNON, A. Monetary Theory and Policy from Hume and Smith to Wicksell – 
Money, Credit, and the Economy. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2011. 
BARBON,  N.  (1696)  “Discourse  Concerning  Coining  the  new  Money  Lighter  – 
Answer  to  Mr.  Lock’s  Considerations  About  Raising  the  Value  of  Money”.  In: 
Magnusson, L. Mercantilism. Routledge, London, 1996. 
BARBON,  N.  (1690)  A  Discourse  of  Trade.  A  Reprint  of  Economic  Tracts. 
Baltimore, 
in: 
<http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/982. Acesso em: 10/08/2010. 
BERKELEY, G. (1735) The Querist (1750). In: Berkeley, G. The Works of George 
Berkeley – in Four Volumes, vol. IV. Edited by Alexander Campbell Fraser. Oxford, 
Clarendon Press, 2005. 
BOYER,  Jérôme.  La  pensée  monétaire  –  Histoire  et  Analyse.  Paris,  Les  Solos, 
2013. 
CANTILLON, R. (1755). Essay on the Nature of Commerce in General. London, 
Transaction Publishers, 2003.  
COUTINHO,  M.  (2011)  “Locke  and  the  quantity  theory  of  Money”.  History  of 
Economics Society 2011 Conference. 
COUTINHO,  M.  (2012)  “Debates  on  the  quantity  of  money  in  circulation:  Petty, 
Locke, Cantillon”. History of Economics Society 2012 Conference. 
DAVENANT, C. (1701) A Postscript to a Discourse of Credit, and the means and 
methods of restoring it. The Making of the Modern World. Web. 8 Mar. 2013. 
ELTIS,  W.  “John  Locke,  the  quantity  theory  of  money  and  the  establishment  of  a 
sound  currency”.  In:  BLAUG,  M.  et  alii.  The  Quantity  Theory  of  Money  –  From 
Locke to keynes and Friedman. Cheltenham, Edward Elgar, 1695. 
FEAVERYEAR, A. The Pound Sterling – A History of English Money. Oxford, 
Clarendon Press, 1963. 
GALIANI, F. Della Moneta (1751). Curitiba, Segesta/Musa, 2000. 
HARRIS,  J.  (1757/58)  An  Essay  upon  Money  and  Coins.  London,  G.  Hawkins, 
1757/58. 
HUME,  D.  (1777).  Essays,  Moral,  Political  and  Literary.  Indianapolis,  Liberty 
Fund, 1985. 
KARIZMADI, S. Money and its Origins. London, Routledge, 2013. 
KNAPP, G.F. The State Theory of Money. London, Macmillan, 1924. 
LAW. J. (1705) Money and Trade Considered:with a proposal for supplying the 
nation with money. Glasgow, R. & A. Foulis, 1705. 
LOCKE,  J.  (1696)  Further  Considerations  Concerning  Raising  the  Value  of 
Money.  In:  LOCKE,  J.  The  Works  of  John  Locke  in  Nine  Volumes.  London, 
Rivington,  12th  ed.,  1824.  Available  in:  <http://oll.libertyfund.org/EBooks/Locke 
0128.04.pdf. Acces in: 10/08/2010. 

 

19 

LOCKE, J. (1692) Some Considerations of the Consequences of the Lowering of 
Interest,  and  Raising  the  Value  of  Money.  In:  LOCKE,  J.    The  Works  of  John 
Locke  in  Nine  Volumes.  London,  Rivington,  12th  ed.,  1824.  Available  in: 
<http://oll.libertyfund.org/EBooks/Locke 0128.04.pdf . Access in: 10/08/2010.  
MEIKLE, S. ‘Aristotle on Money’, Phronesis, vol. 39/1:26-44, 1994. 
MONTANARI,  G.  (1683)  Tratado  Mercantil  sobre  a  Moeda.  Curitiba,  Segesta 
Editora, 2006. 
MURPHY,  A.  E.  John  Law,  Economic  Theorist  and  Policy-Maker.  Oxford, 
Clarendon Press, 1997. 
NORTH, D. (1691) Discourses upon Trade. Edinburgh, Adam and Charles Black,  
1866. 
PETTY, W. (1696). Political Arithmetick. In: Petty, W. The Economic Writings of Sir 
William Petty (Edited by C. H. Hull). Liberty Fund, http://oll.libertyfund.org. 
PETTY,  W.  (1691).  Political  Anatomy  of  Ireland.  In:  Petty,  W.  The  Economic 
Writings  of  Sir  William  Petty 
(Edited  by  C.  H.  Hull).  Liberty  Fund, 
http://oll.libertyfund.org. 
SCHUMPETER, J. (1954). History of Economic Analysis. London, Allen & Unwin, 
1986. 
TURGOT,  A.R.J.  (1766)  Réflexions  sur  la  Formation  et  la  Distribution  des 
Richesses. In: Turgot, Formation & Distribution des Richesses. Paris, Flamarion, 
1997. 
VAUGHAN,  R.  (1675)  A  Discourse  of  Coin  and  Coinage.  London,  Th.  Basset, 
1675. 
 

 

20 

