 

FOLHA DE ROSTO 

 
 

Título: The long expansion and the profit squeeze: output and profit cycles in Brazil (1996-2016) 
 
Autores  e  Filiações  Institucionais:  Guilherme  Klein  Martins  (UMass  Amherst),  Fernando  Rugitsky 
(FEA/USP) 
 
 
Resumo: O objetivo do presente trabalho é contribuir para a compreensão da recente crise brasileira ao 
argumentar que ela se relaciona com uma compressão cíclica dos lucros que ocorreu entre 2009 e 2014, 
seguindo  a  longa  expansão  cíclica  que  se  iniciou  em  2003.  Para  tanto,  são  examinadas  as  trajetórias 
cíclicas do produto e da taxa de lucro da economia brasileira, ao longo dos cinco ciclos econômicos 
identificados entre 1996 e 2016, recorrendo-se à parte do arcabouço estabelecido por Weisskopf (1979) 
que  foca-se  nos  ciclos.  Os  resultados  indicam  que  compressões  dos  lucros  são  raras  na  economia 
brasileira, possivelmente devido ao caráter truncada e à fraqueza das expansões cíclicas. No entanto, uma 
compressão cíclica ocorreu no último ciclo, em parte como resultado do boom das commodities, uma vez 
que o último atenuou a vulnerabilidade externa da economia e permitiu uma expansão mais longa do que 
era usual. 
 
Palavras-chave: compressão cíclica dos lucros, economia brasileira, decomposição da taxa de lucro, 
Weisskopf, modelo Goodwin-estruturalista 
 
Códigos JEL: B50; B51; E32 
 
 
Abstract: The aim of the present paper is to contribute to the understanding of the recent Brazilian crisis 
by  arguing  that  it  was  related  to  a  cyclical  profit  squeeze  that  took  place  between  2009  and  2014, 
following the long cyclical expansion that started in 2003. To do so, the cyclical trajectories of output and 
profit rates in the Brazilian economy, throughout the five business cycles that took place between 1996 
and 2016, are examined by resorting to the part of the framework established by Weisskopf (1979) that 
focuses on cycles. The results indicate that profit squeezes are rare in the Brazilian economy, possibly due 
to the truncated character and the weakness of the business cycles’ expansions. However, a profit squeeze 
did  took  place  in  the  last  cycle,  partly  as  result  of  the  commodities  boom,  as  the  latter  attenuated  the 
foreign vulnerability of the economy and allowed for a longer than usual expansion. 
 
Keywords:  cyclical  profit  squeeze;  Brazilian  economy;  profit  rate  decomposition;  Weisskopf; 
structuralist Goodwin model 
 
JEL Codes: B50; B51; E32 
 
 
Área ANPEC: 2 – Economia Política 
 

 

 1 

 

Between 2014 and 2016, the Brazilian economy collapsed. After more than ten years of rates of 
economic growth above the recent historical average, real gross domestic product (GDP) fell almost 10 
percent from its last peak, in the first quarter of 2014, to the most recent trough, in the last quarter of 
2016.  Unemployment  rate,  in  its  turn,  more  than  doubled,  surging  from  6.2  to  13.7  percent  between 
December 2013 and March 2017. The present paper aims to contribute to recent debates on the origins 
and  determinants  of  such  collapse.  To  do  so,  we  resort  to  an  empirical  investigation  of  the  cyclical 
trajectory  of  the  profit  rate  in  Brazil  throughout  the  last  five  business  cycles,  from  1996  to  2016, 
following closely the framework established, in this Journal, by Weisskopf (1979). The present work, 
which uses extensively the results obtained by Martins (2017), is part of an ongoing research project that 
attempts  to  interpret  the  recent  Brazilian  economic  trajectory  from  the  standpoint  of  growth  and 
distribution models (Carvalho/Rugitsky, 2015; Rugitsky, 2015, 2016, 2017; Gonçalves, 2017). 

To  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  this  is  the  first  attempt  to  apply  the  part  of  Weisskopf’s  (1979) 
framework that focuses on the cyclical phenomena to countries other than the United States (U.S.). The 
rarity of this kind of research is probably due to the difficulty to obtain data for profit rates in a frequency 
adequate  to  examine  cyclical  dynamics.  Most  studies  on  profitability  rely  on  annual  data  and,  as  a 
consequence,  focus  on  longer-term  trends.1 Taking  advantage  of  data  made  recently  available  (Souza 
Júnior, 2017), the present research computed a quarterly profit rate series from 1996 to 2016. 

The  results  obtained  seemed  illuminating  due  to  its  contrast  to  the  ones  obtained  for  the  U.S. 
economy, by Weisskopf (1979) himself and by subsequent research (Henley, 1987; Bakir and Campbell, 
2006, 2009, 2017; Izquierdo, 2013). These investigations have suggested that a cyclical profit squeeze is 
one of the main determinants of cyclical dynamics in the U.S., with the expansion phase of each cycle 
bringing  about  a  squeeze  in  the  profit  rate  that  eventually  unleashes  the  contraction  phase.  In  general, 
such a pattern does not seem to apply to Brazil, being hard to identify profit squeezes in its data. As a 
peripheral economy dependent on the exports of primary goods, the end of its cyclical expansions seems 
to be generally brought about by foreign shocks. It is also noteworthy that its cycles tend to be shorter, 
with expansion phases that are not long enough to tighten the labor market sufficiently for profits to be 
squeezed: the U.S. economy went through only 4 cycles between 1980 and 2009 and their average length 
was more than 7 years (28.9 quarters), whereas the Brazilian economy went through 7 cycles between 
1983 and 2009 and their average length was less than 4 years (14.9 quarters).2 

The  fact  that  cycles  in  peripheral  economies  are  exogenously  determined  is,  of  course,  an  old 
theme  from  Latin  American  structuralism.  A  recent  examination  of  this  issue  by  the  Economic 
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), resorting to data for 59 countries from 1990 
to 2010, found similar results (ECLAC, 2012: chap. 3; see also Pérez Caldentey, Titelman, and Carvallo, 
2014): the average duration of cycles is shorter in Latin America and the Caribbean than in other regions, 
like East Asia and OECD member countries (ECLAC, 2012: 101). Moreover, it is noteworthy that the 
difference  is  explained  mainly  by  the  contrasting  duration  of  the  expansion  phases  of  the  cycles,  with 
contraction  phases  being  more  homogeneous  in  their  duration  across  regions.  The  Brazilian  case  is 
singled out in this analysis due to the fact that the expansion phases of its cycles, in this period, were even 
shorter and had smaller amplitude than the Latin American average. ECLAC (2012: 100-1) argues that 
such  “truncated  expansion  phases,”  characteristic  of  the  region,  are  “determined  by  external  shocks 
(particularly in relation to access to international liquidity and terms-of-trade fluctuations) and procyclical 
policies.” 

The last cycle of the Brazilian economy, however, shows a pattern similar to the one identified for 
the U.S. economy. In the fourth quarter of 2009, some quarters into the expansion phase, the profit rate 
peaked and started to decline. Then, after a long profit squeeze, the contraction phase began in the first 
                                                 
1 For the case of Brazil, see especially Marquetti, Maldonado, and Lautert (2010) and Marquetti and Porsse (2014). Weisskopf 
(1988)  himself  had  to  change  his  framework  when  he  extended  his  research  to  other  rich  countries,  having  available  only 
annual figures. 
2 According to the dating of cycles by, respectively, the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) and the Brazilian 
Committee on the Dating of Business Cycles (CODACE). This difference remains if alternative periods are considered. The 
average length of all 11 cycles that the U.S. economy went through since 1945 is just below 6 years (23.2 quarters) and the 
cycles for the Brazilian economy considered in this research, that is, those between 1995 and 2016, had an average of a little 
more than 4 years (17 quarters). 

 2 

 
quarter of 2014. It is plausible that the magnitude of the collapse that followed can be, at least partly, 
attributed to the fact that it was the compounded result of a foreign shock and a profit squeeze. As it will 
be  suggested  below,  such  profit  squeeze,  an  uncommon  occurrence  in  the  Brazilian  economy,  was 
probably allowed by the commodities boom (on the latter, see Erten and Ocampo,2013; and Reinhart, 
Reinhart, and Trebesch, 2016). It is suggested from this recent history that, when foreign bonanzas allow 
the  Brazilian  economy  to  grow  for  periods  longer  than  usual,  it  becomes  subject  to  the  cyclical  profit 
squeeze dynamics that seems to be typical of rich economies. In this way, the present research contributes 
to  the  examination  of  the  specificity  of  the  distributive  conflict  and  of  class  struggle  in  peripheral 
economies. 

The identification of the profit squeeze in the run-up to the crisis does not entail disregarding other 
potential  determinants  of  the  collapse.  The  debate  on  such  determinants  is  still  far  from  settled,  but 
critical economists tend to emphasize the crucial role played by (i) the turn to austerity, in late 2014, (ii) 
the political crisis that began with the massive protests of 2013, was aggravated by the impeachment of 
President Dilma Rousseff (from the Workers’ Party) in 2016 and resulted in a deep rearrangement of the 
Brazilian  party  system  in  the  election  of  2018,  in  which  a  candidate  from  the  extreme-right,  Jair 
Bolsonaro, rose to the presidency, and (iii) the fall of commodities prices, which had peaked in 2011, at 
the end of the boom, and fell significantly in 2015 (see, for a sample of this debate, Singer (2015, 2018), 
Serrano and Summa (2016, 2018), and Saad-Filho and Morais (2018)). 

It is arguable that the occurrence of a profit squeeze, from 2009 to 2014, rather than being a fourth 
main determinant of the crisis, can be seen as a determinant of the turn to austerity and of the political 
crisis themselves. The distributive conflict that resulted from the profit squeeze seems to have contributed 
decisively to Rousseff’s decision to shift economic policy towards austerity, after the election of 2014. It 
likely also contributed to the decision by the ruling classes to support, in spite of the turn to austerity, the 
impeachment  process  that  was  initially  articulated  by  the  opposition  parties  in  Congress.3 In  what 
concerns the commodities prices, it certainly had many effects in the Brazilian economy, reducing foreign 
demand and putting pressure on the balance of payments. But its effects on the profit rate, through the 
capacity/capital ratio, cannot be underestimated, as the data presented in the following sections indicate. 
 
1. CYCLICAL PROFIT SQUEEZE: THEORY AND HISTORY 
 

The usefulness of Weisskopf’s (1979) framework can be more clearly suggested by presenting it 
alongside certain growth and distribution models.4 In 1967, Goodwin suggested that Volterra’s predator 
and prey model could be used to represent Marx’s interpretation of the business cycle. More concretely, 
he  conceived  a  framework  in  which  growth  and  the  functional  distribution  of  income  determine  each 
other, leading to cycles in employment and the wage share. The impact of distribution on growth resulted 
from  assuming:  (i)  that,  following  Kalecki,  there  are  savings  only  out  of  profits;  (ii)  that  savings 
automatically  become  investment  (Say’s  law);  and  (iii)  that  the  capital/output  ratio  is  stable.  Goodwin 
(1967:  54)  claimed  that  the  last  assumption  was  of  “an  empirical  sort”  and  admitted  that  it  was 
“disputable”,  while  the  first  two  were  made  “for  convenience.”  It  follows  from  the  three  assumptions 
above  that  a  higher  profit  share  raises  the  savings  rate  and,  consequently,  the  investment  rate.  Faster 
accumulation of capital, in its turn, leads to faster economic growth (the two rates must be equal in order 
to  keep  the  capital/output  ratio  constant).  Resorting  to  current  jargon,  one  could  argue  that  this 
formulation is the equivalent, in a savings-driven model, of a profit-led growth regime. 

                                                 
3 It could be argued that the connection between the profit squeeze and the contraction is weakened by the fact that the former 
began almost three years before the latter. However, as will be discussed in the following sections, the effects of the profit 
squeeze  on  capital  accumulation  might  have  been  attenuated  by  a  payroll  tax  reduction  that  was  implemented  from  2012 
onwards (Scherer, 2015). This reduction seems not to have been able to avoid ultimately the accentuation of the distributive 
conflict  and  the  deterioration  of  the  political  situation,  which  eventually  contributed  to  creating  the  conditions  for  the 
contraction. In addition, such lag between the profit squeeze and the contraction is in line with the one found in the research for 
the U.S. economy (see, for instance, Izquierdo, 2013: 465-7) 
4 This presentation was in part inspired by Lavoie’s (2017) recent analysis of Weisskopf (1979). For a recent literature review 
of cyclical profit squeeze theories that focuses rather on the Marxist contributions, see Basu, Chen, and Oh (2013: 577-580). 

 3 

 

 

The other side of the model consists of the impact of growth on distribution. This resulted from 
the assumption that real wage “rises in the neighbourhood of full employment” (1967: 54). When output 
growth is faster than labor productivity growth (he assumed the latter grew at a constant, exogenous rate), 
employment increases, strengthening the bargaining position of the workers, pushing real wages up, and 
squeezing the profit share (once real wage growth is faster than labor productivity growth). One could 
call  this  inverse  relation  between  growth  and  the  profit  share  a  profit-squeeze  distributive  schedule 
(following Barbosa-Filho and Taylor, 2006). Putting everything together, the result would be a cyclical 
trajectory. When employment is low, real wages grow less than labor productivity, increasing the profit 
share and accelerating output growth. Such growth would increase employment until real wage growth 
surpassed the growth of labor productivity, squeezing profits. The resulting lower profit share cuts down 
capital accumulation and ends up decreasing employment. Eventually, the weakened bargaining position 
of workers is reflected in lower real wage growth and the profit share recovers, reinitiating the cycle. 

Briefly  put,  Goodwin  (1967)  formalized  a  cyclical  profit  squeeze,  based  on  the  periodical 
depletion and reconstitution of the reserve army of labor, providing a mathematical representation of an 
argument elaborated by Marx (1867/1976: chap. 25). For the purposes of the present paper, it is useful to 
consider the implications of Goodwin’s (1967) cycle for the trajectory of the profit rate, decomposed in 
the way suggested by Weisskopf (1979: 342): 
 

where 𝜌 stands for the profit rate, Π is the volume of profits, 𝐾 is the capital stock, 𝑌 is output, and Z is 
rate can be decomposed in three elements, the profit share of income (𝜎!), the capacity utilization rate 
(𝜑), and the capacity/capital ratio (𝜁). Given that Goodwin (1967) assumed a stable capital/output ratio, 

potential output (that is, output produced at full utilization of productive capacity). In this way, the profit 

𝜌=Π𝐾=𝛱𝑌𝑌ZZK=𝜎!𝜑𝜁 

he  disregarded  the  trajectories  of  the  utilization  rate  and  the  capacity/capital  ratio  (which,  when 
multiplied,  result  in  the  output/capital  ratio).  It  follows  that  his  profit  share  cycles  are  also  profit  rate 
cycles. 

Barbosa-Filho  and  Taylor  (2006)  formulated  a  version  of  Goodwin’s  model  that  essentially 
entailed the incorporation of the principle of effective demand.5 They called it a “structuralist Goodwin 
model.”  Instead  of  output  growth,  in  their  model  it  is  the  capacity  utilization  rate  that  interacts  with 
distribution to generate cycles. Correspondingly, the cycles are in utilization and the wage share.  

The  main  novelty  of  their  model  lies  in  the  impact  of  distribution  on  utilization6.  Abandoning 
Say’s law, they assume that output is determined by effective demand and that the latter, in its turn, is a 
function  of  income  distribution  (following  Kaleckian  growth  and  distribution  models,  pioneered  by 
Rowthorn  (1981),  Dutt  (1984),  Taylor  (1985),  Blecker  (1989),  and  Bhaduri  and  Marglin  (1990)). 
Assuming a higher propensity to consume out of wages than out of profits, a higher profit share decreases 
consumption,  but  has  a  positive  impact  on  investment.  Depending  on  the  parameters,  a  direct  or  an 
inverse relation can result between the profit share and utilization. The former case is called the profit-led 
                                                 
5 Another model of demand-driven cycles inspired by Goodwin was formulated by Skott. For a comparison of the latter with 
Barbosa-Filho and Taylor’s, see von Arnin and Barrales (2015). 
6 The impact of utilization on distribution is explained by the same underlying mechanism that links growth to distribution in 
Goodwin’s  model.  An  increase  in  utilization  pushes  real  wages  up,  resulting  in  a  rate  of  growth  above  that  of  labor 
productivity, squeezing profits. Hence, they call it a “Marxist” distributive curve. Some of the literature on the cyclical profit 
squeeze assumes that, in the late expansion phase of the cycle, the rate of labor productivity growth is pushed down at the same 
time that real wages are being pushed up. The logic behind such effect is that “an increase in working class power enables 
workers to resist more successfully capitalist efforts to increase work intensity (via increased discipline, speed-ups, and other 
measures  designed  to  increase  labour  efficiency  units  per  hour  of  work)  and  thereby  to  reduce  the  rate  of  growth  of  labor 
productivity.”  (Weisskopf,  1979:  346)  See  also  Boddy  and  Crotty  (1975:  8)  and  Goldstein  (1996:  57).  There  are  also 
reasonable grounds to suppose that an increase in utilization accelerates rather than decelerates the rate of labor productivity 
growth, as Barbosa-Filho and Taylor (2006: 398) suggest, due to “technological, scale and composition effects” (the so-called 
Kaldor-Verdoorn law would be an example). Be that as it may, the inverse relation between utilization and the profit share 
depends only on the impact of utilization on wages being stronger than its impact on productivity. It does not require rising 
utilization to decrease the rate of growth of labor productivity, neither it is incompatible with such decrease. 

 4 

 
demand regime, while the latter is the wage-led one. Based on data for the U.S., they argue that the profit-
led case is the most relevant one and focus their discussion on it. This option entails that the cycle that 
emerges  from  their  model  is  similar  to  Goodwin’s  (1967),  except  for  the  role  played  by  effective 
demand.7 

Regarding the cyclical trajectory of the profit rate, however, Barbosa-Filho and Taylor’s (2006) 
model goes beyond Goodwin’s in a significant way.8 The cycles in the capacity utilization rate imply that 
the assumption of a stable capital/output ratio is abandoned. The reason is that, as shown in Weisskopf’s 
(1979) decomposition of the profit rate, the output/capital ratio moves along the utilization rate, assuming 
that changes in the latter are not compensated by changes in the capacity/capital ratio. Consequently, the 
structuralist Goodwin model’s cyclical dynamics of the profit share and of utilization tend to result in 
more complex profit rate cycles. Dividing the trajectory into four phases, one can summarize their results 
in the following way: 
 
(A) Starting from a low capacity utilization rate, both utilization and the profit share increase, the former 
due to increasing demand (a result of the above-average profit share) and the latter due to slack in the 
labor market. Rising utilization and profit share both increase the rate of profit. 
 
(B) The previous increase in utilization results in a tight labor market, with real wages growing above 
labor  productivity  and,  consequently,  squeezing  the  profit  share.  Given  that  the  profit  share,  despite 
starting  to  fall,  is  close  to  its  highest  level  in  the  cycle,  demand  is  still  increasing  and  bringing  about 
further increases in utilization.9 The trajectory of the profit rate depends on the relative strength of the two 
antagonistic forces (a falling profit share and a rising utilization rate). 
 
(C) The third phase is the beginning of the contraction. The previous decrease in the profit share becomes 
large enough to reduce aggregate demand and utilization. Due to the fact that the latter, despite falling, is 
still close to its peak, workers remain in a strong bargaining position to further squeeze the profit share. 
The profit rate decreases in this phase, with the simultaneous fall of the profit share and utilization. 
 
(D) The fourth phase is the final part of the contraction. It is characterized by the gradual recovery of the 
profit  share,  an  effect  of  the  fall  of  utilization  that  began  in  the  previous  phase  and  that  resulted  in  a 
working class weakened by rising unemployment. Given that the profit share, despite starting to increase, 
is close to its lowest level in the cycle, demand is still falling and bringing about further decreases in 
utilization.  Once  more,  the  trajectory  of  the  profit  rate  depends  on  the  relative  strength  of  the  two 
antagonistic forces (a rising profit share and a falling utilization rate). 
 

Such  models  allow  one  to  identify  determinants  of  the  cyclical  dynamics  of  growth  and 
distribution in capitalist economies, combining explanations for the trajectories of capital accumulation 
and of the distributive conflict between capital and labor. But mechanically applying them to illuminate 
specific historical episodes may lead to misleading results. Weisskopf’s (1979) empirical strategy allows 

                                                 
7 Another way to interpret the meaning of Barbosa-Filho and Taylor’s (2006) extension of Goodwin’s (1967) model is to argue 
that they conceived of a framework that combines two variants of the Marxist literature on cycles, the “rising strength of labor” 
variant and the “realization failure” one, whereas Goodwin (1967) incorporated only the former. See, on the debate between 
the different variants of explanation of the cyclical profit squeeze, Boddy and Crotty (1975, 1976), Sherman (1976, 1997), 
Weisskopf (1979, 1988), Goldstein (1996, 1999), and Basu, Chen, and Oh (2013). 
8 It  might  be  useful  to  clarify  that  Barbosa-Filho  and  Taylor’s  model  does  not  focus  on  the  trajectory  of  the  profit  rate, 
emphasizing rather the cyclical trajectory of the profit share. Whereas the profit share is the variable of interest to examine the 
cyclical dynamics of the functional distribution of income, there is some debate whether capitalists focus on the profit share or 
the profit rate in their investment decisions. Kaleckian literature, in particular, is divided on this issue: for a summary of this 
debate, see Lavoie (2014: 370-375). For a profit (rate) squeeze to be relevant, the necessary assumption is that the profit rate is 
the main variable of interest for capitalists or, at least, for the dynamics of a capitalist economy. 
9 It is noteworthy that the cyclical interaction between demand and distribution is determined by both schedules, not only by 
the demand regime. Thus, despite the assumption that aggregate demand is profit-led, during this phase B, which is precisely 
the profit squeeze, utilization increases whereas the profit share falls. 

 5 

 
one to examine the data for specific cycles from the standpoint of the models discussed above, but it also 
helps to assess whether particular cyclical trajectories deviated from the one predicted by the models. 

Weisskopf (1979) himself thought of his framework as destined to evaluate empirically different 
variants of Marxian crisis theory, that is, the different Marxian explanations for the law of the tendential 
fall  in  the  profit  rate.  Those  explanations  are  usually  associated  with  the  long-run  phenomena,  but  he 
argued that they could also be considered as theories “of short-run cyclical declines in the rate of profit 
(to explain capitalist business cycles).” (p. 341). With the data available to him, he examined both long-
run and short-run dynamics. 

Only the part of his work concerning cycles is of interest for the present research. It began by 
dividing each of the five cycles that the U.S.’ economy went through between 1949 and 1975 in three 
phases, as suggested by the fact that, in each cycle, the profit rate peaked before output. The first phase, 
designated phase A or early expansion, was dated from the trough of real output to the peak of the profit 
rate. Phase B, or late expansion, began at the peak of the profit rate and ended in the peak of real output, 
while phase C, also called contraction, lasted from the peak of output to its subsequent trough. With this 
division, he estimated the change in the profit rate (and in its components) in each phase of each cycle 
and then averaged the results obtained for the same phases of all cycles.  

Very briefly, the results he obtained were the following. The profit rate increased in phase A, in 
the  average  for  the  5  cycles,  due  to  increases  in  the  profit  share  and  in  utilization.  Then,  in  the  late 
expansion  (phase  B),  a  profit  (rate)  squeeze  was  the  result  of  a  falling  profit  share,  which  more  than 
compensated the modest increase in utilization. Finally, during the contraction (phase C), the profit rate 
was further brought down by an additional decrease in the profit share and by a decline in utilization. The 
trajectory of the capacity/capital ratio did not have much impact on the profit rate in any phase of the 
cycle.  

Weisskopf’s (1979) results can be seen as an empirical vindication of the structuralist Goodwin 
model for the U.S. economy. The trajectories observed on phases A and B are the ones predicted for the 
first two phases of the demand and distribution cycles, described above. And Weisskopf’s (1979) results 
complement the theoretical description by pointing out that in the late expansion the decline in the profit 
share more than compensates for the increase in utilization, resulting in a profit rate squeeze. Weisskopf 
(1979: 350) opted for not dividing the contraction into two phases and so his phase C should be read as 
the combination of the two contraction phases of the theoretical cycles described above (the ones referred 
to as C and D).  

The present paper is an attempt to contribute to the sparse efforts that make use of the approach 
developed  by  Weisskopf  (1979)  –  like  Henley  (1987),  Bakir  and  Campbell  (2006,  2009,  2017),  and 
Izquierdo (2013), all of them focused on updating the framework for the more recent U.S. cycles – and to 
analyze whether his results are valid for other periods or for other economies, especially peripheral ones. 
It should be mentioned as well that the present research is also related to other attempts to interpret the 
current Brazilian crisis by focusing on the trajectory of the profit rate, like Rocca and Santos Jr. (2014), 
Marquetti, Hoff, and Miebach (2016), Pinto et al. (2016), and Martins (2017). 

It  is  assumed,  in  order  to  interpret  the  empirical  results  in  light  of  the  theoretical  framework 
described  above,  that  the  Brazilian  economy  is  characterized  in  the  period  in  question  by  a  profit-led 
demand  regime  and  a  profit-squeeze  distributive  schedule.  Such  assumption  seems  in  line  with  the 
burgeoning literature that attempts to estimate these schedules from Brazilian data, which in most cases 
tend to find a profit-led demand regime (see, for instance, Araújo and Gala, 2012; Oreiro and Araújo, 
2013;  Feijó,  Câmara,  and  Cerqueira.  2015;  Feijó,  Lamônica,  and  Bastos,  2015;  Gonçalves,  2017;  and 
Jesus, Araújo, and Drumond, 2018). Attempts to estimate the distributive schedule are less common, but 
there is evidence for the profit squeeze one (Gonçalves, 2017). A detailed investigation of the cyclical 
dynamics  of  demand  and  distribution  in  Brazil  since  the  early  2000s,  which  also  assumes  a  profit-led 
demand regime and a profit-squeeze distributive schedule, can be found in Rugitsky (2017). 
 
2. OUTPUT AND PROFIT CYCLES IN BRAZIL (1996-2016) 
 

 6 

 

 

Data for the five Brazilian business cycles that took place between 1996 and 2016 are presented in 
Table 1 and Figure 1, below. Details about sources and the method for computing the profit rate, as well 
as its decomposition, can be found in Appendix 1. It is remarkable that cycle I does not have a phase B 
(late  expansion),  as  defined  by  Weisskopf  (1979),  given  that  output  and  profit  rate  peak  at  the  same 
quarter. In cycles II, III, and IV, in their turn, the profit rate peaks between one and two quarters before 
output, so that, given the inherent imprecision in the dating of cycles, these short profit squeezes should 
be interpreted with caution. Finally, cycle V has the three phases well defined and so is reminiscent of the 
U.S. cycles. 

It should be noted that attempts to update Weisskopf’s (1979) work to more recent U.S. data also 
found  a  cycle  without  phase  B,  the  one  between  1980  and  1982  (Henley,  1987;  Bakir  and  Campbell, 
2006, 2009, 2017; and Izquierdo, 2013).10 The latter is usually explained as an expansion cut short by 
Volcker’s contractionary monetary policy, so that it did not last long enough to significantly impact the 
labor market and, through this impact, squeeze profits (Brenner, 1998/2006: 194-198).  
 

[TABLE 1 AND FIGURE 1] 

Is  there  a  similar  explanation  for  the  mentioned  pattern  of  the  first  four  Brazilian  cycles  under 
consideration? That is, were there also factors exogenous to the cycles that prematurely interrupted the 
cyclical expansions? The first cycle, from the third quarter of 1995 to the first quarter of 1999, roughly 
coincides  with  the  first  Fernando  Henrique  Cardoso  government  (1995-1998),  a  period  marked  by  the 
price  stabilization  that  followed  the  implementation  of  the  Real  Plan  and  by  the  implementation  of 
neoliberal reforms (Belluzzo and Almeida, 2002: chap. 8; Fishlow, 2011: 44-47, 50-65; Nobre, 2013: 69-
89). Such a cycle was characterized by the expansion that had the lowest average quarterly rate of growth 
among the eight expansions from 1983 to 2016. The expansion was too weak to put pressure on the labor 
market and the average unemployment rate actually rose every year during the expansion, from 1995 to 
1997.  Besides  being  weak,  it  was  also  short,  lasting  only  9  quarters,  whereas  the  average  length  of 
expansions is 12.4 quarters (taking into consideration the 5 cycles examined). Such expansion could not 
have led to a cyclical profit squeeze and the profit rate fell only with the onset of the contraction, which 
was mainly determined by the contagion from the East Asian crisis (Brenner, 2002/2003: chap. 6; Palma, 
2006), which ultimately led to the abandonment of the fixed exchange rate regime in early 1999. 

The subsequent cycle, from the first quarter of 1999 to the fourth quarter of 2001, was similar in 
several  aspects,  being  characterized  by  a  short  and  weak  expansion  that  had  little  impact  on  the  labor 
market.  Its  expansion  phase  was  a  quarter  shorter  than  the  one  of  the  first  cycle,  but  it  was  slightly 
stronger11. In this case, the unemployment rate fell, but very mildly: the average rate for 1998, the year of 
the previous contraction, was 8.4 percent, whereas the average for 2000, the last year of the expansion, 
was  7.8  percent.  The  data  suggest  that  the  profit  rate  peaked  in  the  last  quarter  of  2000,  while  the 
expansion lasted until the first quarter of 2001, but the mentioned evidence points against interpreting this 
interval  as  a  late  expansion  characterized  by  a  cyclical  profit  squeeze.  This  second  cycle  roughly 
coincides with Cardoso’s second government (1999-2002), which was characterized by the establishment 
of the so-called macroeconomic tripod: inflation targeting, flexible exchange rates, and primary surplus 
targets (Pastore and Pinotti, 2005; Farhi, 2006; Nobre, 2013: 89-100). The policy shift did not succeed, 
however, in reducing the fragility that plagued the economy and the expansion was eventually cut short, 
mainly, by the Nasdaq crash that ultimately led to a recession in the U.S. (Brenner, 2002/2003: chap. 10) 
and in other rich countries, being the contraction intensified by an energy crisis in Brazil in mid-2001. 

Cycle III, from the fourth quarter of 2001 to the second quarter of 2003, comprises the last year of 
Cardoso’s second government and the crisis triggered by the speculation around the election in which 
Luís Inácio Lula da Silva, from the Worker’s Party, was first brought to office (Pastore and Pinotti, 2005; 
Paulani, 2008). Its expansion was even shorter than the previous two, lasting only 4 quarters, and again 
the unemployment rate rose, instead of falling. The immediate determinant of the contraction phase that 
                                                 
10 Goldstein  (1996:  59)  argues  that  the  expansion  of  the  cycle  between  1980  and  1982  “is  better  interpreted  as  a  blip  in  a 
collapse that extends from 1979-82.” See also Goldstein (1996: 71). 
11 Average annualized quarterly growth rate was 3.7 percent, instead of 3.5 percent. 

 7 

 
began in the fourth quarter of 2002 was the economic turmoil related to the election that took place in 
October.  Anticipating  the  victory  of  Lula,  capital  flight  led  to  a  depreciation  of  64  per  cent  of  the 
Brazilian  real  against  the  dollar,  between  April  and  October  2002.  To  contain  the  impact  of  the 
depreciation  on  the  inflation  rate,  the  central  bank  increased  the  nominal  interest  rate  from  18  to  26.5 
percent, between October 2002 and March 2003, in a procyclical move common in peripheral economies 
(Kaminsky, Reinhart, and Végh, 2005; Ocampo, Rada, and Taylor, 2009). 

The fourth cycle, from the second quarter of 2003 to the first quarter of 2009, is similar to the 
previous three in the fact that it ended due to the impact of a foreign shock: in this instance, the contagion 
effects of the financial crisis that erupted in the U.S. in the fall of 2008. However, it differs from the 
previous  ones  in  the  length  and  strength  of  its  expansion:  it  lasted  for  21  quarters  and  its  average 
annualized quarterly rate of growth was 5.2 percent. Such long and strong expansion was bound to impact 
the labor market: the average unemployment rate declined from 12.3 to 7.9 percent, between 2003 and 
2008.  As  a  consequence  of  this  impact,  of  policies  adopted  in  the  period,  and  of  changes  in  the 
occupational structure (along with technical change), the profit share oscillated around a declining trend 
throughout  the  period  (see  Rugitsky,  2017),  but  that  was  compensated  by  increases  in  the  capacity 
utilization  rate  and  the  capacity/capital  ratio.  The  profit  rate  could  thus  keep  increasing  until  the 
contraction, peaking only one quarter before output. This trajectory will be further analyzed in the next 
section. 

In historical perspective, it is important to note that the cyclical trajectory of the profit rate in these 
four  cycles  represented  an  oscillation  around  a  mild  upward  trend  that  contrasts  with  the  long-term 
decline  of  profitability  since  the  1950s  (Marquetti  and  Porsse,  2014).  This  inflection  in  the  historical 
trend, during the first three cycles, was a consequence both of a stabilization of the output/capital ratio 
and of an increase of the profit share, a result in its turn of the weakening of the working classes that 
accompanied  the  implementation  of  neoliberalism.  In  the  words  of  Marquetti  and  Porsse  (2014:  65), 
“[t]his  change  was  apparently  connected  with  the  effects  of  neoliberal  reforms  and  macroeconomic 
policies relating to employment and wages, which strengthened the political power of the capitalist class.” 
The  heightened  external  fragility  resulting  from  the  processes  of  trade  and  financial  liberalization  that 
began in the early 1990s and the ensuing truncated cyclical expansions, kept unemployment rates at high 
levels, blocking even a temporary, cyclical recovery of the bargaining position of the workers, until the 
commodities boom and the long expansion (see below). 

To further examine the cyclical pattern of the Brazilian economy, the rates of change of the profit 
rate for each phase of the cycles (early expansion, late expansion, and contraction) can be decomposed in 
its  three  determinants:  the  profit  share,  the  capacity  utilization  rate,  and  the  capacity/capital  ratio.  The 
results are presented in Tables 2, 3.1 and 3.2 and in Figure 2, below. 
 

[TABLES 2, 3.1 AND 3.2 AND FIGURE 2] 

The  results  obtained  have  several  similarities  to  the  ones  presented  by  Weisskopf  (1979),  even 
though  the  first  four  cycles  examined  here  were  cut  short  by  exogenous  factors,  thus  not  presenting 
cyclical  profit  squeezes.  Such  similarities  suggest  that  the  cyclical  interaction  between  the  relevant 
variables take place despite the “truncated” character of the expansions. The increase in the rate of profit 
during the early expansion, phase A, is mostly explained by an increase in the profit share both in the 
Brazilian (Table 2) and in the U.S. (Weisskopf, 1979: table 4) cases. An increase in utilization also plays 
an  important  role.  In  the  late  expansion,  phase  B,  in  its  turn,  the  decline  of  the  profit  rate  is  almost 
exclusively explained by the decrease of the profit share, with the utilization and the capacity/capital ratio 
playing minor roles, also both in the Brazilian and in the U.S. cases.12 Finally, during the contraction, 
phase  C,  the  main  determinants  of  the  decline  of  the  profit  rate  are  falls  of  the  profit  share  and  of 
                                                 
12 Given  that  three  of  our  four  phases  B  are  hardly  typical  representatives  of  a  cyclical  profit  squeeze,  it  might  be  more 
adequate to compare the average results for the U.S. with the one obtained for the phase B of last Brazilian business cycle 
being examined (Table 3.2). In the latter case, the decline of the profit share is still the main determinant of the fall in the profit 
rate, but a decline in the capacity/capital ratio has a similar impact. This cycle will be examined in  more detail in the next 
section. 

 

 8 

 
utilization – in the U.S. case the role of the profit share is a bit larger, whereas in the Brazilian case the 
opposite is true. In all phases, the role of the capacity/capital ratio is almost negligible in the U.S. case, 
while in the Brazilian one, its impact is a bit larger, but it remains a secondary determinant.13 

One  could  argue  that  the  rarity  of  profit  squeezes  in  the  Brazilian  case  makes  the  above 
comparison less compelling as a dynamic as the one suggested by the theoretical literature examined in 
section 1 seems not to characterize the Brazilian economy. However, the rarity in itself seems to be an 
interesting  result,  contributing  to  the  understanding  of  the  specificity  of  business  cycles  and  of  the 
distributive  conflict  in  peripheral  countries  like  Brazil.  In  addition,  the  fact  that  such  an  uncommon 
phenomenon, the profit squeeze, did take place between 2009 and 2014 could help to interpret the depth 
of the collapse that followed. If the pressure of the workers on profits tended to be constrained by the 
truncated cyclical expansions, it is plausible that, once it was unleashed by a long expansion, it would 
have deep political and economic consequences, something further analyzed in the next section.  

It should be noted, finally, that the results presented above, in Tables 2, 3.1, and 3.2, seem to be 
robust. First, an alternative series for the profit rate was calculated using a different estimate of the capital 
stock14. Second, the decompositions of the changes in the profit rate were calculated based on two other 
slightly  different  datings  of  the  cycles  and  of  the  cycle  phases.  The  results  of  all  these  different 
calculations,  which  are  available  upon  request,  were  qualitatively  very  similar.  However,  the  use  of  a 
different  measure  of  utilization  has  a  greater  impact  on  the  results,  enhancing  the  role  of  the 
capacity/capital ratio in the trajectory of the profit rate and reducing that of utilization. For a presentation 
of this alternative and a brief analysis of its implications, see Appendix 6 (available upon request). 
 
3. THE COMMODITIES BOOM, THE LONG EXPANSION, AND THE PROFIT SQUEEZE 
 

Taking into consideration this summary of the data for the last five Brazilian business cycles, the 
present  section  will  focus  on  an  examination  of  the  profit  squeeze  that  took  place  in  the  last  late 
expansion, between 2009 and 2014, and of its origins. Figures for the unemployment rate suggest that, in 
fact, the contraction that resulted from the onset of the crisis in the U.S., in 2008, should be interpreted as 
a  short  interruption  of  a  long  expansion  that  took  place  between  2003  and  2014,  comprising  the  two 
Lula’s governments and the first government by Dilma Rousseff. The unemployment rate, which was at 
12.3 percent in 2003, reached 7.9 in 2008, remained practically stable in 2009 (with an average of 8.1), 
despite the contraction, and went on falling afterwards until 2014, when it had reached 4.8 percent. 

It is not unlikely that the early expansion of the fourth cycle was close to turn into a profit squeeze 
when it was suddenly cut short by the contagion effects of the crisis that began in the U.S. It had lasted 
more than 5 years, being, by a wide margin15, the longest expansion that took place in Brazil of all the 
business cycles that have been dated (that is, from 1983 onwards). Moreover, the rise of the profit rate 
was determined by increases in utilization and in capacity/capital ratio, which more than compensated the 
observed decrease in the profit share, and both variables had reached their peaks, for the period between 
1996 and 2016, in 2008. That is, their increase in cycle V did not take them to the level they had attained 
in  cycle  IV  (see  Figure  2  and  Table  3.2).  Be  that  as  it  may,  the  contraction  that  began  in  mid-2008 
decreased sharply the three components of the profit rate, creating the conditions for a new increase that 
took place in 2009. This short early expansion, however, would probably not have led to a profit squeeze 
were it not for the fact that it began in conditions (especially regarding the labor market) very close to the 
ones in which the previous expansion ended. 

The  first  issue  to  be  addressed  is  the  reason  why  this  long  expansion  was  possible,  given  that 
expansions  are  typically  weak  and  truncated  not  only  in  Brazil,  but  in  Latin  America  as  a  whole,  as 
mentioned previously. This characteristic is mainly a consequence of the region’s vulnerability to foreign 
shocks.  Hence,  a  long  expansion  could  only  come  about  if  such  vulnerability  were,  for  some  reason, 
                                                 
13 It  is  true  that  such  phase  averages  overcast  the  differences  among  the  individual  cycles,  as  can  be  seen  in  the  results 
presented in Tables 3.1 and 3.2, but that is also the case in the research with data for the U.S. economy. 
14 Using a share of the quarterly capital stock form Souza Júnior (2017) that approximates the non-residential capital stock (see 
Appendix 1). 
15 Just two other expansions lasted longer than 3 years, one in the early 1980s and the one from cycle V. 

 9 

 
attenuated. The 2000’s commodities boom and the abundance of liquidity related to it did precisely that. 
It allowed the Brazilian economy to run current account surpluses from 2003 to 2007 and the government 
to  accumulate  billions  of  dollars  in  foreign  reserves,  becoming  a  net  external  creditor.  According  to 
Biancarelli,  Rosa,  and  Vergnhanini  (2017),  this  “new  reality”  of  the  Brazilian  balance  of  payments 
allowed the economy to go through its longest expansion to date without facing currency shortages, to 
absorb the foreign shock of 2008, avoiding a currency crisis, and to resume growing quickly despite the 
deterioration of international liquidity conditions. In what concerns the cyclical dynamic, such attenuation 
of  foreign  vulnerability  allowed  the  demand  and  distribution  cycles  to  run  its  course  without  being 
prematurely interrupted by balance of payments’ difficulties. 

It is, of course, true that the commodities boom also had another effect on the cycle, shifting its 
center of gravity to a higher utilization level, given that it represents a long expansionary shock, having 
persisted until 2011 (Rugitsky, 2017). The magnitude of this positive impact is suggested by the fact that 
the commodities boom in question lasted twice as long as the average one (12 and 6 years, respectively) 
and  resulted  in  a  change  in  real  commodities  prices  that  was  more  than  twice  as  large  as  the  average 
increase  (88.7  and  39.1  percent,  respectively),  according  to  Reinhart,  Reinhart,  and  Trebesch’s  (2016: 
table A1, online appendix) data for all the 13 commodities booms that they identify between 1790 and 
2015. The bust, in its turn, was not as significant, lasting only 4 years (in comparison to an average of 6 
years) and reducing real commodities prices in 25.1 percent (slightly less than the average decline of 25.8 
percent).  It  did  have  a  contractionary  impact  on  the  Brazilian  economy  through  “indirect  channels” 
(Biancarelli, Rosa, and Vergnhanini, 2017), but it did not result in a sudden contraction.16 

The  first  Lula  government  (2003-2006)  took  advantage  of  the  policy  space  provided  by  the 
commodities  boom  to  adopt  measures  that  increased  aggregate  demand,  especially  an  institutional 
stimulus to household borrowing17, an acceleration of the real increases of the minimum wage and an 
expansion  of  social  transfers  (Bolsa  Família  program).  The  rise  in  exports  that  resulted  from  the 
commodities boom also played a role in stimulating demand. Moreover, in the turn from the first to the 
second Lula’s government, a deliberate attempt to increase direct public investment takes place alongside 
an increase in investment by state enterprises (mainly by Petrobras, the oil company). All these factors 
contributed to the first part of the long expansion, the early expansion of cycle IV (see Barbosa-Filho and 
Souza, 2010; Serrano and Summa, 2012; Corrêa and Santos, 2013; Carvalho and Rugitsky, 2015; and 
Rugitsky, 2017). 

The increase in the profit rate observed in the period deviated from the typical early expansion in 
one aspect, already mentioned: the profit share declined almost from the beginning of the expansion and 
the profit rate only increased because such decline was compensated by increases in utilization and in 
capacity/capital  ratio  (Table  3.2).  It  has  been  argued,  from  the  standpoint  of  a  structuralist  Goodwin 
model,  that  the  decrease  in  the  profit  share  observed  in  the  period  was  not  only  a  result  of  growth 
acceleration  (and  its  effect  on  the  labor  market),  but  also  a  product  of  policies  that  increased  the 
bargaining power of workers (mainly, the increases in the real value of the minimum wage) and of the 
sectoral  pattern  of  growth  (Rugitsky,  2017).  The  impact  of  the  latter  on  the  profit  share  took  place 
through a composition effect: the growing share (in aggregate value added) of sectors with below-average 
profit shares of income reduced the average profit share independently of any squeeze in profit shares that 
took place within sectors. Available estimates, resorting to different levels of disaggregation and focusing 
on slightly different time periods, suggest the relevance of this effect. Dias and Ruiz (2016: 14) estimate 
that  the  composition  effect  accounted  for  42.5  percent  of  the  decrease  in  the  profit  share  observed 
between 2005 and 2009. Marcolin (2017: 32) finds a lower, but still relevant, figure: 23.7 percent of the 
decline  observed  between  2004  and  2009  can  be  attributed  to  a  composition  effect.  Finally,  Martins 
(2017: 108) calculates that 71.4 percent of the decline observed between 2004 and 2007 was due to these 

                                                 
16 The “indirect channels,” examined by Biancarelli, Rosa, and Vergnhanini (2017), mainly refer to the impact of the exchange 
rate  devaluation,  which  was  partly  a  result  of  the  end  of  the  commodities  boom,  on  the  balance  sheets  of  firms  with  debt 
denominated  in  foreign  currencies  and  to  the  impact  of  the  falling  asset  prices,  resulting  from  the  liquidity  cycle  that 
accompanied the commodities one, on the collateral of domestic agents and, consequently, on the dynamics of credit. 
17 Allowing a new kind of credit with automatic repayments from the paycheck, the so-called crédito consignado. 

 10 

 
sectoral shifts, while in the following period, between 2007 and 2010, half of the decline was due to the 
composition effect. 

Given that the theoretical framework discussed in section 1, above, is a single-commodity one, 
disregarding sectoral dynamics, it cannot contribute to the interpretation of such composition effect. It has 
been argued, however, that the sectoral dynamics observed in Brazil during the long expansion can be 
taken  account  of  by  a  framework  that  combines  Kaleckian  models  with  some  insights  from  Latin 
American  structuralism  (Rugitsky,  2016,  2017,  2019).  More  specifically,  changes  in  the  sectoral 
compositions of output and employment seem to have played the role of a mediation between aggregate 
demand  and  income  distribution,  unleashing  the  following  cumulative  process:  changes  in  wage 
inequality  impacted  consumption  patterns,  leading  to  shifts  in  the  sectoral  compositions  of  output  and 
employment; the latter, in their turn, had effects both on the functional income distribution and on wage 
inequality, reinitiating the cycle (Rugitsky, 2017, 2019; Loureiro, 2018; see also Medeiros, 2015). 

The  increase  in  utilization  can  be  explained  by  the  expansion  itself  and  the  fact  that  it 
compensated  the  effect  of  the  falling  profit  share  on  the  profit  rate  is  something  suggested  in  the 
Kaleckian  literature.  The  question  that  remain  refers  to  what  could  be  determining  the  change  in  the 
capacity/capital ratio, given that the other two factors (profit share and utilization) are dealt with by the 
theoretical framework proposed by Barbosa-Filho and Taylor (2006), but the capacity/capital ratio was 
simply  assumed  constant  in  that  formulation.  Weisskopf  (1979)  maintains  that  the  observed 
capacity/capital ratio could be subject to shifting relative prices of output and capital stock.18 Indeed, it is 
well known that the prices of non-tradable goods rose faster than those of tradable goods in Brazil since 
the early 2000s, in part due to the appreciation of the exchange rate (Summa and Serrano, 2017). Given 
that the share of tradable goods is probably larger in the capital stock than in output as a whole, such 
difference in inflation rates could explain at least part of the increase in the capacity/capital ratio in the 
first decade of the 21st century19. Such hypothesis is further backed by the similar trajectories, depicted in 
Figure  3,  of  the  capacity/capital  ratio  and  of  the  Brazilian  terms  of  trade,  which  is  parallel  to  the 
movements of the exchange rate in the period and is closely related to the commodities boom (Martins, 
2017: 70-80; Rugitsky, 2017: 1-2).20 
 

[FIGURE 3] 

Two  additional  factors  should  also  be  mentioned,  regarding  the  increase  in  the  capacity/capital 
ratio.  One  is  the  sectoral  pattern  of  growth,  given  that  the  sectors  that  had  its  share  of  value  added 
increased  in  the  period  (especially,  some  activities  in  the  services  sector)  probably  had  above-average 
capacity/capital  ratios21.  The  second  factor  is  related  to  Steindl’s  (1952/1976:  175-191)  claim  that  the 
observed  trajectory  of  the  output/capital  ratio  could  reflect,  rather  than  actual  technological  factors,  a 
changing  age  structure  of  the  capital  stock22.  Martins  (2017:  52)  estimated  this  effect,  which  did 

 

                                                 
18 Other determinants of the capacity/capital ratio, operating on longer time horizons, should not be disregarded, but seems less 
relevant to the episode in question. See Appendix 6 (available upon request). 
19 Moreover,  the  geographical  shift  of  the  production  of  machines  and  equipment  to  East  Asia,  in  general,  and  China,  in 
particular, has had the effect of holding its prices down, which could also have contributed to the observed trajectory of the 
ratio. 
20 The problem with that interpretation is that the capacity/capital ratio estimated for the present research is in real, rather than 
nominal,  terms,  so  it  should  not  reflect  the  shifts  in  relative  prices.  This  issue  deserves  further  research  in  order  to  assess 
whether the deflators used to estimate the series for real output and real capital stock were in fact able to eliminate entirely the 
impact of the trajectory of relative prices. 
21 Data to assess this hypothesis is very limited, but Martins (2017: 63-70) made an attempt. 
22 The issue is related to the way of measuring the capital stock. For the calculation of the profit rate, it is appropriate to use the 
net capital stock, since it is “designed to reflect the wealth of the owner of the asset at a particular point in time” (OECD, 2009: 
56). However, according to Steindl (1952: 176): "Gross capital (...) will in general be much more related to the productive 
capacity than net capital". The OECD (2009) also points to gross capital as a more adequate proxy for productive capacity. As 
shown by Martins (2017: 47-55), changes in the rate of investment may have a greater effect on the value of capital than on its 
productive capacity, under or overestimating changes in capital productivity. In addition, it is also shown that the ratio of net to 
gross capital indicates changes in the average age of the capital stock, hence the name “age structure of the capital stock”. 

 11 

 
contribute, albeit moderately (less than 20 percent), to the increase in the capacity/capital ratio from 2004 
to 2007. 

After  the  abrupt  fall  in  the  profit  rate  that  took  place  during  the  contraction  from  mid-2008  to 
early 2009, which was determined by a fall of its three determinants (Table 3.2), the profit rate resumed 
growing until the last quarter of 2009. Such growth was mainly a product of an increase in profit share 
and utilization. The increase in the profit share, as Figure 2 suggests, does not seem to imply a reversal of 
the  developments  that  were  pushing  it  downwards  since  the  beginning  of  the  long  expansion,  but 
probably reflects just labor hoarding, as the wage share grew markedly with the onset of the crisis and 
declined with a similar intensity when economic activity recovered. 

During the profit squeeze, from the end of 2009 to early 2014, the profit share falls again, but now 
faster than it had fallen during the beginning of the long expansion. Such a decline seems to be explained 
by the typical mechanism of the cyclical profit squeeze, that is, a tight labor market. This is suggested 
both by the fact that the unemployment rate had reached low levels during this period and by Marcolin’s 
(2017)  and  Martin’s  (2017)  estimates  of  the  role  of  the  composition  effect  on  the  decline  during  this 
period: they find a positive composition effect on the profit share, which is more than compensated by a 
strong intra-sectoral decrease. In other words, while at the beginning of the long expansion the decrease 
in the profit share seems partly a result of the sectoral pattern of growth, which contributed to the impact 
of falling unemployment, during the profit squeeze its determinant was the reduction of the profit share 
by workers with higher bargaining power within each sector. Such changing nature of the fall of the profit 
share is also suggested by the fact that the number of strikes and of hours not worked grew significantly 
from  2009  to,  at  least,  2013  (Summa  and  Serrano,  2017:  11-15;  Braga,  2016:  73).  During  the  profit 
squeeze, class conflict came to the fore. 

Although the main determinant of the decline of the profit rate was the fall of the profit share, 
declines in both utilization and in capacity/capital ratio contributed as well. The fall of utilization is a 
result  of  the  deceleration  of  growth  observed  in  the  period.  The  decline  of  the  capacity/capital  ratio, 
which  gathered  speed  after  2011,  could  have  been  determined,  in  its  turn,  by  the  depreciation  of  the 
exchange rate that took place contemporaneously and its effect on the inflation rates of tradable and non-
tradable goods.23 Moreover, according to Martins (2017: 52), 40 percent of the decline observed between 
2010 and 2013 can be attributed to a changing age structure of the capital stock. 

The  profit  squeeze,  which  lasted  from  the  last  quarter  of  2009  until  the  outbreak  of  the  last 
contraction in the first quarter of 2014, covered the last year of Lula’s second government and the first 
three years of Rousseff’s first government (2011-2014) and might illuminate the controversies about the 
determinants of the economic deceleration that occurred in the period, as argued above. Some authors, 
like  Serrano  and  Summa  (2016),  suggest  that  the  deceleration  was  mainly  a  consequence  of  the 
contractionary nature of the economic policy shift that took place between 2011 and 2013, comprising a 
decrease in public investment (allegedly to allow for a reduction of the interest rate) and a depreciation of 
the  exchange  rate.24 Macroprudential  policies  adopted  in  2010  also  played  a  role,  pushing  household 
borrowing  down.  Alternatively,  Singer  (2015,  2018)  claims  that  the  deceleration  seems  to  have  had  a 
more  political  nature,  reflecting  the  opposition  of  the  ruling  classes  to  the  policies  implemented  by 
Rousseff’s government.25 

The occurrence of a cyclical profit squeeze, precisely during this period, may contribute to this 
debate. On the one hand, the economic policy shift aimed at stimulating private investment, at least partly 
                                                 
23 It is interesting to note that, in the U.S. case, a falling capacity/capital ratio played a prominent role in the profit squeeze that 
took  place  around  1972  and  1973,  in  contrast  to  the  secondary  role  it  played  in  the  other  business  cycles,  according  to 
Weisskopf (1979: 352, table 5). This may be related to the fact that this period was characterized by a depreciation of the 
dollar, following the cancellation of its convertibility to gold. See Brenner (1998/2006: 122-129). The prominent role of the 
capacity/capital  ratio  was  not  found,  however,  in  later  updates  of  Weisskopf’s  research,  like  the  ones  made  by  Bakir  and 
Campbell (2006) and by Izquierdo (2013). 
24 That the latter could be contractionary has been famously argued by Krugman and Taylor (1978), building on previous work 
from Hirschman and Diaz-Alejandro. 
25 The economic policy shift was implemented counting on the support of industrial capital, to compensate for the fact that it 
tended  to  alienate  financial  interests.  The  bet  on  the  division  of  the  ruling  classes  failed,  according  to  Singer  (2015),  who 
identifies a reunification of the bourgeoisie from 2012 onwards. See also Rugitsky (2015). 

 12 

 
through policies that had a positive impact on profit margins, counteracting thus the profit squeeze. The 
fact that it did not succeed in increasing investment and maintaining the pace of economic growth can be 
attributed to the fact that the policies adopted had an ambiguous effect on the profit rate, pushing it down 
through a decrease of utilization at the same time that it attempted to push it up through an increase in 
margins.26 On  the  other  hand,  the  profit  squeeze  provides  a  material  basis  for  the  aggravation  of  class 
conflict that underlies Singer’s (2015, 2018) narrative. 

The political and economic situation worsened markedly between 2014 and 2016, with the turn of 
economic policy towards austerity, the beginning of the recession and the escalation of political turmoil, 
which resulted in the ousting of Rousseff from office in 2016, after an impeachment process. Such events 
are the repercussion of the tensions, both political and economic, accumulated in Rousseff’s first term, 
which are, in their turn, arguably related to the profit squeeze. 

The role played by the financial sector in the current crisis should also not be disregarded.27 The 
more salient aspect of financialisation in the Brazilian economy seems to be related to public debt, given 
that the extraordinarily high level of the interest rate in Brazil results in the channeling of a significant 
amount of tax receipts to the financial institutions that hold a large share of government bonds. In this 
context, the government has limited autonomy in relation to the financial sector in the choice of economic 
policy. Therefore, its shift in 2011 and the turn to austerity in 2014 cannot be examined without taking the 
pressure  of  financial  interests  into  account.  An  issue  that  could  be  pursued  in  future  research  is  the 
specific  impact  of  the  profit  squeeze  on  the  financial  institutions,  to  examine  whether  their  political 
behavior was also stimulated by falling profitability. 

The interaction of economics and politics is acknowledged by part of the literature on the cyclical 
profit  squeeze  from  its  beginning.  In  a  famous  paper  from  1943,  Kalecki  claimed  that  a  situation  of 
persistent  full  employment  would  be  resisted  by  capitalists,  who  would  fear  its  social  and  political 
implications,  that  is,  the  strengthening  of  the  working  classes.  Assuming,  as  he  did,  a  functional 
distribution of income that would not oscillate cyclically, Kalecki argued that full employment tended to 
raise  the  profit  rate  (through  an  increase  in  utilization),  but  “‘discipline  in  the  factories’  and  ‘political 
stability’  are  more  appreciated  by  business  leaders  than  profits.”  (1943:  326)  The  contraction  would 
result, in this case, by capitalists’ pressure on the government to cut down its expenditures. He suggested 
calling the resulting cyclical pattern a “political business cycle.” (330; see Rugitsky, 2013: 457-461) 

Boddy  and  Crotty  (1975)  questioned  Kalecki’s  point  that  the  boom  increased  the  profit  rate 
resorting to an empirical exercise similar to Weisskopf’s (1979). But, despite claiming that the cyclical 
contractions might be partly attributed to a profit squeeze, they did not disregard the political motives 
identified by Kalecki. In their words, “[t]he Marxian economic effects of the business cycle reinforce the 
socio-political  aspects  stressed  by  Kalecki.”  (1975:  5)  The  recent  Brazilian  crisis  seems  to  be  a 
particularly clear illustration of such interaction of economics and politics: the profit squeeze had been 
aggravating  the  distributive  conflict  and  pushing  down  the  growth  of  investment  since  2009,  when  in 
2015  the  ruling  classes’  calls  for  austerity  finally  prevailed  and  the  abrupt  contraction  of  public 
expenditures resulted in a large fall of economic activity. Additional factors certainly played a role, such 
as the fall in commodities prices in 2015 and a corruption scandal that paralyzed the construction sector, 
but the crisis cannot be understood without taking into consideration the profit squeeze and its economic 
and political effects. 
 
4. CONCLUDING REMARKS 
 

                                                 
26 Given that part of the policies consisted in a decrease in payroll taxes, its impact would only be felt on the after-tax profit 
rate, instead of on the gross (before taxes) profit rate used in the present research. It would be interesting to examine whether 
the two in fact diverged in this period, an issue that could be pursued in future research. 
27 On the one hand, in contrast to the trend observed in rich economies, the financial sector in Brazil has not seen its share of 
GDP rise. In fact, during the long expansion, it remained stable at around 6.5 %, a low level compared, for instance, with the 
U.S. economy (see Krippner, 2005: 178). On the other hand, it is not unlikely that the share of the financial sector in corporate 
profits  exhibits  a  trajectory  more  in  line  with  the  one  observed  in  other  countries,  something  that  should  be  further 
investigated. 

 13 

 

With sparse research on the cyclical dynamics of profit rates in peripheral economies, the results 
here presented should be considered preliminary. It would be interesting to investigate whether analysis 
for longer periods or for peripheral countries other than Brazil would lead to similar results, that is, that 
profit squeezes are rare due to the truncated nature of the cyclical expansions. More specifically, future 
research  could  examine  whether  other  South  American  countries  that  were  similarly  impacted  by  the 
commodities  boom  also  presented  longer  expansions  followed  by  a  profit  squeeze  and  whether  other 
recent crises that occurred in the region could be, at least partially, related to the latter. Moreover, the 
results for Brazil could be complemented in numerous ways, for instance by investigating in detail the 
role  of  relative  prices  on  the  trajectories  of  the  capacity/capital  ratio  and  of  the  profit  share  and  by 
decomposing the changes of the profit share in changes in real wages and in labor productivity. 

If the results are correct, a strategic question remains for those interested in the prospects of a less 
unequal  Brazilian  society.  Countercyclical  macroeconomic  policies  are  certainly  crucial  in  order  to 
overcome the weak character of the expansions, which keep unemployment at high levels and hinders 
workers  ability  to  shift  the  distribution  in  their  favor.  As  Pérez  Caldentey  and  Titelman  (2014)  argue, 
such  countercyclical  policies,  if  combined  with  adequate  policies  focused  on  productive  development, 
may also play an important role in terms of the long-run trajectory of the economy, given that trend and 
cycle  are  arguably  interdependent.  But,  by  attenuating  the  impact  of  foreign  shocks,  countercyclical 
policies that allow for longer and stronger expansions may lead to profit squeezes and to aggravated class 
conflicts. In the recent Brazilian case, such conflicts manifested themselves in dramatic fashion, revealing 
the  fragility  of  democracy  itself.  The  struggle  for  equality  will  require,  it  seems,  more  than  foreign 
bonanzas,  countercyclical  policies,  and  long  expansions.  It  will  require  a  deeper  transformation  of 
society,  shifting  the  power  balance  in  favor  of  the  great  majority,  so  that,  in  the  future,  when  class 
conflicts result once more in cyclical profit squeezes, democracy can be preserved and social regression 
can be avoided. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
ARAÚJO,  E.,  GALA,  P.  (2012).  “Economic  growth  regimes  in  Brazil:  empirical  evidence  and  policy 

implications.” Estudos Avançados, Vol. 26 (75), pp. 41-56. 

BAKIR,  E.,  CAMPBELL,  A.  (2006).  “The  effect  of  neoliberalism  on  the  fall  in  the  rate  of  profit  in  business 

cycles.” Review of Radical Political Economics, Vol. 38 (3), pp. 365-373. 
(2009). “The Bush business cycle profit rate: support in a theoretical debate and implications for the future.” 
Review of Radical Political Economics, Vol. 41 (3), pp. 335-342. 
(2017).  “Business  cycles:  short-term  dynamics.”  In:  BRENNAN,  D.,  KRISTJANSON-GURAL,  D., 
MULDER,  C.,  OLSEN,  E.  (eds.).  Routledge Handbook in Marxian Economics.  New  York:  Routledge,  pp. 
234-244. 

BARBOSA-FILHO, N., SOUZA, J. A. (2010). “A inflexão do governo Lula: política econômica, crescimento e 
distribuição de renda.” In: SADER, Emir, GARCIA, Marco Aurélio (eds.). Brasil entre o Passado e o Futuro. 
São Paulo: Fundação Perseu Abramo / Boitempo, pp. 57-110.  

BARBOSA-Filho, N., TAYLOR, L. (2006). “Distributive and demand cycles in the US economy: a structuralist 

Goodwin model.” Metroeconomica, Vol. 57 (3), pp. 389-411.  

BASU,  D.  (2010).  “Marx-biased  technical  change  and  the  neoclassical  view  of  income  distribution.” 

Metroeconomica, Vol. 61 (4), pp. 593-620. 

BASU, D., CHEN, Y., OH, J. (2013). “Class struggle and economic fluctuations: VAR analysis of the post-war US 

economy.” International Review of Applied Economics, Vol. 27 (5), pp. 575-596.  

BELLUZZO,  L.  G.,  ALMEIDA,  J.  G.  (2002).  Depois da Queda: a economia brasileira da crise da dívida aos 

impasses do Real. Rio de Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira. 

BHADURI,  A.,  MARGLIN,  S.  (1990).  “Unemployment  and  the  real  wage:  the  economic  basis  of  contesting 

political ideologies.” Cambridge Journal of Economics, Vol. 14 (4), pp. 375-393.  

BIANCARELLI, A., ROSA, R., VERGNHANINI, R. (2017). “New features of the Brazilian external sector since 
the great global crisis.” In: ARESTIS, P., BALTAR, C., PRATES, D. (eds.). The Brazilian Economy since the 
Great Financial Crisis of 2007/2008. London: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 101-129. 

BLECKER,  Robert  (1989).  “International  competition,  income  distribution  and  economic  growth.”  Cambridge 

Journal of Economics, Vol. 13 (3), pp. 395-412. 

 14 

 
BODDY,  R.,  CROTTY,  J.  (1975).  “Class  conflict  and  macro-policy:  the  political  business  cycle.”  Review  of 

Radical Political Economics, Vol. Vol. 7 (1), pp. 1-19. 
(1976). “Wage, prices, and the profit squeeze.” Review of Radical Political Economics, Vol. 8 (2), pp. 63-67. 

BONELLI, R. (2016). “Uma medida de utilização de capacidade na economia brasileira, 1947-2016.” IBRE-FGV 

Séries Históricas. 

BRAGA,  R.  (2016).  “Terra  em  transe:  o  fim  do  lulismo  e  o  retorno  da  luta  de  classes.”  In:  SINGER,  A., 
LOUREIRO, I. (eds.). As Contradições do Lulismo: a que ponto chegamos? São Paulo: Boitempo, pp. 55-92. 
BRENNER,  R.  (1998/2006).  The Economics of Global Turbulence: the advanced capitalist economies from long 

boom to long downturn, 1945-2005. London: Verso. 
(2002/2003). The Boom and the Bubble: the US in the world economy. London: Verso. 

CARVALHO,  L.,  RUGITSKY,  F.  (2015).  “Growth  and  distribution  in  Brazil  in  the  21st  century:  revisiting  the 

wage-led versus profit-led debate.” Department of Economics FEA/USP Working Paper Series, n. 2015-25. 

CORRÊA,  V.,  SANTOS,  C.  H.  (2013).  “Modelo  de  crescimento  brasileiro  e  mudança  estrutural:  avanços  e 
limites.” In: CORRÊA, V. (ed.). Padrão de Acumulação e Desenvolvimento Brasileiro. São Paulo: Fundação 
Perseu Abramo, pp. 19-55. 

DI  FONZO,  T.;  MARINI,  M.  (2012)  On  the  extrapolation  with  the  Denton  proportional  benchmarking  method. 

IMF Working Paper, WP/12/69. 

DIAS, B., RUIZ, A. (2016). “A relação entre a composição sectorial da renda e sua distribuição funcional: o caso 
brasileiro  no  período  recente.”  In: Anais do 1o. Encontro Nacional de Economia Industrial e Inovação.  São 
Paulo: Blucher. 

DUTT, A. (1984). “Stagnation, income distribution and monopoly power.” Cambridge Journal of Economics, Vol. 

8 (1), pp. 25-40. 

Nations. 

ECLAC  (2012).  Structural  Change  for  Equality:  an  integrated  approach  to  development.  Santiago:  United 

ERTEN, B., OCAMPO, J. A. (2013). “Super cycles of commodity prices since the mid-nineteenth century.” World 

Development, Vol. 44, pp. 14-30. 

FARHI, M. (2006). “O impacto dos ciclos de liquidez no Brasil: mercados financeiros, taxa de câmbio, preços e 
política  monetária.”  In:  CARNEIRO,  R.  (ed.).  A  Supremacia  dos  Mercados  e  a  Política  Econômica  do 
Governo Lula. São Paulo: Unesp, pp. 173-205. 

FEIJÓ, C., CÂMARA, F., CERQUEIRA, L. F. (2015). “Inflation, growth, and distribution: the Brazilian economy 

after post war.” Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, Vol. 38 (4), pp. 616–636.  

FEIJÓ, C., LAMÔNICA, M., BASTOS, J. C. (2015). “Accumulation pattern of the Brazilian economy in the 1990s 

and 2000s.” International Review of Applied Economics, Vol. 29 (1), pp. 15–31.  

FISHLOW, A. (2011). Starting Over: Brazil since 1985. Washington D.C.: Brookings Institution. 
FOLEY, D. (1986). Understanding Capital: Marx’s economic theory. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University. 
GOLDSTEIN, J. (1996). “The empirical relevance of the cyclical profit squeeze: a reassertion.” Review of Radical 

Political Economics, Vol. 28 (4), pp. 55-92. 
(1999).  “The  simple  analytics  and  empirics  of  the  cyclical  profit  squeeze  and  cyclical  underconsumption 
theories: clearing the air.” Radical Review of Political Economics, Vol. 31 (2), pp. 74-88. 

GOLLIN, D. (2002). “Getting income shares right.” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 110 (2), pp. 458-474. 
GONÇALVES,  J.  B.  (2017).  “Distribuição  de  renda  e  demanda  agregada  no  Brasil  (1995-2013):  uma  análise  a 

partir de extensões aos modelos neo-Kaleckianos.” Master’s Thesis, University of São Paulo. 

GOODWIN,  R.  (1967)  “A  growth  cycle.”  In:  FEINSTEIN,  C.  H.  (ed.).  Socialism,  Capitalism  and  Economic 

Growth: essays presented to Maurice Dobb. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 54–58. 

HENLEY, A. (1987). “Labour’s share and profitability crisis in the US: recent experience and post-war trends.” 

Cambridge Journal of Economics, Vol. 11 (4), pp. 315-330. 

IZQUIERDO, S. (2013). “The cyclical decline of the profit rate as the cause of crises in the United States (1947-

2011).” Review of Radical Political Economics, Vol. 45 (4), pp. 463-471. 

JESUS,  C.,  ARAUJO,  R.,  DRUMOND,  C.  E.  (2018).  “An  empirical  test  of  the  Post-Keynesian  growth  model 
applied to functional income distribution and the growth regime in Brazil”, International Review of Applied 
Economics, Vol. 32 (4), pp. 428-449. 

KALECKI, M. (1943). “Political aspects of full employment.” Political Quarterly, Vol. 14 (4), pp. 322–331. 
KAMINSKY,  G.,  REINHART,  C.,  VÉGH,  C.  (2005).  “When  it  rains,  it  pours:  procyclical  capital  flows  and 
macroeconomic  policies.”  In:  GERTLER,  M.,  ROGOFF,  K.  (eds.).   NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2004, 
Vol. 19. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 11-53. 

KRIPPNER, G. (2005). “The financialization of the American economy.” Socio-Economic Review, Vol. 3 (2), pp. 

173-208. 

 15 

 
KRUGMAN,  P.,  TAYLOR,  L.  (1978).  “Contractionary  effects  of  devaluation.”  Journal  of  International 

Economics, Vol. 8 (3), pp. 445-456. 

LAVOIE, M. (2014). Post-Keynesian Economics: new foundations. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. 
(2017).  “The  origins  and  evolution  of  the  debate  on  wage-led  and  profit-led  regimes.”  European  Journal  of 

Economics and Economic Policies: Intervention, Vol. 14 (2), pp. 200-221. 

LOUREIRO,  P.  (2018).  The  Ebb  and  Flow  of  the  Pink  Tide:  reformist  development  strategies  in  Brazil  and 

Argentina. PhD Dissertation, Department of Economics, SOAS, University of London. 

MARCOLIN,  J.  V.  (2017).  “Distribuição  funcional  da  renda  brasileira:  uma  análise  do  período  recente.” 

Undergraduate Final Dissertation. University of São Paulo. 

MARQUETTI,  A.,  HOFF,  C.,  MIEBACH,  A.  (2017).  “Profitability  and  distribution:  the  origin  of  the  Brazilian 

political crisis.” Unpublished paper. 

MARQUETTI,  A.,  MALDONADO  FILHO,  E.,  LAUTERT,  V.  (2010).  “The  profit  rate  in  Brazil,  1953-2003.” 

Review of Radical Political Economics, Vol. 42 (4), pp. 485-504. 

MARQUETTI,  A.,  PORSSE,  M.  (2014).  “Patterns  of  technical  progress  in  the  Brazilian  economy,  1952-2008.” 

CEPAL Review, Vol. 113, pp. 57-73. 

MARTINS,  G.  K.  (2017).  “Lucratividade,  desenvolvimento  técnico  e  distribuição  funcional:  uma  análise  da 

economia brasileira entre 2000 e 2013.” Master’s Thesis, University of São Paulo. 

MARX, K. (1867/1976). Capital: a critique of political economy. Vol. 1. Trans. by Ben Fowkes. London: Penguin 

MEDEIROS,  C.  A.  (2015).  Inserção  Externa,  Crescimento  e  Padrões  de  Consumo  na  Economia  Brasileira. 

NIKIFOROS, M. (2016). “On the ‘utilisation controversy’: a theoretical and empirical discussion of the Kaleckian 

model of growth and distribution.” Cambridge Journal of Economics, Vol. 40 (2), pp. 437-467. 

NOBRE, M. (2013). Imobilismo em Movimento: da abertura democrática ao governo Dilma. São Paulo: Cia. das 

Books. 

Brasília: IPEA, 2015. 

Letras. 

OCAMPO, J. A., RADA, C., TAYLOR, L. (2009).  Growth and Policy in Developing Countries: a structuralist 

approach. New York: Columbia University. 

OECD (2009). Measuring Capital OECD Manual. 2nd Ed. Paris. 
OREIRO, J. L., ARAÚJO, E. (2013). “Exchange rate misalignment, capital accumulation and income distribution: 

theory and evidence from the case of Brazil.” Panoeconomicus, Vol. 60 (3), pp. 381-396. 

PALMA, G. (2006). “The 1999 Brazilian financial crisis: ‘macho-monetarism’ in action.” Economic and Political 

Weekly, Vol. 41 (8), pp. 727-737. 

PASTORE, A. C., PINOTTI, M. C. (2005). “Fiscal policy, inflation, and the balance of payments in Brazil.” In: 
GIAVAZZI,  F.,  GOLDFAJN,  I.,  HERRERA,  S.  (eds.).    Inflation  Targeting,  Debt,  and  the  Brazilian 
Experience, 1999 to 2003. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 3-42. 

PAULA, L. F., MODENESI, A., PIRES, M. (2015). “The tale of the contagion of two crises and policy responses 
in Brazil: a case of (Keynesian) policy coordination?” Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, Vol. 37 (3), p. 
408-435. 

PAULANI,  L.  (2008).  “Brasil  delivery:  razões,  contradições  e  limites  da  política  econômica  nos  primeiros  seis 
meses  do  governo  Lula.”  In:  PAULANI,  L.  Brasil  Delivery:  servidão  financeira  e  estado  de  emergência 
econômico. São Paulo: Boitempo, pp. 15-34. 

PÉREZ CALDENTEY, E. TITELMAN, D. (2014). “Macroeconomics for development in Latin America and the 
Caribbean: some new considerations on countercyclicality.” International Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 
43 (1), pp. 65-91. 

PÉREZ CALDENTEY, E., TITELMAN, D., CARVALLO, P. (2014). “Weak expansions: a distinctive feature of 

the business cycle in Latin America and the Caribbean.” World Economic Review, n. 3, pp. 69-89. 

PINTO, E., PINTO, J. P., BARUCO, G., SALUDJIAN, A., BALANCO, P., SCHONERWALD, C., NOGUEIRA, 
I. (2016). “A economia política dos governos Dilma: acumulação, bloco no poder e crise.” UFRJ Texto para 
Discussão, n. 004. 

REINHART,  C.,  REINHART,  V.,  TREBESCH,  C.  (2016).  “Global  cycles:  capital  flows,  commodities,  and 

sovereign defaults, 1815-2015.” American Economic Review, Vol. 106 (5), pp. 574-580. 

ROCCA, C., SANTOS JR., L. (2014). “Redução da taxa de poupança e financiamento do investimento no Brasil, 

2010-2013.” Estudo Especial CEMEC. 

ROWTHORN, R. (1981). “Demand, real wages and economic growth.” Thames Papers in Political Economy, pp. 

RUGITSKY,  F.  (2013).  “Degree  of  monopoly  and  class  struggle:  political  aspects  of  Kalecki’s  pricing  and 

distribution theory.” Review of Keynesian Economics, Vol. 1 (4), pp. 447-464. 

1-39. 

 16 

 

(2015).  “Do  ensaio  desenvolvimentista  à  austeridade:  uma  leitura  kaleckiana.”  In:  BELLUZZO,  Luiz 
Gonzaga,  BASTOS,  Pedro  Paulo  Z.  (Eds.).  Austeridade  para  quem?  Balanço  e  perspectivas  do  governo 
Dilma Rousseff. São Paulo: Carta Maior / Friedrich Ebert Stiftung, pp. 131-137. 
(2016).  “Growth,  distribution,  and  sectoral  heterogeneity:  reading  the  Kaleckians  in  Latin  America.” 
EconomiA, Vol. 17 (3), pp. 265-278. 
(2017). “The rise and fall of the Brazilian economy (2004-2015): the economic antimiracle” Department of 
Economics FEA/USP Working Paper Series, n. 2017-29. 
(2019). “Questão de estilo: a mudança estrutural para a igualdade e seus desafios.” In: Chiliatto-Leite, M. V. 
(Org.).  Alternativas  para  o  Desenvolvimento  Brasileiro:  novos  horizontes  para  a  mudança  estrutural  com 
igualdade. Santiago (Chile): CEPAL, pp. 75-95. 

SAAD-FILHO, A., MORAIS, L. (2018). Brazil: neoliberalism versus democracy. London: Pluto Press. 
SCHERER, C. (2015). “Payroll tax reduction in Brazil: effects on employment and wages.” International Institute 

of Social Studies Working Papes, no. 602. 

SERRANO,  F.,  SUMMA,  R.  (2012).  “Macroeconomic  policy,  growth  and  income  distribution  in  the  Brazilian 

Economy in the 2000s.” Investigación Económica, Vol. 71 (282), p. 55-92. 
(2016). “Aggregate demand and the slowdown of Brazilian economic growth in 2011-2014.” Nova Economia, 
Vol. 25 (n. especial), pp. 803-833. 
(2018). “Conflito distributivo e o fim da ‘breve era de ouro’ da economia brasileira.” Novos Estudos Cebrap, 
Vol. 37 (2), pp. 175-189. 

SHAIKH, A. (1978). “Political economy and capitalism: notes on Dobb’s theory of crisis.” Cambridge Journal of 

Economics, Vol. 2 (2), pp. 233-251. 
(1987/1990). “Organic composition of capital.” In: EATWELL, J., MILGATE, M., NEWMAN, P. (eds.). The 
New Palgrave: Marxian Economics. New York: W. W. Norton, pp. 304-309. 

SHERMAN,  H.  (1976).  “Class  conflict  and  macro-policy:  a  comment.”  Review of Radical Political Economics, 

Vol. 8 (2), pp. 55-60. 
(1997).  “Theories  of  cyclical  profit  squeeze.” Review of Radical Political Economics,  Vol.  29  (1),  pp.  139-
147. 

SINGER,  A.  (2015).  “Cutucando  onças  com  varas  curtas:  o  ensaio  desenvolvimentista  no  primeiro  mandato  de 

Dilma Rousseff (2011-2014).” Novos Estudos, n. 102, pp. 43-71. 
(2018).  O Lulismo em Crise: um quebra-cabeça do período Dilma (2011-2016).  São  Paulo:  Companhia  das 
Letras. 

SOUZA JÚNIOR, J. R. (2017). “Indicadores IPEA trimestrais de estoque de capital e de investimento líquido.” 

IPEA Carta de Conjuntura. 

STEINDL, J. (1952/1976). Maturity and Stagnation in American Capitalism. New York: Monthly Review Press. 
SUMMA, R., SERRANO, F. (2017). “Distribution and conflict inflation in Brazil under inflation targeting, 1999-

2014.” Review of Radical Political Economics, advanced access. 

TAYLOR, L. (1985). “A stagnationist model of economic growth.” Cambridge Journal of Economics, Vol. 9 (4), 

pp. 383-403. 

VON  ARNIN,  R.,  BARRALES,  J.  (2015).  “Demand-driven  Goodwin  cycles  with  Kaldorian  and  Kaleckian 

features.” Review of Keynesian Economics, Vol. 3 (3), pp. 351-373. 

WEISSKOPF, T. (1979). “Marxian crisis theory and the rate of profit in the postwar U.S. economy.” Cambridge 

Journal of Economics, Vol. 3 (4), pp. 341–78. 
(1988).  “An  analysis  of  profitability  changes  in  eight  capitalist  economies.”  Review  of  Radical  Political 
Economics, Vol. 20 (2-3), pp. 68-79. 

 
APPENDIX 1: DATA – METHODS AND SOURCES 
 
1) Profit Share: It is defined as one minus the labor share of income. An annual series for the latter, ranging from 
1996 to 2015, is calculated as the ratio of employees’ compensation to the sum of employees’ compensation and 
gross operational surplus, using data from national accounts (specifically, Tabelas de Recursos e Usos, Nível 12, 
Tabela 2). This follows Gollin’s (2002) second suggested adjustment, which considers that gross mixed incomes 
comprise  both  labor  and  capital  income  in  the  same  proportions  as  the  remainder  of  national  income.  The 
calculated annual series is, then, transformed into quarterly one resorting to monthly labor share series calculated 
from  Pesquisa  Mensal  do  Emprego  (Monthly  Employment  Survey)  and  Pesquisa  Nacional  por  Amostra  de 
Domicílios  (National  Household  Sample  Survey).  Concretely,  the  proportional  deviation  of  the  share  of  each 
quarter in relation to the corresponding annual figure is used to bring the annual national accounting series to a 
higher frequency. To do so, the Denton-Cholette disaggregation with average conversion is used (see Di Fonzo and 

 17 

 
Marini, 2012). Further, the seasonal adjustment for the complete series is performed by SEATS method using an 
ARIMA (100) x (011) setting, with two ‘level shifts’ (1996Q4 and 2001Q4). Total profits are then calculated by 
multiplying total value added, obtained from the quarterly national accounts, and the profit share. 
 
2)  Capital  Stock:  Following  conventional  procedure  (Marquetti,  Maldonado,  and  Lautert,  2010;  Souza  Júnior, 
2017),  an  annual  series  for  the  net  capital  stock  is  calculated  using  the  Perpetual  Inventories  Method,  which  is 
based on the investment flow and parameters related to asset depreciation (such as life time and depreciation rate). 
Details  about  this  calculation  can  be  found  in  Martins  (2017).  To  bring  the  calculated  series  to  a  quarterly 
frequency, we resort to the quarterly deviations from the annual average from the quarterly series calculated by 
Souza Júnior (2017) – a potential limitation is that the latter includes residential stock, in contrast to the annual 
figure estimated by Martins (2017). Alternatively, the rates of change of the profit rate and of its components were 
recalculated using a different series for the quarterly capital stock: a series that resulted from multiplying the data 
from  Souza  Júnior  by  the  average  share  of  nonresidential  capital  stock  in  total  capital  stock,  for  each  year,  as 
estimated by Martins (2017). Results were very similar. 
 
3)  Capacity  utilization  rate:  Seasonally  adjusted  series  for  the  capacity  utilization  of  the  industrial  sector 
calculated  by  the  Brazilian  National  Confederation  of  Industry  (Confederação  Nacional  da  Indústria).  The 
alternative  series  for  the  whole  economy,  discussed  in  Appendix  6  (available  upon  request),  is  obtained  by 
weighting indicators for each of the three major sectors (industry, agriculture, and services) in relation to their share 
in value added. The indicators for agriculture and services were calculated following the procedure suggested by 
Bonelli  (2016).  In  each  case,  the  log  of  the  series  of  seasonally  adjusted  aggregate  output,  from  the  quarterly 
national  accounts,  is  obtained  and  the  local  maximum  semesters  are  considered  to  represent  full  capacity 
utilization. The full capacity for each semester is then given by the polynomial equation that connects these peak 
points and the capacity utilization rate, by the ratio between the observed value and the calculated full capacity. 
 
4) Dating of cycles: Dating provided by the Brazilian Committee for the Dating of Business Cycles (Comitê de 
Datação de Ciclos Econômicos). 
 

5) Rates of change: Following Weisskopf (1979), the annual growth rate of each variable x is obtained by ordinary 

least squares regression of log x on time (measured in years). The annual growth rates of each phase are obtained 
by the average growth rates of the respective phases in each cycle. 
 
APPENDIX 2: TABLES 
 

TABLE 1: RECENT OUTPUT AND PROFIT CYCLES IN BRAZIL (1996-2016) 
Profit Rate, ρ** 

Real Output, Y* 

Cycles 

Keypoint 
Y-trough 

Quarter 
1995.3*** 

I 

II 

III 

Y-peak, ρ-peak 

1997.4 
1999.1 
1999.1 
2000.4 
2001.1 
2001.4 
2001.4 
2002.2 
2002.4 
2003.2 
2003.2 
2008.2 
2008.3 
2009.1 
2009.1 
2009.4 
2014.1 
2016.4 
* GDP at constant 2000 Brazilian Reais (millions) 

Y-trough 
Y-trough 
ρ-peak 
Y-peak 
Y-trough 
Y-trough 
ρ-peak 
Y-peak 
Y-trough 
Y-trough 
ρ-peak 
Y-peak 
Y-trough 
Y-trough 
ρ-peak 
Y-peak 
Y-trough 

IV 

V 

31,02% 
34,31% 
31,63% 
31,63% 
34,90% 
33,89% 
35,61% 
35,61% 
36,47% 
34,45% 
35,14% 
35,14% 
40,49% 
40,36% 
34,46% 
34,46% 
39,20% 
35,24% 
28,82% 

271.614 
289.022 
285.173 
285.173 
304.605 
305.476 
303.004 
303.004 
310.228 
318.918 
314.458 
314.458 
402.792 
410.266 
385.507 
385.507 
414.464 
474.345 
435.615 

 18 

 

** See Appendix 1 
*** Data for the first quarter of 1996, for lack of information for the preceding period. 

 
TABLE 2: RATES OF GROWTH OF BASIC VARIABLES: PHASE AVERAGES* 

 

Rate of profit, ρ 
Share of profits, σπ 
Capacity utilisation rate, φ 
Capacity/capital ratio, ζ 
* All figures represent average annual % rates of growth. 
 

0,81% 
0,76% 
0,27% 

A 

2,05% 

-1,52% 
-0,06% 
-0,20% 

Phases 
B 

-2,17% 

-0,69% 
-1,55% 
-0,46% 

C 

-3,00% 

TABLE 3. 1: RATES OF GROWTH OF BASIC VARIABLES*

Cycle I

A

C

A

Cycle II

B

C

A

Cycle III

B

C

1996.1-1997.4

1997.4-1999.1 1999.1-2000.4 2000.4-2001.1 2001.1-2001.4 2001.4-2002.2

2002.2-2002.4

2002.4-2003.2

-3,02%
Rate of profit, ρ
-1,90%
Share of profits, σπ
-0,98%
Capacity utilisation rate, φ
Capacity/capital ratio, ζ
0,16%
* All figures represent average annual % rates of growth

2,81%
2,43%
0,44%
-0,33%

2,36%
1,35%
1,41%
-0,63%

-6,37%
-4,94%
-0,85%
0,06%

8,11%
8,18%
-1,43%
0,55%

2,06%
-0,89%
1,40%
1,33%

-4,93%
-5,86%
0,58%
0,86%

1,71%
2,67%
-1,76%
0,62%

TABLE 3.2: RATES OF GROWTH OF BASIC VARIABLES*

A

Cycle IV

B

Cycle V
A

C

B

C

2003.2-2008.2

2008.2-2008.3 2008.3-2009.1 2009.1-2009.4 2009.4-2014.1 2014.1-2016.4

7,21%
4,09%
1,66%
0,68%

0,66%
-0,39%
0,36%
0,62%

-13,72%
-6,37%
-3,87%
-1,99%

-0,54%
Rate of profit, ρ
-1,27%
Share of profits, σπ
-0,62%
Capacity utilisation rate, φ
Capacity/capital ratio, ζ
1,41%
* All figures represent average annual % rates of growth
 
 
APPENDIX 3: FIGURES 
 
Figure 1: Recent Output and Profit Cycles in Brazil (1996-2016) 
 

-1,32%
-0,59%
-0,13%
-0,46%

-3,33%
-0,77%
-1,19%
-1,05%

490000	
460000	
430000	
400000	
370000	
340000	
310000	
280000	
250000	
220000	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

1
Q
6
9
9
1

3
Q
6
9
9
1

1
Q
7
9
9
1

3
Q
7
9
9
1

1
Q
8
9
9
1

3
Q
8
9
9
1

1
Q
9
9
9
1

3
Q
9
9
9
1

3
Q
3
0
0
2

1
Q
0
0
0
2

1
Q
5
0
0
2

3
Q
5
0
0
2

3
Q
2
0
0
2

1
Q
3
0
0
2

1
Q
4
0
0
2

3
Q
4
0
0
2

3
Q
0
0
0
2

1
Q
1
0
0
2

3
Q
1
0
0
2

1
Q
2
0
0
2

Recessions	
GDP	(in	constant	2000	Brazilian	Reais)	[millions]	

1
Q
0
1
0
2

3
Q
0
1
0
2

1
Q
1
1
0
2

3
Q
1
1
0
2

1
Q
2
1
0
2

3
Q
2
1
0
2

Late	Expansions	
Profit	Rate	[Right	Axis]	

1
Q
6
0
0
2

3
Q
6
0
0
2

1
Q
7
0
0
2

3
Q
7
0
0
2

1
Q
8
0
0
2

3
Q
8
0
0
2

1
Q
9
0
0
2

3
Q
9
0
0
2

1
Q
3
1
0
2

3
Q
3
1
0
2

1
Q
4
1
0
2

3
Q
4
1
0
2

1
Q
5
1
0
2

3
Q
5
1
0
2

1
Q
6
1
0
2

3
Q
6
1
0
2

 
 

 19 

0.44	
0.4	0.42	
0.38	
0.36	
0.34	
0.3	0.32	
0.28	
0.26	

 

 
Figure 2: Components of the Profit Rate (1996-2016) [index: 1996Q1=1] 

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

1
Q
6
9
9
1

3
Q
6
9
9
1

1
Q
7
9
9
1

3
Q
7
9
9
1

1
Q
8
9
9
1

3
Q
8
9
9
1

1
Q
9
9
9
1

3
Q
9
9
9
1

1
Q
0
0
0
2

3
Q
0
0
0
2

1
Q
3
0
0
2

3
Q
3
0
0
2

1
Q
4
0
0
2

3
Q
4
0
0
2

1
Q
5
0
0
2

3
Q
5
0
0
2

1
Q
6
0
0
2

3
Q
6
0
0
2

1
Q
9
0
0
2

3
Q
9
0
0
2

1
Q
0
1
0
2

3
Q
0
1
0
2

1
Q
1
1
0
2

3
Q
1
1
0
2

1
Q
2
1
0
2

3
Q
2
1
0
2

1
Q
3
1
0
2

3
Q
3
1
0
2

1
Q
4
1
0
2

3
Q
4
1
0
2

1
Q
5
1
0
2

3
Q
5
1
0
2

1
Q
6
1
0
2

3
Q
6
1
0
2

1
Q
1
0
0
2

3
Q
2
0
0
2

3
Q
1
0
0
2

1
Q
2
0
0
2

Recessions	
Capacity/capital	ratio	

3
Q
8
0
0
2

1
Q
7
0
0
2

3
Q
7
0
0
2

1
Q
8
0
0
2

Late	Expansions	
Capacity	utilization	rate	

Profit	share	

 
 
Figure 3: Capacity/Capital Ratio and Terms of Trade (1996-2016) - [index: 1996Q1=1] 

1.25	
1.2	
1.15	
1.1	
1.05	
1	
0.95	
0.9	

1.35	
1.25	1.3	
1.15	1.2	
1.05	1.1	
0.95	1	
0.85	0.9	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

1
Q
6
9
9
1

3
Q
6
9
9
1

1
Q
7
9
9
1

3
Q
7
9
9
1

1
Q
8
9
9
1

3
Q
8
9
9
1

1
Q
9
9
9
1

3
Q
9
9
9
1

1
Q
0
0
0
2

3
Q
0
0
0
2

1
Q
1
0
0
2

3
Q
1
0
0
2

1
Q
2
0
0
2

3
Q
2
0
0
2

1
Q
3
0
0
2

3
Q
3
0
0
2

3
Q
5
0
0
2

1
Q
6
0
0
2

3
Q
6
0
0
2

1
Q
7
0
0
2

3
Q
7
0
0
2

1
Q
8
0
0
2

3
Q
8
0
0
2

1
Q
9
0
0
2

3
Q
1
1
0
2

1
Q
2
1
0
2

3
Q
2
1
0
2

1
Q
3
1
0
2

3
Q
3
1
0
2

1
Q
4
1
0
2

3
Q
4
1
0
2

1
Q
5
1
0
2

1
Q
4
0
0
2

3
Q
4
0
0
2

1
Q
5
0
0
2

Late	expansions	

1
Q
1
1
0
2

3
Q
9
0
0
2

1
Q
0
1
0
2

3
Q
0
1
0
2

Capacity/capital	ratio	

3
Q
6
1
0
2

1
Q
6
1
0
2

3
Q
5
1
0
2

Terms	of	trade	

Recessions	

 

 20 

 

 

