ANPEC – 41º Encontro Nacional de Economia 
Área 2 - Economia Política 

 
 

The fourth dimension: derivatives as a form of capital 

 

Pedro Rossi I  
Guilherme Santos Mello II  
Ricardo de Medeiros Carneiro III 
Marcos Vinicius Chiliatto-Leite IV 

Abstract 

This  paper  discusses  the  role  of  derivatives  in  contemporary  capitalism.  Its  analytical  construction  is 
based on a  specific  reading of Marx which features  the constitution of  four dimensions  in the capitalist 
mode  of  production,  highlighting  derivatives  markets  as  a  development  of  fictitious  capital:  the  fourth 
dimension. Therefore, derivatives are viewed not only as supporting the financial accumulation process, 
but also as playing a central role that affects the entire process. 

 

Keywords: Derivatives; Marx; Capitalism; Financialization. 
 

Resumo:  

Esse  artigo  discute  o  papel  dos  derivativos  no  capitalimo  contemporâneo.  Sugere-se  uma  construção 
analítica a partir de uma leitura de Marx, onde se apresentam quatro dimensões do desenvolvimento do 
modo  de  produção  capitalista,  destacando  os  derivativos  como  um  desdobramento  do  capital  fictício:  a 
quarta dimensão.  Dessa forma, propõe-se que os derivativos não são apenas coadjuvantes no processo de 
acumulação financeira, mas desempenham um papel central que condiciona todo esse processo. 
 
 Palavras Chave: Derivativos; Marx; Capitalismo; Financerização. 
 
JEL: B51; G01; P16. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                        
I Lecturer at the State University of Campinas (IE/UNICAMP). 
II Researcher at the State University of Campinas (IE/UNICAMP). 
III  Executive  director  for  Brazil  at  the  Inter-American  Development  Bank  (IDB)  and  Professor  at  the  State  University  of 
Campinas (IE/UNICAMP). 
IV Counselor for Brazil at the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) and PhD candidate at the State University of Campinas 
(IE/UNICAMP). 

1 

 

Introduction 

The  derivatives  market  is  the  most  important  financial  market  considering  the  volume  of 
operations as a criterion. Despite the importance of this market, there is a dearth of studies that delve into 
the  topic  in  the  field  of  Political  Economy;  there  is  no  set  of  detailed  analyses  about  the  nature  of  this 
instrument  and  its  impact  on  the  process  of  capital  accumulation.  However,  some  exploratory  texts 
consider derivatives a central variable to economic dynamics, such as Bryan and Rafferty (2006), Lipuma 
and Lee (2005), Bryan and Rafferty (2006), Blackburn (2006) and McKenzie (2011).1 

This study aims to advance the discussion of derivatives from the Political Economy perspective 
in dialogue with the previously cited authors. For this, the paper analytically constructs four dimensions 
of  capitalist  accumulation.  The  purpose  of  this  construction  is  to  highlight  the  derivatives  market  as  a 
development  of  fictitious  capital  and  as  a  particular  sphere  of  the  financial  accumulation.  Three 
methodological  axes  are  used  to  characterize  each  dimension.  The  first  is  the  Marxist  analysis  of  the 
forms  of  money  circulation  and  the  subordinate  relations  in  the  process  of  capitalist  accumulation. The 
second axis comes from the Bryan and Rafferty (2006) analysis that identifies degrees of separation in the 
ownership  of  capital  in  the  process  of  capitalist  accumulation.  And  the  third  axis  of  analysis  is  the 
description of the system logic and changes in capitalism in each dimension. 

This  construction,  although  exploratory,  points  out  important  features  of  the  logic  of  financial 
accumulation provided by derivatives. In derivatives markets without physical delivery, transactions are 
purely monetary; therefore, there is no change in ownership of the underlying assets. Given this and other 
characteristics  of  derivatives,  which  will  be  addressed  in  this  paper,  we  argue  that  they  become  the 
locomotive of wealth appreciation  when derivatives markets  assume the  prerogative of price formation. 
At  this  point,  some  of  the  major  spot  markets  become  dependent  on  the  derivatives  market  and  the 
forward price variation is transmitted by arbitrage in the “opposite” direction than usually expected. One 
can say, in a contradictory way, spot prices “derive” from forward prices. 

This study also dialogues with the literature of “financialization” – represented by Chesnais (1995; 
1996;  2003;  2004),  Aglietta  and  Rebérioux  (2005),  Aglietta  (2006),  Palley  (2007),  Guttmann  (2008), 
among  others.  This  literature  indicates  control  over  the  property  of  companies,  represented  by  share 
capital, as responsible for the spread of a financial logic between economic agents. It is  argued that the 
fourth dimension exacerbates financial domination and gives it new contours. The core of contemporary 
finance is increasingly moving from property relations, represented by stock markets, or the bond market, 
to  the  derivatives  market  where  agents  who  run  the  financial  dynamics,  such  as  large  banks  and  hedge 
funds,  operate.2  In  these  terms,  the  derivatives  market  adjusts  the  sphere  of  property  to  its  logic  by 
controlling price dynamics, and it shifts the epicenter from the bond markets to the derivatives market. 

In addition to this introduction and the concluding remarks, the paper is divided into four parts. In 
the  following  part,  we  discuss  the  nature  of  derivatives,  an  essential  starting  point,  to  the  extent  that 
derivatives are financial instruments subject to frequent misunderstandings. Section 2 describes the four 
dimensions of capitalism, highlighting the new form of accumulation provided by the derivatives market. 
Section  3  provides  the  microfoundations  of  the  fourth  dimension,  and  shows  theoretically  how  future 
prices can continuously determine spot prices though the dynamic of speculation and arbitrage. Section 4 
illustrates  how  the  logic  of  derivatives  can  be  observed  in  contemporary  capitalism,  particularly  with 
regard to price determination issue.  

                                                        
1  Blackburn  (2006)  inspired  the  use  of  the  term  “fourth  dimension”,  notwithstanding  loading  it  with  different  meaning  from 
that used in this text. 
2  “It  is  not  household  names  like  Nike  or  Coca-Cola  that  are  the  capstones  of  contemporary  capitalism,  but  finance  houses, 
hedge  funds and private equity concerns,  many of  which are unknown to the  general public. In the end even the largest and 
most famous of corporations have only a precarious and provisional autonomy within the new world of business  – ultimately 
they are playthings of the capital markets” (BLACKBURN, 2006: 42). 

2 

 

1. On the nature of derivatives 

Derivatives  are  not  an  invention  of  modern  finance.  Their  origin  dates  back  to  pre-capitalist 
periods. According to Bryan and Rafferty (2006), there are records of forward contracts of rice in China 
in  2000  BC.  The  original  function  of  these  instruments  was  to  protect  farmers  from  fluctuations  in 
agricultural  prices.  Derivatives  are,  therefore,  instruments  that  emerge  organically  from  the  production 
process and are subsequently appropriated and refurbished by the financial system to enhance the process 
of capital accumulation. However, the speculative use of derivatives is also very ancient, as shown in the 
book Politics, by Aristotle. In the story of Thales of Miletus, a primitive use of an option contract can be 
identified. Thales, predicting an increase in the olive harvest, negotiated with owners of olive presses the 
right to rent machines during the harvest period in exchange of cash advance. When the bountiful harvest 
came, the olive growers sought the scarce machines on the market and Thales made a fortune. 

The  usual  definition  of  derivatives,  repeated  in  finance  textbooks,  states  that  these  are  financial 
contracts that establish future payments, whose value derives from an asset, financial instrument or event 
occurrence.  This  definition  can  be  misleading  as  it  suggests  a  causality  that  is  not  always  true,  i.e.,  it 
proposes that the price formation of derivative contracts depends on prices in the spot market.3 However, 
there  are  derivatives  markets  in  which  spot  and  future  prices  are  defined  simultaneously;  and  others 
where the locus of determination is the forward market as will be shown throughout this study.4 Thus, this 
study  adopts  the  concept  of  derivatives  as  a  bilateral  contract  that  stipulates  future  payment  and  whose 
value is tied to the value of another asset, index or rate or, in some cases, depends on the occurrence of an 
event.5 

An  important  characteristic  of  a  derivative  transaction  is  that,  if  considered  in  isolation,  it 

represents a “zero sum game”, where earnings are equal to losses: 

 

Virtual markets do not create wealth. They only redistribute it among the participants. In aggregate, one can 
only  win  the  values  lost  by  other  participants  in  the  derivatives  markets. The  only  wealth  created  in  these 
markets  is  made  by  the  brokerage  and  emoluments  to  the  Stock  Markets  paid  by  all  participants,  whether 
they won or lost money on their operations (FARHI, 1998: 7) 

 

In order to better understand derivatives, one should be alert to the three motives that lead agents 
to  operate  with  derivatives:  hedge,  arbitrage  and  speculation.  The  hedge  agent  is  motivated  by  the 
coverage  of  risks  of  their  activities  on  the  spot  market.6  For  this  agent,  derivatives  are  compensatory 
because they cover losses or compensate gains from activities in the spot market. Meanwhile, speculative 
transactions with derivatives are those where the position assumed by an agent has no correspondence on 
the spot market, thus, they are exposed to risks of price variations or the occurrence of events. 

As it is a bilateral contract, the common argument is that the speculator is essential for derivative 
trading as it takes the risks of productive enterprises and thus provides the hedge. This is not necessarily 
true, as the speculator may be dispensable in  contracts  where there are opposing interests of companies 
that  require  a  hedge  such  as,  for  example,  between  an  exporting  company  whose  risk  is  the  domestic 
currency  appreciation  and  an  importing  company  that  fears  depreciation  of  the  domestic  currency  in 
relation  to  the  foreign  currency.  In  this  case,  the  derivative  exchange  serves  two  agents  with  hedge 
motivations  and  provides  a  risk  reduction  for  both  by  ensuring  the  future  price  of  the  exchange  rate 
between  two  currencies.  Finally,  the  arbitrage  transaction  is  characterized  by  two  simultaneous 
operations, one on the spot market and one in the derivatives market, where the motivation is to exploit 

                                                        
3 This causality is in the origin of the term “derivative”. 
4  This  question,  repeated  throughout  the  paper,  is  corroborated  by  Bryan  and  Rafferty  (2006:  12):  “Many  empirical  studies 
have  shown that prices are first formed in derivatives  markets (a process called price discovery) and are transmitted back to 
cash markets, while others have found that this process occurs more or less simultaneously.” 
5 The Chicago stock market, for example, negotiates weather futures intended for protection against the occurrence of weather 
events.  
6  “Hedge  risk  transactions  consist,  essentially,  in  assuming  for  a  future  time  the  opposite  position  that  one  has  on  the  spot 
market” (FARHI, 1999: 94). 

3 

 

price  differentials  in  these  markets.  This  creates  the  opportunity  of  gains  without  risks.7  Unlike  a 
speculative operation where the result of the operation is known ex post, in arbitrage, the gain is known ex 
ante. This operation is responsible for transmitting prices between the spot and future markets, as will be 
shown in section 3. 

There  are  two  forms  of  settlement  for  derivative  contracts,  which  are:  physical  delivery  of  the 
underlying asset or cash settlement. Markets that operate exclusively with physical delivery require, from 
the counterparts, the delivery and receipt of the asset or good involved in the operation. For example, a 
forward contract with physical delivery of oil implies that, on a future date, one party will sell to the other 
a certain number of barrels of oil at a pre-agreed price. This type of market restricts the set of participants 
to those who work in production, which use the product as an input, or at least have the logistics required 
to transport and store the commodity. Therefore, price determination in this market reflects the interaction 
of these agents, which are somehow linked to production, processing or storage of the underlying assets. 

Meanwhile, in the market with cash settlement there is no physical exchange, but an adjustment of 
margins  on  the  financial  difference,  paid  in  cash.  This  factor  allows  the  operation  of  agents  unrelated 
neither  to  production  nor  to  the  use  of  the  underlying  assets,  and  opens  a  wide  opportunity  for 
speculators.  For  example,  a  Japanese  investor  can  sell  dollars  against  Brazilian  reals  with  settlement  in 
yen. In this case, he may not have the dollars nor want to get Brazilian reals, since he is only interested in 
the result in yen from the exchange rate fluctuations between the dollar and real.8 However, his operation 
potentially affects the dollar/real exchange rate.  

Moreover, a derivative market with cash settlement grants participants in this market a tremendous 
leverage. Restrictions on the degree of leverage come down to a margin requirement that corresponds to a 
small percentage of notional value for the contract.9 In this context, McKenzie (2011) states the growth of 
markets  with  cash  settlement  enables  a  substantial  increase  in  leverage  of  agents  and  a  rise  in  trading 
volumes in derivatives markets, becoming a large space for financial speculation. 

In these terms, the derivative contract makes it possible to separate the assets themselves and the 
volatility of their prices. It is a negotiation involving the attributes of assets and their risks, but not their 
ownership,  or  property.  A  stock  is  a  contract  that  establishes  ownership  of  part  of  a  company;  a  debt 
security provides the right to ownership of an income flow; but derivatives do not imply any ownership 
(Bryan  and  Rafferty,  2006).10  The  derivatives  are  priced,  bought  and  sold  without  any  change  in 
ownership of the asset to which they relate. Thus, agents can “sell what they do not have or buy what they 
do not want to possess” (FARHI, 2010: 209). 

A social – or macroeconomic – specific and extremely important function can be attributed to the 
derivatives  market:  the  transfer  of  risks  between  agents.  By  pricing  and  providing  risk  transfer, 
derivatives become a useful tool for dealing with macro and microeconomic uncertainty. They play a role 
of stabilizing and coordinating the agents' expectations and can, in theory, reduce the spread of financial 
instability  to  the  sphere  of  production.  In  this  sense,  although  they  do  not  directly  create  wealth, 
derivatives  can  generate  positive  indirect  effects  on  the  production  of  wealth  that  are  consequences  of 
how producers respond to uncertainty about prices.11 

Naturally,  the  more  volatile  the  economic  variables  that  affect  the  production  of  goods  and 
services,  the  greater  the  importance  of  derivatives  will  be.  However,  an  analysis  of  the  importance  of 
derivatives  becomes  more  complex  when  one  admits  the  possibility  of  the  derivatives  market  itself 
increasing  macroeconomic  and  price  instability.  In  other  words,  they  can  solve  problems  of 

                                                        
7 Arbitrage can also be conceived in the same market, between two maturities or two different instruments. 
8 The cash settlement also allows the development of index markets that, by nature, are non-deliverable.  
9  The  notional  value  corresponds  to  the  face  value  of  the  derivative  contract. As  in  most  cases,  contracts  are  settled  by  the 
financial difference, the amounts actually transferred are much smaller. In OTC markets, the margin requirement for security is 
at the discretion of parties involved in the contract;  meanwhile, in the stock  market, there are margin requirements since the 
settlement of the contract is guaranteed by a central counterparty. 
10 This abstraction, promoted by derivatives, will be better qualified throughout the paper. 
11 “However, while such derivatives may be a zero sum in monetary terms, in a broader context, they can be seen to involve a 
positive sum. By permitting better planning and organization of production and trade, derivatives may generate positive effects 
on resource allocation and accumulation” (BRYAN AND RAFFERTY, 2006: 42). 

4 

 

microeconomic efficiency and aggravate problems of macroeconomic instability. Along these lines, Farhi 
(1998)  argues that derivatives have a contradictory  nature, where the initial  logic becomes its opposite: 
they are at the same time essential mechanisms for hedging risks and privileged means of speculation that 
adds volatility to the markets: 

The  systematic  analysis  of  the  impact  of  financial  derivatives  shows  the  dual  and,  sometimes,  ambiguous 
role of these instruments. They play a role of stabilizing and coordinating the agents' expectations and can 
strongly  reduce  the  spread  of  financial  instability  to  the  sphere  of  production.  At  the  same  time,  the 
extensive use made by economic agents of the mechanisms of derivatives, whether to hedge risks, or for use 
in  arbitrage  operations  or  even  to  speculate,  together  with  the  power  of  leverage  present  in  these  markets 
have the potential to exacerbate the volatility and instability of markets (FARHI, 1998: 262-263). 

2. The four dimensions of capitalism 

The  four  dimensions  are  analytical  constructions  that  seek  to  describe  the  formation  and 
development  of  the  capitalist  mode  of  production.  The  purpose  of  this  construction  is  to  highlight  the 
derivatives  market  as  a  development  of  fictitious  capital  and  as  a  particular  sphere  of  financial 
accumulation.  There  are  three  methodological  axes  used  to  characterize  each  dimension.  The  first  is  a 
Marxist  analysis  of  the  forms  of  circulation  of  money  and  the  subordinate  relations  in  the  process  of 
capitalist  accumulation.  The  second  axis  comes  from  the  Bryan  and  Rafferty  (2006)  analysis  that 
identifies degrees of change in the nature of capital ownership in the process of capitalist accumulation. 
And the third axis of analysis is a description of the logic of the system and changes in capitalism in each 
dimension. 

The four dimensions presented are not necessarily associated with a specific historical context, but 
coexist historically. Analyzing the Marxist method, Belluzzo (1980) describes it as "eminently genetic" or 
"logical-genetic" where  the most simple  categories and concepts  contains features of the more  complex 
categories, while the latter contains in its genesis contradictions inscribed in the most elementary forms12. 
That's exactly what the concept of "dimensions" seeks to capture: the transfiguration of the forms, that is, 
how the more complex forms of capital accumulation arise from the most elementary forms through their 
contradictions,  to  subordinate  them  and  transform  the  dynamics  of  capitalism.  Accordingly,  the  fourth 
dimension is presented as a theoretical development of a new form of capital as it appears: the "derivative 
form." 

Also  noteworthy  is  that  the  analytical  separation  of  the  spheres  of  accumulation  does  not  imply 
independence  between  them.  Neither  does  the  subordination  of  production  to  finance  imply  absolute 
autonomy of the first in view of the second. That is, there is no self-referential appreciation process where 
finances limitlessly determine their own value. On the contrary, the hierarchical structure suggested does 
not  relieve  the  dependence  of  the  financial  sphere  on  the  sphere  of  production;  these  spheres  are  inter-
conditioned. In this sense, potential detachments between the spheres are limited in time and will tend to 
be adjusted repeatedly through crises. 

2.1. First three dimensions: spheres of commodities, production and ownership 

The  analytical  category  of  the  first  dimension  refers  to  the  most  primitive  form  of  mercantile 
circulation, due to the nature of the occasional exchange whose objective is to obtain use values. This is 
what  Marx  (1985)  called  “the  direct  form  of  commodity  circulation”,  an  abstract  type  of  commodity 
circulation. This means that Marx shows the way in which, in a (hypothetical) simple mercantile society – 
with the trading of commodities and where money has no role as capital –, the values, or the products of 
human labor, are exchanged according to the scheme: Commodity (C) – Money (M) – Commodity (C). In 

                                                        
12 This  means  that  the  study  of  the  simplest  forms  allows  us  to  glimpse  the  more  complex  forms  and  its  contradictions. As 
stated  by  Mazzuccelli  (1985),  it  is  imperative  for  researchers  the  task  to  unravel  and  understand  the  "(...)  fundamental 
transformations of the mode of production, in order to identify immanent tendencies of the mode of production that leads to the 
establishment of new structural forms of existence" (MAZZUCCELLI, 1985:10). 

5 

 

this sphere, money is a means of circulation and not an end of the process. It is important to highlight that 
in  this  sphere  of  circulation  there  is  no  separation  between  work  and  ownership  of  the  means  of 
production. Therefore, the ideas of social classes, extraction of surplus value, nor the idea of capital are 
built,  at  this  stage  of  Marxist  analysis.  The  logic  of  the  process  is  to  obtain  a  new  good,  i.e.,  the 
production of a commodity has use value as its end13  

The second dimension is a sphere of productive accumulation where the aim is to begin with an 
amount of money and, through the M-C-M’ process, end with an increase of ΔM, i.e., a M' = M + ΔM, the 
latter generated in the sphere of production. The additional money from the second dimension is a profit 
obtained from  the surplus value that  results from the production process. A precondition  for  the second 
dimension is to have established capitalist relations of production. Bryan and Rafferty (2006) refer to the 
separation of the worker from his means of production as the “first level of separation of the ownership of 
capital”. This separation allows the formation of a class of owners, capitalists, and another one of “free” 
workers available on the market, so that the second dimension is marked by the subsumption of labor to 
capital,  which  in  turn  manifests  itself  in  the  wage  relation.  Furthermore,  production  decisions  are 
individual and have as  a goal  the obtainment of  additional money,  and specifically, capital  appreciation 
that, as we have seen, involves money, as an end, and wage labor. 

Moreover,  the  constant  need  for  capital  appreciation  is  already  manifested  in  the  second 
dimension.  The  circulation  of  money  as  capital  means  that  the  goal  is  not  to  obtain  use  values,  but  to 
obtain profits, and the valorization process is an end in itself. In summary, in the second dimension, the 
process  begins  with  an  amount  of  money  and  ends  with  an  increase  to  the  original  money,  which  is 
possible  by  subordinating  labor  to  capital  and  by  creating  surplus  value.  Therefore,  in  the  so-called 
second dimension, money becomes capital and accumulation is configured as a process of accumulation 
of abstract wealth, of money.14 

The first  element  to  form  the  third dimension, in turn, is  the occurrence of capital  appreciation 
without the mediation of production of commodities, so that circulation is reduced to the extremes M-M'. 
The M-M' way appears, within the second dimension, as a way to support the M-C-M' accumulation. This 
means that credit, understood as the temporary transfer of capital among capitalists, is born as a way to 
extend  the  ability  to  mobilize  the  workforce  and  means  of  production.  In  addition  to  interest-bearing 
capital,  Marx  (2001)  brings  the  first  elements  for  the  understanding  of  “fictitious  capital”.  The 
constitution  of  tradable  financial  instruments,  such  as  bonds,  bills  of  exchange,  stocks,  are  forms  of 
fictitious  capital,  with  an  original  face  value  but  whose  current  value  corresponds  to  expected  income 
flows, discounted by an interest rate. Here the appreciation process of fictitious capital gains autonomy, 
apparently complete, in relation to productive appreciation.15 Therefore, the third dimension presents the 
“second  level  of  separation  of  ownership  of  capital”  (BRYAN  &  RAFFERTY,  2006),  which  is  the 
separation of ownership and production (or management) – resulting from property in shares.  

Extensive  literature  with  theoretical  foundation  on  the  contributions  of  Marx  and  Keynes 
describes the dominance of finance in the economic process and the changes in contemporary capitalism. 
Author´s such as Chesnais (1995; 1996; 2003; 2005), Epstein (2001), Belluzzo (1997), Tavares and Melin 
(1997), Plihon (2004), Aglietta and Rebérioux (2005), Aglietta (2006), Carneiro (2007), Palley (2007) and 
Guttmann  (2008)  promote  the  idea  of  financial  dominance,  capitalism  dominated  by  finance,  or  simply 
“financialization”. This literature describes the main logic of the third dimension, which is asset valuation 
logic  or  fictitious  appreciation.  In  general  lines,  the  dynamics  of  capital  gains  impose  its  interests  and 

                                                        
13 It is not the purpose of this paper to discuss Marx theory of value. It is assumed that the reader has a basic understanding  on 
this issue. 
14 Marx (2001, vol. I: 224) concludes: “Value therefore now becomes value in process, money in process, and, as such, capital. 
It  comes  out  of  circulation,  enters  into  it  again,  preserves  and  multiplies  itself  within  its  circulation,  enters  into  it  again, 
preserves  and  multiplies  itself  within  its  circuit,  comes  back  out  of  it  with  expanded  bulk,  and  begins  the  same  round  ever 
afresh.  M-M’,  money  which  begets  money,  such  is  the  description  of  Capital  from  the  mouths  of  its  first  interpreters,  the 
Mercantilists”. 
15  This  appearance  of  complete  autonomy  is  actually  illusory  in  a  sense  that  very  rapid  fictitious  appreciation  processes 
eventually  end  in  financial  crises,  whose  larger  meaning  is  the  return  to  a  greater  adherence  to  the  productive  sphere 
appreciation process. 

6 

 

controls the behavior of the M-C-M' process and, therefore, subordinates the sphere of production to its 
interests. This financial logic is imposed on the production system to the extent that stock market shares 
are controlled by financial agents.  

 

“From  the  80s,  the  shareholders  owners  expended  considerable  energy  and  legal  means,  or  quasi-legal,  to 
subordinate industrial managers and turn them into people who internalize the priorities and codes of conduct 
born of the power of the stock market”.(CHESNAIS, 2005: 36). 
 

In  most  literature  on  financialization,  derivatives  appear  tangentially  illustrating  the  operating 
mode of firms whose centrality is in asset valuation logic represented by the stock market. Therefore, the 
debate  is  not  centered  in  the  derivatives  market  but  rather  in  the  realm  of  property  where  capitalism 
moves through the centralization of wealth, by mergers and acquisitions, the appreciation of shares etc. It 
is  based  on  this  point  that  this  paper  proposes  a  contribution,  and  argues  that  derivatives  have  a  more 
structural role in the process of capital accumulation. 

2.2. The fourth dimension: the sphere of derivatives 

In  physics,  the  discussion  about  the  fourth  dimension  comes  up  as  an  attempt  to  use  time  in 
studies of natural phenomena. It is known that space has three dimensions, described by three orthogonal 
planes that make up a three-dimensional coordinate system. In modern physics, the concept of space-time 
became  widely  used  with  the  elaboration  of  the  theory  of  relativity.  Time  appears  as  an  additional 
dimension to describe the movement of bodies and natural phenomena. In economics, derivatives refer to 
risks  associated  with  the  passage  of  time,  or  rather,  they  reduce  economic  uncertainty  to  probabilistic 
risks and negotiate these risks in a particular market. For the hedge agent, derivatives represent an attempt 
to  eliminate  uncertainty  surrounding  the  process  of  reproduction  of  capital.  They  are,  accordingly,  a 
reduction of microeconomic Keynesian uncertainty. For those who speculate, time is a determining factor 
in obtaining gains or losses. The logic of speculation is a temporal logic in the sense of the anticipation of 
price movement or occurrence of future events.16 

Derivatives  are  not  exclusive  to  the  fourth  dimension  of  capitalism.  These  instruments,  as 
conceptualized in section 1, organically emerge from the production process and can be observed in each 
of  the  four  dimensions.  In  the  first  dimension,  derivatives  are  inserted  to  ensure  the  circulation  of 
commodities at a given price, that is, to ensure future sales (C-M) or a future purchases (M-C) at a pre-
established  price,  guaranteeing  protection  against  price  variation  in  the  exchange  of  commodities. 
Derivatives are also functional in the logic of productive accumulation, being characterized in this study 
as  the  second  dimension.  They  can  appear  in  various  stages  of  production  of  commodities,  such  as  to 
ensure the purchase price of raw materials and inputs, to buy insurance against events that interfere with 
the  production  process,  or  to  ensure  the  final  product  price.  These  occurrences  mitigate  uncertainties 
associated  with  the  production  process  and  increase  the  predictability  of  earnings  resulting  from  this 
process (ΔM). 

In the third dimension, derivatives are used primarily to ensure the profitability of capital, because 
credit relations, bond and stock markets are permeated by the uncertainty related to interest rate changes 

                                                        
16 According to Schackle (1959, p. 285): “The mathematician treats time as a space, or as one dimension of a space, in which 
all points have an equal status or importance or validity together, within one and the same prospect of the world; they have, as I 
would paradoxically say, a simultaneous validity, each of them means the same to him when he  thinks about them all in one 
thought.”    The  attempt  of  the  derivative  form  is  to  treat  time  as  the  mathematician  does,  when  derivatives  quantify  the 
uncertainty about price changes, or the uncertainty about the occurrence of any event, in a measured “risk”. The uncertainty is 
reduced  to  a  supposedly  known  “risk”,  as  if  it  were  predictable. This  “contradiction”  of  the  derivative  form  is  precisely  the 
reason  why  they  are  prone  to  make  mistakes  and  amplify  volatility.  For  the  purposes  of  this  paper,  it  is  important  to  clearly 
explain  the  meaning  of  uncertainty,  which  cannot  be  confused  with  probabilistic  risk.  The  uncertainty  means  that  there  are 
events  in  the  course  of  economic  activities  in  which  there  are  no  probabilistic  knowledge  of  their  results.  There  are  events 
whose effects are simply not quantifiable, or even unknown, in a world where the past is not invariably repeated and the future 
is necessarily unknowable.  
 

7 

 

and  compliance  with  credit  agreements.  However,  from  the  development  of  fictitious  capital  and  the 
consequent  increase in  the  importance of secondary markets,  arise the  growth and the  generalization of 
the speculative use of derivative markets. This  generalization gives rise to the fourth  dimension.  In this 
sphere,  the  derivative  transactions  empower  themselves  as  a  new  form  of  capital,  with  particularities 
discussed ahead. The derivative form, dialectically, depends on the circulation of fictitious capital, and at 
the  same  time  denies  it.  Depends,  because  its  form  of  gain  is  directly  related  to  the  price  variation  of 
fictitious capital, but it denies because derivatives exchange tend to be independent of changes in property 
rights.  Finally,  it  reinforces  the  role  of  fictitious  capital  and  amplifies  its  impact  on  the  capital 
accumulation. 

As  developed  in  section  2.1,  capital  has  the  power  to  make  profits  through  the  production  and 
appropriation  of  surplus  value.  In  turn,  money  is  crucial,  because  it  moves  the  production  process  and 
generates additional wealth. That is, money goes into the circuit as capital, goes through the production 
process and returns to the capitalist in the form of money-capital at the end of the process. It is, therefore, 
the means and the goal of the process. With interest-bearing and fictitious capital, as described, capitalism 
assumes a more exterior and more fetishist form. Money-capital gains an apparent and relative autonomy 
to  pursue  its  way  to  appreciation  on  its  own.  It  may  be  interest-bearing  capital,  supported  by  the  credit 
system,  which  apparently  provides  money  with  the  ability  to  create  wealth  or  add  value  to  itself 
independently  of  production;  or  fictitious  capital,  in  which  stocks  of  wealth  can  apparently  appreciate 
autonomously. So, financialization allows the M-M’ form to subordinate production and labor. 

Now,  the  new  form  of  accumulation  provided  by  derivatives  markets  has  a  fundamental 
characteristic: the appreciation process is independent of initial investment. At this stage, capital assumes 
its most abstract form. If, earlier, the formula for capital appreciation could be denoted by M-M', where 
M'  =  M  + ΔM,  in  the  sphere  of  derivatives  it  is  proposed  that  the  form  of  capital  appreciation  can  be 
simply denoted by ΔM*. The notation ΔM* proposes, on one hand, a lack of prior capital (M), and, on the 
other hand, the (*) form denotes a difference in the nature of the gain from the operation. 

Unlike  previous  forms, ΔM*  “dispenses”  the  need  for  money  as  a  means  of  appreciation,  or  its 
advance  in  the  beginning  of  the  process.  This  means  that  money  is  still  an  end  to  the  process  of 
valorization,  but  it  apparently  loses  its  relevance  as  a  vehicle  of  valorization,  as  well  as  the  credit 
system.17 Leverage, a feature of derivative markets, does not imply credit relations as such, but these are 
implicit  in  the  concept  of  leverage.  These  relations,  as  well  as  the  interest  associated  with  the  money 
form, are incorporated in the pricing of derivative contracts. As will be discussed in the next section, the 
future price of any asset is given not only by the  agents' expectations regarding the price change of this 
asset, but by the credit market interest rate, which consists of a carrying cost of this contract. 

In this new dimension, the process of capital accumulation transmutes from the ownership sphere. 
This  is  because  an  important  feature  of  derivatives  is  the  fact  that  operating  with  derivatives  does  not 
imply  ownership  of  the  underlying  asset.  Bryan  and  Rafferty  (2006:  74)  refer  to  this  separation  as  the 
third degree of separation of ownership of capital, and thus define: 

 

The  third  degree  of  separation  of  capital  ownership  involves  the  process  by  which  capital  ownership  is 
separated from company ownership and capital competes as itself. We have already described this separation 
in its most obvious form: that ownership of a share derivative (option or futures contract) is different from 
ownership of a share itself. The share derivative (such as a futures contract on a firm or the market index) 
gives  its  owner  exposure  to  the  performance  (price  and  profitability)  of  the  company  (or  group  of 
companies) in a form that is more flexible than direct share ownership. 

 

Nevertheless,  derivative  instruments  are  capable  of  deepening  the  abstraction  of  social  relations 
already present in  fictitious and interest-bearing capital (typical of the third dimension).  18 Hence, if the 
                                                        
17  That  is  to  say  that  there  is  no  need  to  transform  money  into  capital  for  the  process  of  valorization.  Money,  as  well  as 
ownership and credit relation, is concealed in derivative operations.   
18  Blackburn  (2006),  by  coining  the  term  “gray  capitalism”  calls  attention  to  this  characteristic  of  dissociation  of  asset 
ownership from the negotiation of its price fluctuations, as well as the “opacity” (McKENZIE, 2011: 209) of social relations 
that  are  underlying  each  asset.  That  is,  the  relations  of  ownership  and  responsibility  are  “clouded”  by  the  complexity  of 
8 

 

third  dimension  is  in  accordance  with  the  empowerment  of  financial  accumulation  with  respect  to  real 
bases of capital appreciation, the fourth dimension advances in this process and consolidates the form of 
financial accumulation to look even more autonomous, abstract and, thus, fetishized. After all, derivatives 
are  instruments  that  allow  capital  to  reproduce  by  a  process  that  “dispenses”  asset  property  and  money 
itself  as  a  means.  The  fetish  takes  its  most  radical  detachment  from  concrete  forms,  as  derivative 
operations hide real assets behind the contract as well as the social relations arising therefrom. 

However,  this  abstraction  does  not  imply  absolute  autonomy  of  the  derivatives  markets.  These 
markets facilitate movements in prices of economic fundamentals, both in times of boom and in times of 
crisis,  which  are  transmitted  to  the  real  sphere  and  affect  credit  relations  and  property  relations.  The 
accumulation by derivatives finds its “limit” at critical moments, i.e., when changes in risk perception of 
agents  generate  price-adjusting  in  the  market  that  take  the  form  of  inversion  of  bets  and  settlement  of 
contracts.  At  this  moment,  the  social  relations  of  property  and  credit  are  again  essential  to  ensure  the 
liquidity  and  solvency  of  agents  involved  in  these  markets,  revealing  the  real  social  relations  of  power, 
property and money that appeared previously only in a veiled manner. 

The  nature  of  earnings  in  the  fourth  dimension  is  different  from  that  provided  in  previous 
dimensions. As seen, the gain obtained by the capitalist in the second dimension is the profit derived from 
surplus value, and the gain in the third dimension originates from the appreciation of assets or receipt of 
interest.  Now,  the  gain  in  a  derivative  transaction  can  be  considered  a  gain  of  “casino”,19  i.e.,  a  gain 
arising from the mere bet on price movement by an asset that the betting agent does not own.20 Gains in 
these markets are provided by speculation that, among the major players in the market, is manifested in 
the  form  of  consolidated  strategies  that  seek  to  manipulate  information  and  form  conventions  that  have 
the  power  to  distort  prices.  Therefore,  the  fourth  dimension  is  a  sphere  of  accumulation  inherently 
speculative. The empowerment of derivative market is also the autonomization of speculation on property 
rights.  Thus,  as  proposed  by  Lipuma  and  Lee  (2005),  derivatives  are  a  functional  form  of  speculative 
capital par excellence.   

Another central feature of the derivatives market is its transversality, understood as the ability to 
integrate  diverse  markets.  The  derivatives  market  seeks  to  transform  economic  uncertainty  into  a 
measurable  probabilistic  risk;  price  it;  and  turn  into  an  interchangeable  instrument.  These  tools  enable 
different  financial  assets  to  be  measured  under  the  same  unit  of  measure,  “commoditizing”  risks  and 
integrating various markets.21 Thus, the derivatives market leads capital mobility to its limit and enables 
the exchange of profit on stocks of global wealth. Figure 1 illustrates the aforementioned process: in the 
derivatives market, one can change the profitability of a share by the interest rate variation in a country, 
bet on the appreciation of an exchange rate, on the sovereign debt default of another country etc. 

                                                                                                                                                                                                   
financial transactions. 
19 Following here the nomenclature utilized by Strange (1986) and McKenzie (2011) that, when describing the current state of 
financial capitalism, name it Casino Capitalism. 
20 It is worth noting that the gain may result from the appreciation or devaluation of capital stocks, i.e., the falling price of the 
underlying asset can bring gains, provided that the bet has been made in the right direction. 
21 This feature is called blending by Bryan and Rafferty (2006), bringing numerous aspects of the derivatives markets. The fact 
that derivatives are capable of commensurating different assets is directly related to the ability of derivatives to “commoditize 
the risks”, or, as stated by Lipuma and Lee (2005), “objectify the abstract risk”. Rotta (2008), by highlighting this issue as a 
social process of abstraction from the concrete, argue “the derivatives can only be priced if there is a process of real abstraction 
of the specific risks in an abstract risk” (ROTTA, 2008: 189). 

9 

 

Figure 1: The transversality and integration of markets through derivatives 
 

D-D' 

Foreign 
exchange 
market 

D-D' 

Debts 
market 

D-D' 

Interest 

rates 
market 

D-D' 

"nth" Market 

D-D' 

Housing 
market 

D-D' 

Stock 
market 

D-D' 

Commodities 

market 

Derivatives 

market 

D-D' 

Bonds 
market 

D-D' 

Credit 
market 

 
 
Source: Prepared by the authors. 
 

 

In  these  highly  deregulated  derivatives  markets  the  need  for  previous  capital  is  very  low  or 
nonexistent22.  Thus,  derivatives  are  instruments  utilized  to  avoid  prudential  regulation  once  an 
outstanding derivative  contract  does not  immediately  affect  the  assets  of firms; neither often  appears in 
their balance sheet.23 One can place bets without the need of guarantee deposits, which encourages agents 
to  enter  these  highly  leveraged  markets.  Moreover,  as  discussed  in  section  1,  the  growth  of  cash 
settlement markets allows for an increase in trading volumes in derivatives markets. 

As a result of transversality – coupled with high leverage and increases in transaction volume  – 
the  dynamics  of  derivatives  markets  generates  a  constant  repricing  of  stocks  of  financial  assets  and, 
therefore, of the fictitious wealth. The derivatives markets become the locomotive of wealth appreciation 
when  they  assume  the  prerogative  of  price  formation.  At  this  point,  some  of  the  major  spot  markets 
become dependent on derivatives markets and price variation is transmitted by arbitrage in the opposite 
direction  than  usual.  One  can  say,  in  a  contradictory  way,  that  spot  prices  are  “derived”  from  futures 
prices. 

In conclusion, the fourth dimension is consolidated when the logic of profit by betting, on markets 
with high liquidity, high leverage and deep abstraction, is able to price goods and core assets. Thus, the 
derivatives  market  starts  to  increasingly  take  on  the  role  of  privileged  locus  of  movement,  pricing  and 
appreciation  of  fictitious  capital,  subordinating  the  appreciation  logic  of  the  previous  dimensions.  The 
next session deepens the discussion around the pricing argument by presenting its microfoundations. 
 
3. Derivatives beyond the zero sum game 

                                                        
22 While it is the case that many derivatives require very little money expended upfront, it is also the case that not just anyone 
can enter these markets without an initial amount of money.  Individual investor access to these markets is common in some 
cases  but  requires  collateral  deposits.  For  example,  the  foreign  exchange  derivative  market  is  supplied  by  on-line  trading 
platforms  offered  by  brokers  to  individual  investors  with  widespread  use  in  some  countries.  According  to  Terada  (2008), 
individual investors accounted for 10% of foreign exchange trading in 2007 in Japan. 
23 Evidently, a bet that becomes erroneous will lead to the need to comply with the commitment made, which may require, for 
example, liquidation of assets. 

10 

 

 

The argument that derivatives market is a zero sum game is indubitable, since the sum gained by 
one  agent  corresponds  precisely  to  the  sum  lost  by  another  at  the  moment  of  liquidating  the  derivative 
contract.  However,  this  truism  could  lead  to  the  mistaken  idea  of  market  neutrality  in  face  of  wealth 
accumulation process. This section intends to deconstruct this idea by showing the importance this market 
can have in  the  capital  accumulation process.24 First,  it intends to  deal  with the microeconomic aspects 
(such as the price transmission mechanisms from the derivatives markets to the spot markets) and to show 
the  theoretical  possibility  of  the  market’s  operation  in  providing  gains  for  all  agents  involved,  while 
simultaneously  conditioning  spot  market  pricing  so  that,  contradictorily,  spot  prices  are  derived  from 
futures  prices.  It  most  specifically  points  out  the  special  case  when  the  market  is  dominated  by 
speculation and arbitrage, which is characteristic of the fourth dimension. Then, it will be discussed the 
implications of this new logic of asset pricing in capital accumulation, and in the transfer of income to the 
financial sector that it provides. 

Price formation in derivative market is directly related to arbitrage conditions established between 
this and the spot market. From a theoretical perspective, the price of an asset in the futures market should 
be equal to its spot price plus the asset carrying cost, and it should respect the following condition:      

 
 (1)   Ft  =  St  + It – Qt + Ct   
 
Where  Ft  is  the  futures  price  in  period  t;  St  is  the  spot  price  in  period  t;  Qt  is  the  yield  of  the 
underlying asset in period t; It is the interest rate in period t and Ct is the carrying cost for the underlying 
asset  in  period  t.25  Depending  on  the  nature  of  the  asset,  some  parameters  do  not  apply,  such  as  a 
currency, the carrying cost equals zero. In this case, the futures price between two currencies will be the 
price of one currency in relation to another (spot exchange rate) plus the interest rate differential between 
the two currencies in question  (It – Qt)  26. In the case of a commodity future contract, the Qt variable is 
null, since the underlying asset does not have yield as an attribute; however, the variable Ct is significant 
and  it  varies  in  accordance  with  the  nature  of  the  commodity  and  maturity  t  of  the  contract.27  For  the 
future price of a stock, besides the interest rate, which functions as an opportunity cost for carrying the 
stock, the variable Qt is relevant and represents the expected dividend. 

The basic idea behind the equation (1) is that market participants who want an asset at t+1 (or the 
earnings tied to it) can buy the asset at moment t in the spot market and incur the storage and opportunity 
costs or, alternatively, buy the asset in the futures market, forming a long position and receiving the asset 
(or the equivalent earnings) when the contract expires. When these two forms are not equivalent, there is 
room  for  agent  arbitrage.  Thus,  the  relationship  of  prices  given  by  equation  1  between  the  spot  and 
futures  market  is  a  condition  that  makes  agent  arbitrage  impossible.  On  the  other  hand,  when  there  is 
disequilibrium and the futures price is higher than the spot prices and the other parameters, as in equation 
(2),   

 
(2)       Ft  > St  + It – Qt + Ct   
  

                                                        
24 An  initial  criticism  of  the  argument  of  neutrality,  already  well-disseminated,  is  based  on  the  destabilizing  potential  of  this 
market by financial fragility. Along this line, the concentration of risks in the derivatives market is said to deteriorate agents’ 
financial balances. In other words, unsuccessful bets can compromise agent payment capacity and thus impact real economy 
and disseminate crises. This section will show that the impact of the derivatives markets goes far beyond the issue of financial 
fragility. 
25  The  formula  presented  is  a  simplification  of  the  one  used  in  financial  markets.  In  order  to  calculate  arbitrage,  which 
considers continuous time, the equivalent formula is Ft = St e(I-Q+C)T, as elaborated in details by Hull (2006). Another implicit 
simplification in this formula is the absence of a risk element.  
26 Keynes (1924) was a pioneer in this type of analysis, describing price formation in London’s exchange market. His  analysis 
gave origin to the covered interest rate parity theory. 
27 In some markets, the presence of a convenience yield is admitted, which is a premium attributed to ownership of the physical 
good and varies inversely  with the level of existing stocks. This premium would be an additional variable in equation (1). In 
Unctad (2011) there is an analysis of convenience yield for the commodities market.  

11 

 

the  agents  can  take  out  loans  at  interest  (It),  buy  the  underlying  asset  in  the  spot  market  (storing  it  if 
needed)  and  simultaneously  sell  future  contracts  for  the  asset  in  the  derivatives  market  with  the  same 
maturity  as  the  loan. The  final  effect  of  this  operation  is  an  increase  in  spot  price  resulting  from  buyer 
pressure in this market and the reduction in the futures prices resulting from seller pressure in the futures 
market in the direction of equilibrium represented by equation (1). For the arbitrator, there is no price risk 
since the asset purchased in the spot market is hedged by the sale of the same asset in the futures market. 
In other words, the sale of the asset’s futures contract compensates the gains or losses resulting from asset 
price  variation  in  the  spot  market,  gains  from  asset  yields  in  the  spot  market  (Qt),  interest  rate  (It)  and 
carrying cost (Ct). And a gain from arbitrage results from this operation.28 In the opposite case, with lower 
futures  process,  the  arbitrators  sell  the  asset  in  the  spot  market  and  buy  futures  contracts  of  the  same. 
While  disequilibrium  remains,  there  will  be  the  possibility  of  risk-free  gains.  Thus,  the  arbitrators  can 
engage in this type of operation until disequilibrium is corrected and equation (1) is verified.29  

Given  the  conditions  that  establish  the  parameters  for  arbitrage,  it  is  worth  analyzing  its 
“direction”, that is, the market in which the disequilibrium presented in equation (2) originates and from 
which the arbitrage operation stems. In the case of asset pricing established in spot market, the pricing of 
derivative contracts will indeed derive from underlying asset prices. However, there is the possibility of a 
disequilibrium  stemming  from  the  derivatives  market  and,  in  this  case,  the  direction  of  price 
determination is reversed. The analysis that follows explores an analytical case (stylized fact) where price 
formation occurs in the derivatives market.  

First,  the  characteristic  that  makes  the  derivatives  market  a  “zero  sum  game”  is  founded  on  the 
fact  that  derivatives  are  bilateral  contracts  where  gains  or  losses  must  be  adjusted  between  the  parties 
involved  in  the  operation.  Considering  the  three  typical  motivations  for  derivatives  market  (hedging, 
arbitrage and speculation), these contracts can have a combination of agents with those motivations that 
share  losses  and  gains.  In  this  context,  there  are  two  contract  cases  where  the  hedge  motivation  is  not 
present and that deserve special consideration.  

The  first  analytical  case  involves  contracts  between  two  agents  who  intend  to  speculate  in  the 
derivatives market. These speculators make opposing bets and the result of this operation is the transfer of 
wealth between these two financial agents. In the hypothesis of speculation by equal forces, in opposing 
vectors, in which half of the speculators expect a price increase and the other half a drop in price, the final 
effect is neutral on prices, but increases liquidity.30 However, the most relevant case for this study is when 
speculative  demand  by  one  of  the  ends  of  the  contract  is  more  important  and  the  agent  who  intends  to 
arbitrate occupies the opposing end of the operation. In this case, the effects can be extremely relevant in 
terms of price distortion and income transfer to the financial sector.  

In his analysis of price formation in futures markets, Keynes (1924:129) points out the case where 

speculation keeps the spaces for arbitrage open in the forward exchange market.  

 

“But  there  is  a  further  contingency  of  considerable  importance  which  occurs  when  speculation  is 
exceptionally active and is all one way. It  must be remembered that the floating capital normally available, 
and ready to move from center to center for the purpose of taking advantage of arbitrage profits between spot 
and  forward  exchange,  is  by  no  means  unlimited  in  amount,  and  is  not  always  adequate  to  the  market´s 
requirements.”  
 

Furthermore, Keynes (1924: 130) argues that single direction speculative pressure tends to provide 

gains for speculators:  

                                                        
28    Observe  that  the  arbitrage  agent  should  have  access  to  cheap  interest  rates  in  the  market  and  in  the  case  of  assets  with  a 
carrying  cost,  as  commodities,  they  should  have  storage  capacity  (or  outsource  this  service)  and  be  able  to  buy  and  sell  the 
good on the spot market. The parameter for arbitrage shall be defined by the agents with best access to the credit market and, 
for some derivatives contracts, like commodities, with the capacity to store at lower cost.  
29  It  should  be  underscored  that  there  is  no  automatic  tendency  toward  adjusting  the  prices  in  question.  Situations  of 
disequilibrium in equation (1) can be recurrent and more or less frequent, depending on the market.  
30  Here,  speculation  assumes  its  “positive  characteristic”  of  providing  liquidity  to  the  market  without  generating  price 
tendencies.    

12 

 

“It is interesting to notice that when the difference between forward and spot rates has become temporarily 
abnormal,  thus  indicating  an  exceptional  pressure  of  speculative  activity,  the  speculators  have  often  turned 
out to be right.” 
 

In  this  context,  when  speculation  dominates  the  derivatives  markets,  and  especially  when  most 
bets are made in the same direction, asset pricing in the spot market become dependent on the formation 
of  trends  in  futures  market.  That  is,  the  intensity  of  speculative  demand  by  one  end  of  the  derivative 
contract  moves  prices  and  then  causes  the  disequilibrium  necessary  for  arbitrage,  as  pointed  out  in 
equation (2). For example, excess speculative demand purchasing future oil increases its futures price and 
creates a gap for arbitrators, who enter at the short end of the future contract and simultaneously buy the 
product  in  the  spot  market,  thus  transmitting  the  pressure  for  increasing  prices  in  the  spot  market. 
Therefore, speculators shape the price tendencies in derivatives market and arbitrators are responsible for 
transmitting them to spot market. The situation described characterizes the emergence of  disequilibrium 
in equation (1), and the transfer of speculative pressure from future market to spot market. In this context, 
in the logic of the fourth dimension, there may be long periods of a persistent single direction speculation 
and an uninterrupted arbitrage in time, what would lead to significant future and spot price changes.31  

By  commanding  the  asset  pricing  process,  the  derivative  markets  also  command  the  fictitious 
appreciation  of  stocks  of  wealth  traded  in  secondary  markets.  In  other  words,  through  buyer  and  seller 
pressure exercised in the futures markets and transmitted by arbitrage to the spot markets, the derivatives 
change  prices  and  thus  the  expectations  of  earnings  and  the  appreciation  of  securities  as  well,  without 
necessarily  corresponding  to  changes  in  the  real  conditions  of  capital  production.  These  processes 
broaden  the  autonomy  of  finance  in  relation  to  the  sphere  of  production  described  by  financialization 
literature.  

Besides  the  fictitious  appreciation  of  wealth,  the  derivatives  market  also  transfers  income  to  the 
financial sector. Observe that throughout the asset appreciation process caused by the derivatives market, 
the  result  of  derivatives  contracts,  when  considered  in  isolation,  provides  systemic  gains  for  the 
speculator who stays long while the assets appreciate and causes losses to the arbitrator who assumes a 
short  position  in  the  contract.  However,  it  is  worth  remembering  that  arbitrator  agents  are  those  who 
conduct two simultaneous operations, one in the derivatives market and the other in the spot market. The 
gain or loss resulting from the derivatives market compensates the price variation of the asset bought in 
the spot market and provides a risk-free gain derived from the price distortion between the two markets.  

In this sense, despite the zero sum game argument, when considering the derivative operation not 
as an isolated contract,  but rather as a link within a bigger chain  of operations  that interconnect  futures 
markets to spot markets, the price cycles resulting from speculation in the derivatives markets can provide 
gains to all financial agents involved.  

If the speculator and the arbitrator appear as “winners” the same cannot be said of the agent who 
operated  in  the  spot  market  as  the  arbitrator’s  counterparty.  By  positioning  himself  in  the  opposite 
direction of the arbitrator, this agent incurs a loss resulting from an opportunity  cost.32 This opportunity 
cost is equal to the arbitrator’s gain.33  

 

                                                        
31 Different from the maxim that establishes that “good speculation is the kind that annuls itself, and arbitrage is the kind that 
ends in time”.  
32  If  the  spot  market’s  “loser”  agent  is  a  direct  producer  of  merchandise,  it  can  be  said  that  the  arbitrator’s  gain  is  the 
appropriation  of  added  value  produced  by  this  agent.  In  Marxist  terms,  it  could  be  said  there  is  a  sharing  of  added  value 
produced  in  the  productive  sphere  with  the  financial  agents,  which  does  not  result  purely  from  the  productive  capital  vs. 
financial capital relation, but rather from a “mercantile gain” obtained by the financial sector to the detriment of the productive 
sector.  When  securities  become  commercial  merchandise  in  different  markets,  the  capital  set  aside  for  arbitrage  acts  in  a 
manner analogous to mercantile capital in the production of real merchandise. Therefore, its profit comes from the commercial 
operation of buying and selling securities, exploring the price differential that momentarily occurs between two markets with 
diverse maturities.  
33 By “closing” the gaps for arbitrage, the arbitrator terminates the moment from which it stemmed, that is, the moment the law 
of equivalent exchange is momentarily invalid. However, this moment may remain open for a long period, even with action by 
the arbitrators, given the action by other agents who operate in the financial market. 

13 

 

4. The fourth dimension and contemporary capitalism 
 

While  in  the  previous  section  our  main  objective  was  to  analytically  deal  with  the  price 
transmission  mechanisms  from  derivative  markets  to  spot  markets  and  their  consequences,  this  section 
aims at providing examples of the growing importance of derivative markets in contemporary capitalism 
and,  in  particular,  in  price  determination  for  some  of  the  international  financial  system’s  main  markets. 
Among those markets dominated by the “logic of derivatives”, some of the most important that stand out 
are  analyzed  separately  in  this  section:  foreign  exchange  market,  commodity  market,  stock  market, 
interest rate market and credit market. 

A specific branch of financial literature called “price discovery” is concerned about unveiling the 
price formation process for assets in the different markets. This literature studies two or more markets for 
the same asset and it seeks to find out which is the primary locus of asset pricing.34 For such, the authors 
mainly use causality tests on asset trading intra-day data. This method is used to study a broad range of 
markets:  commodities,  equities,  bonds,  exchange,  interest  or  credit.35  According  to  this  literature,  a 
fundamental  aspect  of  the  market  in  which  price  discovery  occurs  is  its  capacity  to  disseminate 
information.  Several  factors  can  influence  the  capacity  of  a  market  to  generate  and  disseminate 
information, such as financial volume, liquidity, depth, volatility, trading frequency, among others.36  

Liquidity is one of the aspects that  stand out in the price discovery process. It is not an intrinsic 
characteristic  to  derivatives  markets,  but  rather  an  expression  of  trust  by  the  financial  community.  It 
depends on trade volume and on participant diversity: the more diverse the motivations for operating in 
the  market,  the  greater  the  possibilities  will  be  of  finding  counterparts  for  purchase  and  sale  orders.37 
Considering  these  aspects,  the  derivatives  market  is  the  most  liquid  market  in  the  world. According  to 
BIS, the notional value of derivatives in the over-the-counter market in December 2008 was around US$ 
600 trillion. This sum easily exceeds the economy’s real needs: for comparison purposes, it corresponds 
to  more  or  less  10  times  global  GDP  and  35  times  the  stock  of  global  shares.38  This  is  a  market  that 
besides  meeting  the  hedge  demands  of  commerce  and  service  flows,  it  negotiates  the  variation  in  the 
stock  of  global  wealth,  exchanging  different  forms  of  capital  earnings  and  constantly  changing  its 
monetary denomination. 

Accordingly,  the  centrality  of  derivative  markets  grows  as  its  liquidity  grows,  in  many  cases 
exceeding  the  liquidity  found  in  spot  markets.  Likewise,  the  advances  in  information  technologies  and 
telecommunications  are  also  fundamental  factors  for  understanding  the  growing  importance  of  these 
markets, given that the online transaction platforms have greater capacity for processing, transmitting and 
disseminating  new  information  for  agents  participating  in  the  market.  The  analysis  that  follows 
panoramically  deals  with  the  importance  of  some  derivative  markets  with  the  intent  of  illustrating  the 
logic of the fourth dimension.  

One of the most relevant aspects of the recent modifications in  commodities markets has to do 
with  the  financialization  of  prices  resulting  from  the  importance  of  derivative  markets. As  discussed  in 
                                                        
34 It is worth noting that the price discovery problem would not be relevant in Walrasian models where perfect competition and 
perfect information are assumed.  
35    In  accordance  with  this  literature,  price  discovery  is  a  relative  concept  once  it  is  very  rare  for  a  price  to  be  completely 
determined in one market and only absorbed by the other, without reverse influence. Therefore, To say that a market provides 
more price discovery (or more of an information share) does not necessarily mean that this market is the initial or the ultimate 
source of information.” (TSE, FUNG, XIANG, 2006, pg. 13) 
36  Here  there  is  a  qualitative  difference  between  formal  exchanges  and  over-the-counter  markets.  The  first,  being  more 
transparent  and  trading  homogenous  contracts,  has  a  naturally  developed  information  dimension,  whereas  over-the-counter 
markets  are  by  definition  more  opaque.  Nevertheless,  many  over-the-counter  markets  increasingly  acquire  exchange  market 
features due to electronic trading platforms that promote the dissemination of information and a growing virtual centralization 
of the market by computer networks (SARNO and TAYLOR, 2001). 
37  It  is  worth  noting  there  is  a  “carnal  relation”  between  liquidity  and  speculation.  For  Aglietta  (2001),  financial  market 
liquidity is the fruit of speculation, and more, the evaluation that there only is speculation in markets with some liquidity is a 
truism. 
38 The IMF’s estimate, released in the World Economic Outlook of April 2010, for global GDP in 2010 is US$ 61.7 trillion. For 
the stock market, the value of global stock was US$ 17.1 trillion in 2007, falling to US$ 9 trillion in 2008 with the financial 
crisis (data from CPIS, August 2010). 

14 

 

section  1,  derivatives  contracts  permit  access  to  the  commodities  markets  of  agents  to  production  or 
processing of commodities and do not even have the capacity to transport or store products. The crucial 
aspect  to  underscore  in  this  new  form  of  market  organization  is  its  impact  on  the  exacerbation  of 
tendencies in commodity prices, their volatility and the increase in the positive correlation between prices 
of  different  types  of  commodities  and  those  with  other  financial  assets.  Historically,  this  change 
supposedly consolidated in mid-2000 (CARNEIRO, 2011).39 

Commodities  markets  have  the  biggest  number  of  studies  in  price  discovery  literature.  In  these 
studies are highlighted the role of future markets in the price formation process and in their capacity to 
disseminate  important  market  information.  Hernandez  and  Torero  (2010)  point  to  the  predominance  of 
futures  markets  in  price  discovery  for  agriculture  commodities  such  as  corn,  wheat  and  soybean.40  A 
similar conclusion is reached by Yang and Leatham (1999) for the wheat market and Zapata et al (2005) 
for sugar.41  

For energy commodities, the analysis by Sander et al. (2004) shows there is a positive correlation 
between  the  increase  in  oil  prices  and  the  return  of  non-commercial  agents  in  futures  markets.  In  other 
words, agents not connected to the energy commodities market obtain systematic gains in these markets 
when  prices  rise. There  is  also  ample  literature  that  discusses  the  formation  of  a  price  bubble  resulting 
from speculation in the oil derivatives market.42 For authors like Kahn (2009), “speculation on the future 
price  of  oil  led  to  both  overshooting  of  spot  prices  in  the  first  half  of  2008  and  undershooting  in  the 
second  half  of  the  year”.  This  form  of  fictitious  appreciation  of  wealth  can  also  be  accompanied  by 
episodes  of  price  manipulation  such  as  that  reported  by  the  CFTC  (Commodity  Futures  Trading 
Commission)  in  which  the  company  Vitol  held  11%  of  all  oil  contracts  on  the  New  York  Mercantile 
Exchange (CHOO, 2008). 

The  foreign  exchange  market  is  one  of  the  biggest  in  the  world,  mobilizing  around  US$  4.7 
trillion per day in 2010, with 64% of all transactions conducted in derivatives markets, according to BIS 
data.  This  market  is  predominantly  over-the-counter,  but  it  is  internationally  connected  by  electronic 
platforms that permit futures operations between dozens of currencies.43 These platforms are operated by 
large  banks  that  work  as  brokers  by  meeting  retail  demands,  form  speculative  positions  and  arbitrate 
between markets. For some currencies, the exchange derivative market  is  much more liquid  and deeper 
than  the  spot  market.  Among  the  reasons  for  this  asymmetry  of  liquidity  is  easy  access,  the  lack  of 
regulations and usually smaller operations costs (such as taxes, capital controls and operational costs).  

The study by Rosenberg and Traub (2009) points to great influence in the Chicago futures market 
in exchange rate pricing for dollars, German Marks, Yens, Pounds and Swiss Francs for 1996. According 
to the author, this occurs despite greater spot market liquidity measured by the trade volume in currencies 
like the Mark. Price formation for the Brazilian Real exchange rate with the US Dollar is attributed to the 
futures market. Ventura and Garcia (2009) conclude that the exchange rate is first formed in the futures 
market,  and  it  is  then  transmitted  by  arbitrage  to  the  spot  market,  with  10  minute  gaps.  Rossi  (2011) 
analyzes  the  relation  between  positions  of  different  agents  in  the  futures  market  and  the  exchange 
variation  and  it  attributes  the  formation  of  tendencies  in  the  futures  exchange  market  to  foreigners  and 

                                                        
39 Thus, there have recently been important  modifications in these  markets, as  warned by UNCTAD (2011). In one hand, an 
important modification comes from the change in speculator profile and their normal form of investment. On the other hand, 
the  market  developed  new  instruments,  significantly  replacing  futures  and  options  of  prices  for  specific  products  for  those 
linked to aggregate indexes. 
40 “Provided that futures markets are generally considered to perform two major roles in commodity markets—a risk-transfer 
role and, in particular, an informative or price discovery role—we might be tempted to assume that futures markets dominate 
spot markets. (…) It can also be argued that physical traders use futures prices as a reference to price their commodities due to 
the greater transparency and (often) greater liquidity of commodity futures over physical commodities.” (HERNANDEZ AND 
TORERO, 2010: 2) 
41 "It was found that the futures market for sugar leads the cash market in price discovery. However, we fail to find evidence 
that changes in the cash price cause changes in futures price, that is, causality is unidirectional from futures to cash.” (ZAPATA 
et al., 2005: 2)  
42 For some examples of this discussion, see Wray (2008) and Khan (2009) . 
43  There  are  two  main  electronic  trading  and  exchange  brokerage  platforms:  Reuters  2002-2  Dealing  System  (Reuters)  and 
Electronic Broking System Spot Dealing System (EBS).  

15 

 

institutional  investors  with  the  objective  of  obtaining  speculative  gains,  and  the  realization  of  arbitrage 
gains  to  commercial  banks,  transmitting  speculative  pressure  stemming  from  the  futures  market  to  the 
spot market. For the case of Brazilian currency, other authors sustain the position that the exchange rate is 
formed in the future, like Franco (2000) and Dodd and Griffith-Jones (2007), with the latter arguing based 
on financial agent interviews. 

Besides  the  leading  role  in  price  formation  in  foreign  exchange  markets,  derivatives  are  pointed 

out in literature as facilitators for speculator action in this market:  

 

“Foreign exchange derivatives can also be used to improve the ability of speculators to mount an attack on a 
developing country’s exchange rate system. In 1997, speculators employed both foreign exchange derivatives 
and equity-linked derivatives on Hong Kong’s stock market in order to launch their  attack on Hong Kong’s 
fixed exchange rate regime.” (DODD, 2001: 60)  
 

Additionally,  several  studies  point  to  speculation  with  exchange  derivatives  –  called  carry  trade 
strategies  –  as  being  responsible  for  exchange  rate  misalignments  in  core  and  peripheral  currencies, 
including UNCTAD (2007), Galati et al. (2007) and Flassbeck and La Marca (2007). These studies show 
the  role  of  carry  trade  in  exchange  rate  distortion  due  to  interest  rate  differentials  among  currencies. 
Along this same line, Kregel (2010:1) argues that “derivatives contracts have been crucial in subverting 
the  impact  of  exchange  rates  on  the  adjustment  process  and  thus  on  the  profitability  of  export  firms  in 
surplus countries.”  

Recent  studies  show  that  index  future  markets  have  led  pricing  in  stock  markets.    The  index 
markets were created to  guide the pricing of exchange-traded funds (ETF), which consist of investment 
funds in stocks. In many cases, the demand and supply for these funds became the leading factor for the 
price  of  stocks.  The  additional  step,  provided  by  index  futures  market,  is  the  trading  not  only  of  stock 
funds, but  also  of the variations in  those indexes used for pricing. Schlusche  (2009) performs  an  ample 
literature  review on price discovery in  index markets  and  refers to  several  authors  who, like him, point 
out  the  prevalence  of  futures  markets  in  the  price  discovery  function.  Despite  all  methodological 
differences,  the  majority  of  studies  have  shown  that  the  futures  market  leads  the  index  market  in  price 
discovery.44

 

Derivatives also play an important role on interest rates market. The yield curve – since it is the 
term structure of interest rates - is formed in the interest rate futures market, revealing the expectations of 
market  agents  for  the  evolution  of  various  fundamental  prices  in  the  economy.  Based  on  these 
expectations, some central banks make decisions on setting short term interest rates in a constant game of 
power  and  expectations  with  financial  markets.  Dodd  and  Griffth-Jones  (2001:  2)  underscore  the 
importance of interest rate futures markets stating that “[interest rate futures markets] (…) play a leading 
role in the fixed income market by preceding the government bank market in lengthening of maturities of 
fixed  interest  rate  contracts.”  Based  on  reports  by  the  Bank  of  England,  Moessner  (2001)  attests  this 
influence in future markets, affirming: 

 

The  Bank  of  England  uses  options  to  derive  indicators  of  uncertainty  about  future  interest  rates,  exchange 
rates and equity markets, in order to inform monetary policy and to identify potential financial stability risks. 
For example, the Inflation Report uses exchange-traded option prices to derive the probability distribution of 
market expectations of UK short-term interest rates. (MOESSNER, 2001: 52) 

 
Therefore, derivatives become a pressure instrument before monetary authorities and thus have a 
political  influence  in  determining  interest  rates,  which  is  a  key  macroeconomic  price  that  remunerates 
stocks of wealth and burdens the generation of income by the productive sector. 

                                                        
44 “Stoll and Whaley (1990) and Chan (1992) for the S&P 500 index, and Tse (1999), Tse (2001), and Tse, Bandyopadhyay, 
and  Shen  (2006)  for  the  DJIA  index  report  the  dominance  of  the  futures  market  in  price  discovery.  For  the  German  market, 
Booth,  So,  and  Tse  (1999),  who  consider  the  DAX  index,  index  futures  and  index  options  in  their  investigation  on  price 
leadership  in  the  German  market,  show  that  index  futures  dominate  in  the  process  of  price  formation.  Similarly,  Theissen 
(2005) finds that the futures market leads the spot market in terms of relative contribution to price discovery.” (SCHLUSCHE, 
2009: 2) 

16 

 

Additionally,  the  dynamic  of  the  credit  market  is  also  affected  by  the  logic  of  derivatives. The 
most notable example also stems from the conditions that pushed the American economy into the recent 
financial crisis. Although the role of derivatives have been widely discussed (its role on the credit bubble 
formation, increasing systemic risk, etc. 45), it is worth pointing out that the derivative credit markets also 
had a role on pricing securitized mortgages as shown by Levetin and Watcher (2012): 

 
“CDS [credit default swap] spreads (the price of CDS protection) are linked to PLS [private-label mortgage-
backed securities] spreads (the yield on PLS) via arbitrage. When CDS spreads tighten, it is cheaper to insure 
against PLS, which increases demand for PLS, thereby pushing down the yield on the PLS, which lowers the 
cost of borrowing.” (LEVETIN AND WATCHER, 2012: 1246).   

 

The  crisis  is  also  illustrative  of  a  more  general  process  valid  for  all  markets  in  which  the 
derivatives  do  not  provide  absolute  autonomy  to  finance.  In  other  words,  there  is  no  self-referenced 
appreciation  process  where  finances  arbitrarily  and  unlimitedly  determine  their  own  value.  Quite  the 
contrary, the subordination suggested does not exempt the financial sphere’s dependence in relation to the 
production  sphere;  they  are  interdependent  spheres.  In  this  sense,  the  detachments  driven  by  the 
derivatives market are limited and will be continuously adjusted through crises. 

Concluding remarks 

This  paper  sought  to  address  the  central  role  played  by  derivatives  markets  in  contemporary 
capitalism. It argues that these financial instruments have added several implications to the dynamics of 
capitalist economies, so that it forms a new sphere of accumulation, here called the fourth dimension. In 
this new dimension, it is possible to observe three major changes compared to the previous dimensions. 
The  first  concerns  the  emergence  of  new  property  relations,  marked  by  the  separation  between  the 
ownership  of  assets  and  ownership  of  the  rights  on  the  performance  of  these  assets,  leading  the 
abstraction of the appreciation of wealth to its maximum. The second change relates to the new nature of 
the gain obtained in derivative transactions, here termed as casino gain. Finally, these changes create the 
conditions to consider a relationship of subordination of prior dimensions to the fourth dimension, which 
is  consolidated  when  derivatives  markets  become  the  central  locus  for  determining  spot  prices  in  key 
markets. The table below seeks to synthesize the analytical reasoning developed throughout the text. 

 

Table 1: The four dimensions of capitalism 

 

Circulation of 

money 

Property relations 

Subordination 

relations 

Logic of the system 

1st DIMENSION 

Sphere of 

commodities 

2nd DIMENSION 

Sphere of production 

C-M-C 

Producer owns the means of 

production 

M-C-M’ 

and ownership of the means 

Separation between work 

3rd DIMENSION 

Sphere of ownership 

M-M’ 

of production. 

Separation between 

company’s ownership and 

management of the 

production 

Separation between 

4th DIMENSION 

Sphere of derivatives 

∆M* 

ownership of assets and the 
property of the performance 

of assets 

 

- 

Subsistence  

Subordination of 
labor to capital 

Subordination of the 
productive capital to 
the financial capital 

Subordination of the 
sphere of ownership 

to the sphere of 

derivatives 

Profit by the 

extraction of surplus 

value 

asset 

appreciation 

Casino gains 

                                                        
45  The  process  that  caused  the  American  crisis  demonstrates  the  acute  form  of  competition  in  the  derivatives  markets. 
Institutions  that  sold  CDOs  bought  CDS  at  the  same  time  to  speculate  against  the  instruments  they  recommended  to  their 
clients. In other words, they knew of the high probability of default and used that information to obtain gains to the detriment 
of others’ losses. Furthermore, this process also included episodes of fraud, manipulation of information and the corruption of 
the regulatory agencies. 

17 

 

Source: Prepared by the authors. 

 
Understanding  the  importance  of  these  financial  instruments  in  contemporary  capitalism  allows 
the  development  of  research  in  various  fields  of  political  economy,  macroeconomics  and  development 
economics. The ideas mentioned here, far from being definitive, point to the need for further studies on 
the  subject.  The  issue  deserves  deeper  theoretical  treatment,  either  inside  the  Marxist  construction,  to 
evaluate these financial instruments as a deployment of fictitious capital and a particular sphere of capital 
accumulation;  or  in  the  Keynesian/Minskyan  framework,  seeking  to  evaluate  the  impact  of  such 
instruments on volatility and instability of economic systems. 
 
 
References: 
 
AGLIETTA, M. (2001) Macroeconomia financeira – I. Mercado financeiro, crescimento e ciclos, São Paulo: Loyola. 
AGLIETTA, M. (2006). The future of capitalism. In Coriat, Petit, & Schméder[Eds],  The hardship of nations: exploring the 

paths of modern capitalism (pp. 9-35). Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. 

AGLIETTA,  M.,  &  REBÉRIOUX,  A.  (2005).  Corporate  governance  adrift:  a  critique  of  shareholder  value.  Cheltenham: 

Edward Elgar. 

BELLUZZO, L. G. (1980) Valor e Capitalismo: um ensaio sobre economia política. São Paulo: Brasiliense. 
BELLUZZO,  L. G.  (1997). Dinheiro e as transfigurações da riqueza. In: M. Tavares, &  J. L. Fiori[Orgs],  Poder e dinheiro: 

uma economia política da globalização (pp. 151-194). Petrópolis: Editora vozes. 

BLACKBURN, R. (2006). Finance and the Fourth Dimension. New Left Review, 39, 39-70. 
BRYAN,  D.,  &  RAFFERTY,  M.  (2006).  Capitalism  with  Derivatives:  A  Political  Economy  of  financial  derivatives,  capital 

and class. Chippenham: Palgrave macmillan. 

CARNEIRO, R. (2007). Globalização e integração periférica. Texto para Discussão. IE/UNICAMP, 126. 
CARNEIRO,  R.  (2011).  Commodities,  choques  externos  e  crescimento:  reflexões  sobre  a  América  Latina.  Série 

Macroeconomia del desarrollo, 117, Santiago, enero de 2012. 

CHESNAIS, F. (1995). A globalização e o curso do capitalismo de fim-de-século. Economia e Sociedade(5), 1-30. 
CHESNAIS, F. (1996). A mundialização do capital. São Paulo: Xamã. 
CHESNAIS,  F.  (2003).  A  'nova  economia':  uma  conjuntura  própria  à  potência  econômica  estadunidense.  In:  Chesnais, 

Duménil, Lévy, & Wallerstein, Uma nova fase do capitalismo? (pp. 43-70). São Paulo: Xamã. 

CHESNAIS,  F.  (2005).  O  capital  portador  de  juros:  acumulação,  internacionalização,  efeitos  econômicos  e  políticos.  In:  F. 
CHESNAIS[Org],  A  finança  mundializada:  raízes  sociais  e  políticas,  configuração,  consequências.  São  Paulo: 
Boitempo. 

CHOO,  Richard. (2008)  A Few Speculators Dominate Vast Market for  Oil  Trading. Artigo publicado  no Washingtown post 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-

disponível 

2008 

em 

de 

e 

21 

em 
dyn/content/article/2008/08/20/AR2008082003898.html 

agosto 

de 

DOOD, R. (2001) Derivatives Markets: Sources of Vulnerability in U.S. Financial  

Markets,  Financial  Policy 

forum, 

Derivative Study Center.  

DODD, R., & GRIFFITH-JONES, S. (2007). Report on derivatives markets: stabilizing or speculative impact on Chile and a 

comparison with Brazil. Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). 

DODD, R., & GRIFFITH-JONES, S. (2007). Report on derivatives markets: stabilizing or speculative impact on Chile and a 

comparison with Brazil. Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). 

EPSTEIN,  G.  (2001).  Financialization,  Rentier  Interests,  and  Central  Bank  Policy.  mimeo,  Department  of  Economics, 

University of Massachusetts. 

FARHI,  M.  (1998).  O  futuro  no  presente:  um  estudo  sobre  o  mercado  de  derivativos  financeiros.  Campinas:  Tese  de 

doutorado. IE/UNICAMP. 

FARHI, M. (1999). Derivativos financeiros: hedge, especulação e arbitragem. Economia e Sociedade(13), 93-114. 
FARHI,  M.  (2010).  Os  impactos  dos  derivativos  no  Brasil.  In:  L.  MARCOLINO,  &  R.  CARNEIRO,  Sistema  financeiro  e 

desenvolvimento no Brasil. São Paulo: Atitude. 

FLASSBECK,  H.,  &  LA  MARCA,  M.  (2007).  Coping  with  globalized  finance:  Recent  Challenges  and  Long-term 

Perspectives. Genebra: UNCTAD. 

FRANCO, G. (2000) The real plan and the exchange rate, Essays International Finance, Princeton University, n. 216 
GALATI, G., HEATH, A., & McGUIRE, P. (2007). Evidence of carry trade activity. BIS Quarterly Review, 27-41. 
GUTTMANN, R. (2008). Uma introdução ao capitalismo dirigido pelas finanças. Novos Estudos, 82, 11-33. 
HERNANDEZ,  M.  &  TORERO,  M.  (2010)  Examining  the  Dynamic  Relationship  between  Spot  and  Future  Prices  of 
em 

Commodities. 

Disponível 

Paper 

2010. 

0988 

June 

Agricultural 
http://www.ifpri.org/sites/default/files/publications/ifpridp00988.pdf 

Discussion 

IFPRI 

HULL,  J.  (2006)  Options, Futures  and  Other  Derivatives (6th  Edition),  Personal  Educational  International.   Published  on 

February 9, 2006 

 

18 

KEYNES, J.M. (1924) A tract on monetary reform. Nova York, Prometheus books, 2000 
KEYNES, J. M. (1992). A Teoria Geral do Emprego, do Juro e da Moeda (Original 1936 ed.). São Paulo: Atlas. 
KHAN,  Mohsin  S.  (2009)  The  2008  oil  price  “bubble”.  Peterson  Institute  for  international  economics.  Policy  brief,  august 

2009. Number PB09-19 

KREGEL, J. (2010). Structured Derivatives Contracts, Hedging Exchange Appreciation and Financial Instability: Brasil, China 
and Korea. In: University of China. Conference “Financialization, Financial Systems and Economic Development” 8-
9 November 2010. 

LEVETIN, Adam J. & WACHTER, Suzan M. (2012) Explaining the housing bubble, Georgetown Law Journal, Vol. 100, No. 

4, pp. 1177-1258 

LIPUMA, E., & LEE, B. (2005). Financial derivatives and the rise of circulation. Economy and Society, 34(3), 404-427. 
MARX, K. (2001). The Capital (Vol. I, II, III). London, GBR. The Electric Book Company Ltd. http://site.ebrary.com . 
MAZZUCCELLI, F. (1985) A contradição em processo: o capitalismo e suas crises. São Paulo, ed. Brasiliense. 
McKENZIE, R. A. (2011). Casino Capitalism with Derivatives: Fragility and Instability in Contemporary Finance.  Review of 

Radical Political Economics, 43(2), 198-215. 

MOESSNER,  R.  (2001)  Over  the  counter  interest  rate  options.  Bank  of  England.  Quarterly  Bulletin;  Summer  2001;  41,  2; 

ProQuest Central 

PALLEY, T. (2007). Financialization: What it is and why it matters. Levy Economics Institute Working Paper, 525. 
PLIHON, D. (2005). As grandes empresas fragilizadas pelas finanças. In: F. CHESNAIS[Org.],  A finança mundializada. São 

Paulo: Boitempo Editorial. 

ROSENBERG, J. & TRAUB, L.G. (2009) Price Discovery in the Foreign Currency Futures and Spot Market. The Journal of 

Derivatives, Winter 2009, Vol. 17, No. 2: pp. 7-25. 

ROSSI, P. (2010). O Mercado internacional de moedas, o carry trade e as taxas de câmbio.  Textos avulsos. Observatório da 

Economia Global. IE/UNICAMP(5). 

ROSSI,  P.  (2011)  Taxa  de  câmbio  no  Brasil:  dinâmicas  da  arbitragem  e  da  especulação.  Observatório  da  Economia  Global 

(CECON-UNICAMP), textos avulsos, n.7 

ROTTA,  T.  N.  (2008).  Dinheiro  inconversível,  derivativos  financeiros  e  capital  fictício:  a  moderna  lógica  das  formas.  São 

Paulo: Dissertação de mestrado - Universidade de São Paulo. 

SANDERS, D.R., K. Boris, and M. Manfredo. (2004) Hedgers, Funds, and Small Speculators in the Energy Futures Markets: 

An Analysis of the CFTC’s Commitments of Traders Reports. Energy Economics 26(2004):425-445. 

SARNO, L. & TAYLOR, M.P. (2001)  Official Intervention in the Foreign Exchange Market: Is It Effective and, If So, How 

Does It Work? Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXIX (September 2001),  pp. 839–868 

SCHLUSCHE,  Bernd  (2009).  Price  Formation  in  Spot  and  Futures  Markets:  Exchange  Traded  Funds  Vs.  Index 

Futures, Journal of Derivatives, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 26-40. 

SCHACKLE, G.L.S. (1959) Time and Thought. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, Vol. 9, No. 36 (Feb., 1959), 

pp. 285-298 

STOCKHAMMER, E. (2000). Financialization and the Slowdown of Accumulation. Working Paper Series, Vienna University 

of Economics and Business Administration, 14. 

STRANGE, S (1986). Casino Capitalism. Wiley & Sons, Incorporated, John 
TAVARES,  M.  C.  (1997).  Pós-escrito  de  1997:  A  reafirmação  da  hegemonia  norte  americana.  In:  M.  Tavares,  &  J.  L. 

Fiori[Orgs], Poder e dinheiro: uma economia política da globalização (pp. 55-86). Petrópolis: Editora vozes. 
TERADA, T. (2008) Recent Trends in Japanese Foreign-Exchange Margin Trading, Bank of Japan Review, Sept/2008. 
TSE,  Y.,  XIANG,  J.,  FUNG  J.K.W.  (2006)  Price  discovery  in  the  foreign  exchange  futures  market.  Journal  of  Futures 

Markets, Volume 26, Issue 11, pages 1131–1143, November 2006 

UNCTAD. (2007). Trade and Development Report. New York and Geneva: United Nations. 
UNCTAD.  (2011).  Price  Formation  in  Financialized  Commodity  Markets:  The  role  of  information.  New  York  and  Geneva: 

United Nations. 

VENTURA, A. & GARCIA, M. (2009) Mercados futuro e a vista de câmbio no Brasil: O rabo balança o cachorro. Textos para 

discussão, PUC-RJ, n.563 

WRAY,  R.  (2008)  The  commodities  market  bubble:  Money  Manager  Capitalism  and  the  Financialization  of  Commodities. 

Levy Institute: public police brief n. 96, disponível em http://www.levyinstitute.org/pubs/ppb_96.pdf 

YANG,  J.,  LEATHAM,  David  J.  (1999)  Price  Discovery  in  Wheat  Futures  Markets.  Journal  of  Agricultural  and  Applied 

Economics, August 1999 

ZAPATA, H. et alli (2005). Price Discovery in the World Sugar Futures and Cash Markets: Implications for the Dominican 

Republic. Agricultural & applied economics, staff paper series n.469, março de 2005. 

 

 

19 

