The Introduction of Rational Expectations into Macroeconomics in the 1970’s: 

reasonableness versus operationality of the hypothesis 

 
 

Danilo Freitas Ramalho da Silva 
Universidade Federal do ABC 

 
 

RESUMO 
Este  artigo  descreve  a 
introdução  da  hipótese  das  expectativas  racionais  na 
macroeconomia dos anos 1970 através dos trabalhos de Robert Lucas e Thomas Sargent, 
tendo como foco a discussão sobre a razoabilidade versus a operacionalidade da hipótese. 
Será mostrado que essa introdução foi criticada em termos metodológicos principalmente 
por não ser razoável na descrição dos fenômenos macroeconômicos. Por outro lado, será 
mostrado que a defesa metodológica da hipótese, feita por Lucas e Sargent, foi baseada 
em sua operacionalidade para lidar com esses mesmos fenômenos macroeconômicos. 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
This  paper  describes  the  introduction  of  the  rational  expectations  hypothesis  into 
macroecomics  in  the  1970’s  through  the  works of  Robert  Lucas  and  Thomas  Sargent, 
focusing  on  the  methodological  discussion  over  the  reasonableness  versus  the 
operationality  of  the  hypothesis.  I  will  show  that  this  introduction  was  criticized  in 
methodological  grounds  mostly  for  not  being  reasonable  to  describe  macroeconomic 
phenomena. On the other hand, the methodological defense of the hypothesis, made by 
Lucas and Sargent, was based on its operationality to deal with the same macroeconomic 
phenomena. 
 
 
Palavras-chave: expectativas racionais, Lucas, Sargent, operacionalidade, razoabilidade. 
 
 
Keywords: rational expectations, Lucas, Sargent, operationality, reasonableness. 
 
 
Área Anpec: Área 1 – História do Pensamento Econômico e Metodologia 
 
 
Classificação JEL: B22 

 

 

1 

1. Introduction 
 
 
This paper describes the introduction of rational expectations into macroecomics 
in the 1970’s, focusing on the methodological discussion over the reasonableness versus 
the operationality of the hypothesis.  This introduction can be attributed specially to the 
works of Robert Lucas, Thomas Sargent, Neil Wallace and Robert Barro in that period, 
which impacted both theoretical and econometric macro modeling. I will show that this 
introduction was criticized in methodological grounds mostly for not being reasonable to 
describe macroeconomic phenomena. On the other hand, the methodological defense of 
the  hypothesis  was  based  on  its  operationality  to  deal  with  the  same  macroeconomic 
phenomena – and the concept of operationality will be made clear throughout the paper. 
This  methodological  divergence  exposes  the  changes  that  were  happening 
in 
macroeconomis in the 1970’s, with the emergence of new classical macroeconomics and 
its  challenge  to  the  Keynesian  paradigm.  In  this  paper, I  will  focus  specifically  on  the 
works of Robert Lucas and Thomas Sargent in the early 1970’s. They both made original 
efforts  to  incorporate  rational  expectations  into  macroeconomic  models  and  they  both 
suffered the methodological criticism based on the argument that the rational expectations 
hypothesis was not reasonable to deal with macroeconomic phenomena. It will be shown 
that the arguments used by Lucas and Sargent to defend the hypothesis were not based on 
its reasonableness, but on its operationality. 

De  Vroey  (2016:  212)  argues  that  there  were  two  kinds  of  criticisms  to  the 
introduction of rational expectations into macroeconomics. The first was about its strict 
relevance  to  specific  markets  and,  thus,  its  irrelevance  to  deal  with  aggregate 
macroeconomic phenomena. The second was about the process of formation of rational 
expectations, meaning how agents learned and obtained information to form this kind of 
expectation.  These two kinds of  criticism  have a common broader aspect, which  is the 
idea  that  rational  expectations  is  not  a  reasonable  hypothesis,  meaning  that  it  has  no 
resemblance to the real world. I will add a third kind of criticism to De Vroey’s (2016) 
list, which is that models with rational expectations did not have anything to say about 
short-run economic policies,  whereas  in the real  world policy  makers  had to deal with 
short  run  problems.  Therefore,  I  will  argue  that  Lucas  and  Sargent  avoided  the 
“reasonableness of the hypothesis” criticism since their methodological criteria was the 
operationality of the  hypothesis, not its reasonableness. By  “operationality” Lucas and 
Sargent  meant,  in  a  broad  sense,  that  rational  expectations  hypothesis  was  the  most 
suitable hypothesis to build equilibrium (stationary) models and to allow for econometric 
tests and predictions. 
 
 
2.1. Rational expectations hypothesis in Lucas’s macro models 

 
Lucas’s first macroeconomic model with rational expectations can be found in his 
paper “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money” (Lucas, 1972a), published in the April 
of 1972 issue of the Journal of Economic Theory. Lucas (1972a) builds an overlapping 
generations model from which emerges a positive correlation between nominal prices and 
real output, what he calls “a variant of the well-known Phillips curve” (p. 103). Monetary 
shocks  have  real  effects  in  the  short  run  just  because  young  agents  have  information 
problems; they cannot distinguish whether the price change of their products is relative 
or absolute. A monetary expansion induces a rise in demand for all goods by the part of 
old agents, who receives the new money. Young agents raise the production of the goods 
they produce since they do not know if the rise in demand is real or nominal. Therefore, 

 

2 

real output increases as every agent perceives expansionary periods as good periods. If 
not for the incomplete information problem, agents would correctly predict future prices, 
since they have rational expectations, and the monetary expansion would not have real 
effects in the economy at all. 

Lucas (1972a) does not engage in a deep discussion about the reasonableness of 
the rational expectations hypothesis and  the justification for its adoption. Nevertheless, 
Lucas (1972a: 104) explains why he is using the rational expectations hypothesis instead 
of some kind of adaptive expectations when talking about the concept of equilibrium used 
in the paper, which implies the rational expectations hypothesis: 

 
 

In this paper, equilibrium prices and quantities will be characterized 
mathematically  as  functions  defined  on  the  space  of  possible  states  of  the 
economy, which are in turn characterized as finite dimensional vectors. This 
characterization  permits  a  treatment  of  the  relation  of  information  to 
expectations which is in some ways much more satisfactory than is possible 
with conventional adaptive expectations hypothesis. (Emphasis added). 

 
 
Lucas’s (1972a) explanation for the use of the rational expectations hypothesis is 
that  it  is  satisfactory  in  relating  information  to  price  expectations  in  such  a  way  that 
agents know the “true probability distribution of next period’s price” (p. 110), making the 
economy reach equilibrium in every point in time, differently from what would happen 
with adaptive expectations. In a footnote, Lucas (1972a: 110, n. 7) attributes the concept 
of rational expectations to Muth (1961). In Lucas (1972a), current and future prices are 
the same functions of random variables, what implies that current and future prices are 
random variables with the same distribution. 

Despite  being  the  first  macroeconomic  model  with  rational  expectations 
elaborated by Lucas, the one introduced in “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money” 
(Lucas, 1972a) was not the first model of this type to be actually presented by Lucas to a 
large audience.1 During the summer of 1970, few months after writing “Expectations and 
the Neutrality of Money” (Lucas, 1972a), Lucas prepared a paper in which he exposed 
the implications of rational expectations to the modeling and testing of the natural rate of 
unemployment hypothesis. The paper was written for a conference that Lucas was invited 
to participate as an advocate of the  natural rate hypothesis. It was the  first time Lucas 
wrote a paper especially for a conference and it was a deliberate effort in establishing his 
macroeconomics  of  equilibrium  in  the  economics  profession.  The  paper  was  called 
“Econometric Testing of the Natural Rate Hypothesis” (Lucas, 1972b) and was presented 
at the Federal Reserve Board conference “The Econometrics of Price Determination”, in 
Washington, D.C., in October of 1970. 

One decade later, Lucas (1983: 51) said in his interview to Klamer (1983) that he 
knew that James Tobin would be present at the conference and, so, he imposed himself 

                                                             
1  There  is  a  draft  version  of  “Expectations  and  the  Neutrality  of  Money”  dated  from 
January of 1970, which was presented as a working paper at Carnegie-Mellon University 
and can be found at Lucas’s Papers at Duke University (Robert E. Lucas Jr. Papers, 1960-
2004  and  undated.  Rare  Book,  Manuscript,  and  Special  Collections  Library,  Duke 
University,  Durham,  North  Carolina,  USA.).  Unfortunately,  there  is  no  register  of 
possible  reactions  to  the  paper,  which  is  comprehensible,  since  it  was  an  internal 
presentation. 

3 

 

the task of explaining to him the implications of rational expectations to the modeling and 
testing of the natural rate hypothesis in a way that he could comprehend. He also wanted 
to  explain  to  Tobin,  as  a  consequence,  why  standard  tests  of  the  natural  rate  of 
unemployment that did not adopt rational expectations were misleading. Lucas’s choice 
of Tobin as his interlocutor was not random. Tobin was responsible for summarizing the 
papers of the conference and was considered a leading macroeconomist and an “honest” 
person  by  Lucas  (1983:  51);  someone  that  he  could  actually  discuss  his  ideas  with.  In 
another occasion, when writing about his recollections of that period, Lucas (2004: 290) 
said that the paper was written with the intention of reaching a broad audience, which was 
not necessarily familiar with his theoretical and more complicated paper “Expectations 
and the Neutrality of Money” (Lucas, 1972a). 

Therefore,  the  presentation  of  “Econometric  Testing  of  the  Natural  Rate 
Hypothesis” (Lucas, 1972b) at the Federal Reserve Board conference can be considered 
the first occasion in which a Lucas’s macro model with rational expectations was exposed 
to a large and critical audience. Among the participants of the conference - besides James 
Tobin  -  there  were  two  professors  of  economics  from  MIT,  Paul.  W.  MacAvoy  and 
Franklin M. Fisher, who also had their critical comments published in the volume of the 
conference  (Eckstein,  1972).  I  will  show,  then,  that  the  content of  the  criticisms  were 
mostly about the reasonableness of the rational expectations hypothesis and of the macro 
equilibrium  model  in  general,  but  that  Lucas’s  defensive  argument  was  based  on  the 
operationality of the rational expectations hypothesis, not on its reasonableness, revealing 
the fundamental methodological difference between him and his critics. 

 
 

2.2. The origins of rational expectations in Lucas’s work 

 
It  is  important  to  note,  though,  that  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  conference  in 
October  of  1970  was  not  the  first  time  in  which  the  reasonableness  of  the  rational 
expectations hypothesis was subject to criticism. It had been done before, not to a Lucas’s 
macro  equilibrium  model,  but  to  Lucas  and  Prescott’s  (1971)  investment  model. 
“Investment  under  Uncertainty”  (Lucas  and  Prescott,  1971),  of  Econometrica,  from 
September of 1971, was the first published paper in which Lucas – with Prescott – used, 
indeed,  the  rational  expectations  hypothesis  in  a  model.  In  the  paper,  the  authors 
determine the behavior, through time, of investment, output and prices at the firm level 
and, simultaneously, at the competitive industry level when facing a stochastic demand, 
following  Lucas’s  (1966,  1967)  research  agenda  on  investment  by  firms.  However, 
differently from Lucas (1966, 1967), the rational expectations hypothesis used in Lucas 
and Prescott (1971) implied that actual prices at the industry level and prices forecasted 
by firms were random variables – not deterministic variables -, having not only the same 
mean value, as in Muth (1961), but the same probability distribution as a whole. 

In a  letter addressed to Lucas, dated from  August 22nd, 1968, Prescott refers to 
“Investment under Uncertainty”, saying that the paper was overall well received at the 
1968  Meeting  of  the  Econometric  Society,  in  Boulder,  Colorado,  but  the  rational 
expectations  hypothesis  had  been  source  of  conflict  among  the  participants.2  Some  of 
them  thought  that  perfect  forecast  in  price  distribution  was  an  extremely  strong 
assumption.  So,  Prescott  suggested  to  Lucas,  in  the  letter,  that  either  they  could  use 
Muth’s definition of rational expectations to defend the hypothesis - although he was not 
sure if it was really possible - or they could argue that people had eventually learned about 

                                                             
2 Lucas Papers, Box 1, file folder “1968”. 

 

4 

the true distribution of prices after participating in the market for a sufficient long period. 
This last alternative shows that, back in 1968, Lucas and Prescott were still considering 
defending the rational expectations hypothesis by arguing in favor of its reasonableness, 
its  connection  to  the  real  world.  Anyway,  Prescott  preferred  the  other  option,  as  he 
considered Muth’s approach more general and, thus, superior - since it postulated perfect 
forecast  only  in  prices’  mean  not  in  prices’  whole  distribution  -,  what  shows  that  the 
dominant  criterion  for  the  authors  was  the  mathematical  criterion,  not  the  criterion  of 
reasonableness. Prescott also says to Lucas in the letter that he would work on the paper 
and try to use Muth’s definition – what he was never able to do. 

Few  months  later,  in  a  letter  addressed  to  Prescott,  dated  from  December  2nd, 
1968,  Lucas  mentions  the  effect  caused  by  the  presentation  of  the  same  paper  in  a 
symposium on uncertainty and capital theory at Cowles Foundation, in Yale, in the end 
of November of 1968.3 Once again, the adoption of the rational expectations hypothesis 
had been source of protest by the participants of the seminar. They wanted to know what 
exactly the hypothesis meant and if it was reasonable at all. According to Lucas, most of 
the people thought that the hypothesis was unreasonable and that  he and Prescott were 
“cheating” (Lucas’s quotes) by postulating equilibrium at each point in time. Basically, 
they wanted to know how firms obtained information to form expectations. 

“Investment  under  Uncertainty”  (Lucas  and  Prescott,  1971)  was  submitted  to 
Econometrica seven months later, in June of 1969. In the published version of the paper, 
Lucas  and  Prescott  (1971)  eventually  chose  to  present  the  rational  expectations 
hypothesis as Muth’s (1961) hypothesis, not as a result of people’s learning in the market, 
although  they  could  not  actually  use  Muth’s  (1961)  definition  of  actual  and  expected 
prices as random variables having only the same mean. The solution to this discrepancy 
was to make a safety clause and to inform the reader that they were extending Muth’s 
(1961) definition to the case in which actual and expected prices were random variables 
with a common distribution (Lucas and Prescott, 1971, p. 660, n. 4). 

In the following passage, we can see the reasons why  Lucas and Prescott (1971: 

660) chose to use rational expectations instead of adaptive expectations in their model: 

 
 

Typically the forecasting rule postulated takes the form of anticipated 
prices being a fixed function of past prices - "adaptive expectations." But it is 
clear that if the underlying disturbance (in our case, the demand shift) has a 
regular  stochastic  character  (such  as  a  Markov  process),  forecasting  in this 
manner is adaptive only in a restrictive and not very interesting sense. Except 
for  an  unlikely  coincidence,  price  forecasts  and  actual  prices  will  have 
different probability distributions, and this difference will be persistent, costly 
to forecasters, and readily correctible. 

To  avoid  this  difficulty,  we  shall,  in  this  paper,  go  to  the  opposite 
extreme,  assuming  that  the  actual  and  anticipated  prices  have  the  same 
probability  distribution,  or  that  price  expectations  are  rational.  Thus  we 
surrender,  in advance, any  hope of shedding  light on the process by which 
firms translate current information into price forecasts. In return, we obtain 
an  operational  investment theory  linking  current  investment to  observable 

                                                             
3 The  complete  list  of  participants  in  the  symposium  includes:  George  Akerlof,  David 
Cass,  Duncan  Foley,  John  Gould,  Robert  Hall,  Al  Klevorick,  Robert  Lucas,  Edmund 
Phelps, Mike Rothschild, Harl Ryder, Joe Stiglitz and Hiro Uzawa. 

5 

 

current  and  past  explanatory  variables,  rather  than  to  "expected"  future 
variables which must, in practice, be replaced by various "proxy variables." 

 
 
In adopting the rational expectations hypothesis, Lucas and Prescott (1971: 660) 
intentionally  avoid  discussing  the  “process”  by  which  firms  translate  information  into 
price  forecasts, what was a typical discussion related to  adaptive expectation schemes. 
Proceeding this way, Lucas and Prescott (1971) also avoid the discussion over the most 
reasonable adaptive rule of price expectation formation. Nonetheless, Lucas and Prescott 
(1971: 664, n. 9) make a defensive comment, in a footnote, exactly on the reasonableness 
of the rational expectation hypothesis: 

 
 

[…] now that the precise content of the "rationality" of expectations 
is  made  clear  (in  the  following  definition),  we  add  a  final  comment  on  its 
"reasonableness": we can think of no objection to this assumption which is 
not  better  phrased  as  an  objection  to  our  hypothesis  that  the  stochastic 
component of demand has a regular, stationary structure. If the demand shift 
assumption  is reasonable, then expectations rational  in our sense are surely 
more plausible than any simple, adaptive scheme. If the demand assumption 
is  unreasonable,  then  adopting  an  alternative  expectations  hypothesis  will 
certainly not improve matters. 

 
 
The adoption of the rational expectations hypothesis by Lucas and Prescott (1971) 
created  an  “operational  investment  theory”,  meaning  that  it  allowed  linking  current 
investment to observable current and past explanatory variables instead of to some kind 
of  expected  future  variables.  This  is  so  because  the  rational  expectations  hypothesis 
postulates a property of the outcome of some unspecified expectation formation process, 
which is that the future price sequence at time t is the same function of the stochastic and 
stationary component of the demand as is the actual price sequence. It means that future 
and actual prices have the same distribution of probability and, thus, firms know the true 
distribution of prices for all future periods. This assumption implies that the industry is 
always  in equilibrium or, in other words, that prices and quantities are always  market-
clearing values. It also implies that all future values can be forecasted and, thus, the firm 
can maximize its present value for all future periods. 

As  we  can  see  from  the  discussion  related  to  “Investment  under  Uncertainty” 
(Lucas and Prescott, 1971), the rational expectations hypothesis had been criticized for 
not  being  reasonable  even  before  making  its  way  into  macroeconomics  in  the  early 
1970’s, but Lucas and Prescott avoided this kind of discussion by putting emphasis on 
the operationality of the hypothesis instead. 
 
 
2.3. Reactions to rational expectations in Lucas’s macro models 

 
Back  to  October  of  1970,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  conference,  Lucas  (1972b) 
exposed  the  implications  of  rational  expectations  to  the  modeling  and  testing  of  the 
natural  rate  of  unemployment  hypothesis.  Lucas  (1972b)  presents  the  natural  rate  of 
unemployment hypothesis in a model in which prices and quantities are market clearing 
outcomes and prices expectations are rational. The model is composed by an aggregate 

 

6 

supply  equation,  an  aggregate  demand  equation,  a  policy  rule  equation  and  a  rational 
expectations’  equation  for  future  prices.  The  rational  expectations’  equation  for  future 
prices  applied  to  the  aggregate  supply  equation  constitutes  the  natural  rate  of 
unemployment hypothesis itself. 

When  introducing  the  rational  expectations  hypothesis  into  the  model,  Lucas 
(1972b: 96) defines it as meaning that the expectation of the difference between actual 
and expected prices equals zero, or what he calls “rational in the sense of Muth (1961)”. 
Then  Lucas  (1972b:  96,  n.7)  discusses  briefly  the  adequacy  of  the  hypothesis  in  a 
footnote: 

 
 

My concern in this paper will be to show that rational expectations can 
lead  to  workable,  testable  cycle  models.  For  the  argument  that  this 
hypothesis  is  also  plausible  and  consistent  with  a  variety  of  evidence,  the 
reader is referred to Muth (1961). (Emphasis added). 

 
 
So Lucas (1972b) avoids any further discussion about the reasonableness of the 
rational expectations hypothesis simply by redirecting the reader to Muth’s (1961) paper. 
He makes clear that his criterion for using the rational expectations hypothesis is based 
on its operationality, or, in his own words, on the possibility to build “workable, testable 
cycle models”. 

Lucas (1972b: 99) argues that the wrong test on the existence of the natural rate 
of unemployment would be on the restriction that the sum of the coefficients of current 
and  past  aggregate  demand  -  that  include  the  Phillips  curve  parameter  and  the  policy 
parameters - is equal to zero, meaning that aggregate demand shifts would not affect real 
output in the long run. This kind of (wrong) “standard” test - which implies a test on the 
magnitude of the parameter of the Phillips curve in a model with adaptive expectations - 
had  been  performed  by  Lucas  and  Rapping  (1969b),  and  also  by  Cagan  (1968)  and 
Gordon  (1970).  The  last  two  had  been  endorsed  by  Tobin  (1968)  and  Solow  (1970), 
respectively,  the  economists  that  Lucas  elected  as  references  for  this  kind  of 
macroeconomic framework. 

The  solution  of  Lucas’s  (1972b)  system  of  four  equations  –  with  rational 
expectations  –  implies  that  real  output  depends  on  the  Phillips  curve  parameter  (the 
response  of  real  output to the  difference  between  current  and  expected  prices)  and  on 
policy  parameters.  Lucas  (1972b:  99-100)  says  that  the  assumption  of  rational 
expectations actually implies restrictions “across equations”, between policy parameters 
and  behavioral  parameters  in  the  model.  The  right  test  on  the  natural  rate  of 
unemployment under rational expectations would be, then, a test on these restrictions.4 
Therefore,  the  existence  (or  not)  of  the  natural  rate  of  unemployment  could  be 
characterized as “a ‘system priority’, like stability or identifiability”. 

In his summary paper of the conference, Tobin (1972a: 13) comments on Lucas’s 
paper  saying  that  it  was  a  rigorous  and  sophisticated  defense  of  the  natural  rate  of 
unemployment hypothesis, but criticizes the reasonableness of the rational expectations 
hypothesis by saying that it was a too much strong assumption regarding the capability 
of agents of receiving and processing information: 
 
 

                                                             
4 See Hoover (1988: 177) for a more detailed description of this test. 

7 

 

The participants [of the economy]  not only  must receive the correct 
information about the structure [of the economy] but also must use all of the 
data  correctly  in  estimating  prices  and  in  making  quantitative  decisions. 
These  participants  must  be  better  econometricians  than  any  of  us  at  the 
Conference. 

 
 
Besides being a too much strong assumption, the rational expectations hypothesis 
 
and the consequent Lucas’s (1972b) modeling of natural rate hypothesis would not even 
be useful for the policy makers, as Tobin (1972a: 13) says: 
 
 

[…] a pragmatist might conclude that he agrees with the natural rate 
hypothesis  in principle  but also believes that, in as  long a run as can  be of 
concern to policy-makers in an uncertain and unchanging world, a trade-off 
does exist for policy makers as well as for statisticians. 

 
 
Lucas  immediately  responded  to  this  criticism  of  the  rational  expectations 
 
hypothesis  as  being  a  too  much  strong  assumption  in  a  letter  to  Tobin  dated  from 
November 2nd, 1970. He argues that, although he assumes in the paper that each agent 
knows the entire structure of the economic system, this assumption is not crucial to the 
existence of the natural rate of unemployment. One could still obtain the natural rate even 
if  the  agents  formed  their  expectations  about  the  correct  distribution  of  future  prices 
conditioned  on  only  a  part  of  the  available  information  or  even  on  no  information  on 
current realizations at all. They just need to know the correct conditional distributions of 
prices,  but that  does  not  mean  that  they  know the  structure of  the  entire  system.  They 
could infer the correct conditional distributions from a histogram of past prices, which, 
for its turn, depended of the entire structure of the economy. In the end of the letter, Lucas 
says  he  is  attaching  a  paper  that  deals  with  this  issue  in  a  more  precise  and  artificial 
setting. The paper is “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money” (Lucas, 1972a). 
 
Back to the Federal Reserve Board conference in October of 1970, it was not only 
James  Tobin  who  criticized  Lucas’s  (1972b)  macro  equilibrium  model  with  rational 
expectations. Another strong criticism came from MacAvoy (1972). MacAvoy’s (1972: 
116) first criticism to Lucas (197b) is about the high level of aggregation of the model, 
which would make impossible for the applied researcher to analyze the different pricing 
practices of the sectors of the economy. He continues to criticize Lucas (1972b) by saying 
that government would not have parameters of a competitive economy in his model, since 
the government himself was able to control prices. He also says that the Federal Reserve 
monetary policy would eventually change the rational expectations function Pt = E(Pt*) 
+ ηt, (where Pt is the current price level, Pt* is the future price level and ηt is a random 
variable).  MacAvoy  (1972:  117)  criticizes,  then,  the  reasonableness  of  the  rational 
expectations hypothesis: 
 
 

The  author  [Lucas  (1972b)]  could  have  rendered  a  great  service  by 
venturing into testing and measuring, as well, to show that his expectations 
function  has  more  than  plausibility.  At  present,  this  function  lacks 
documentation from observed behavior in competitive industries and may 
be  descriptive  of  noncompetitive  industries  only  because  those  controlling 

 

8 

output set present and future prices by making ηt “step” price adjustments (so 
that  markets  do  not  clear  with  demand  changes,  violating  another 
assumption). (Emphasis added). 

 
 
 
So  MacAvoy  (1972)  criticizes  the  rational  expectations  hypothesis  in  Lucas 
(1972b) because he thinks that it has no correspondence in reality. He looks at the real 
world in which firms control prices in some industries, while the government is able to 
control  some  other  prices  too,  and  does  not  see  a  good  description  of  that  in  Lucas’s 
(1972b) model. MacAvoy (1972: 117, n.1) is, then, even more emphatic about the absence 
of reasonableness in the rational expectations hypothesis: 
 
 

Lucas cites Muth [1961] for consistency of his function with a “variety 
of  evidence”,  but  I  found  only  indications  in  this  source  of  the  relative 
implausibility  of  the  simple  cobweb  (p.  344).  The  cobweb  is  not  the  null 
hypothesis, the rejection of which  implies the acceptance of Lucas rational 
expectations. (Emphasis added). 

 
 
 
Few days after the conference, Lucas wrote a letter to MacAvoy in which he sent 
a  revised  version  of  his  paper  (Lucas,  1972b),  and  where  he  says  that  MacAvoy’s 
interpretation of Muth’s (1961) rational expectations hypothesis as specific to the solution 
of  the  cobweb  model  was  completely  wrong.  He  did  not  discuss  MacAvoy’s  (1972) 
criticism to the reasonableness of the hypothesis any further, though. 
Another criticism to Lucas’s (1972b) model in the same conference was made by 
 
Franklin  M.  Fisher.  Fisher  (1972:  113)  also  criticizes  the  reasonableness  of  rational 
expectations  hypothesis  by  saying  that  although  he  agrees that  a  policy  that  goes  long 
enough can make people have correct expectations on average, he disagrees that after a 
policy change average expectations will be correct in the short run. He, then, exposes his 
idea  of  what  would  be  the  proper  definition  of  rational  expectations,  according  to  his 
reasonableness criteria: 
 
 

A proper view of rational expectations seems to me to be that the limit 
of the expected value of the expected prices  is the same as the  limit of the 
expected value of actual prices given that there are no policy shifts. I see no 
reason,  however,  why  the  two  expected  values  should  be  equal  at  every 
moment in time. 

 
 
  
Fisher (1972: 113) goes on emphasizing this criticism and the idea that in Lucas’s 
(1972b)  model  individuals  participating  in  the  economy  would  have  to  be  able  to 
understand the new policy as fast – or even faster – as the policy maker himself. In the 
end, he concludes saying that he does not think that the natural rate model is better than 
a standard Keynesian short-run macro model in guiding economic policy. 
 
 
3.1. Rational expectations hypothesis in Sargent’s macro models 
 

 

9 

The  first  paper  in  which  Sargent  uses  the  rational  expectations  hypothesis  in  a 
 
macroeconomic  model  is  “Rational  Expectations,  the  Real  Rate  of  Interest,  and  the 
Natural  Nate  of  Unemployment”,  published  in  1973  on  the  Brookings  Papers  on 
Economic Activity. Sargent (1973: 433) says that his work is “heavily dependent” on the 
analysis of the natural rate of unemployment hypothesis made by Lucas (1972a, b, 1973, 
1976) and Lucas and Rapping (1969)  

Sargent (1973) builds a macroeconomic model in which the relationship between 
interest rate and expected inflation is presented and Fisher’s theory (of the “natural rate 
of interest”) is analyzed. Expected inflation is first modeled under adaptive expectations 
and,  afterwards,  under  rational  expectations.  Sargent  (1973:  433)  argues  that  under 
rational expectations the natural rate of unemployment hypothesis and Fisher’s theory on 
the  relation  between  interest  rate  and  expected  inflation  (“natural  rate  of  interest” 
hypothesis)  form  the  same  package.  Sargent  (1973)  proposes,  then,  some  tests  for  the 
rational  expectations  model,  concluding  that  the  most  straightforward  one  would  be 
simply the  test on the natural rate of unemployment  itself. The  model presented in the 
paper is described basically by two propositions. The first deals with the natural rate of 
output  (unemployment)  and  states  that  deviations  of  output  from  its  normal  level  are 
statistically  independent  of  systematic  fiscal  and  monetary  policies.  The  second  deals 
with the real rate of interest and states that the real rate is independent of the systematic 
part of the money supply. Sargent (1973) says that the validity of the first proposition is 
shown in Lucas (1972a, b, 1976), while the second proposition should stand and fall with 
Lucas’s  natural  rate  of  unemployment  proposition.  Therefore,  the  econometric  test  of 
these propositions together would be simply the econometric test on the natural rate of 
unemployment hypothesis itself. Sargent cites Lucas (1972b, 1973) as examples of proper 
tests on the natural rate of unemployment and proposes another one, which turns out to 
be inconclusive to him, since it rejects the natural rate of unemployment but is claimed to 
be superior to any available structural models that denies the natural rate in predicting the 
rate of unemployment. 
 
Sargent  (1973:  431)  firstly  presents  the  rational  expectations  hypothesis  as 
“’rational’  in Muth’s sense”,  meaning that public’s expectations are not systematically 
worse than the predictions of the economic models - and referring to Muth (1961). Later 
in  the  paper,  Sargent  (1973:  439)  is  more  specific  and  says  that  rational  expectations 
hypothesis applied to his model would require that “the public (a) knows the true reduced 
form  for the  price  level,  (b)  knows the  probability  distributions  or  rules  governing  the 
evolution of the exogenous variables, and (c) combines this information to form optimal 
(least squares) forecasts of the price  level”. And then Sargent (1973: 439) presents the 
two reasons why this kind of expectations should be adopted: 
 
 

First,  it  makes  concrete  and  operational  the  appealing  notion  that 
people  use  information  besides  past  prices  in  forming  their  forecast  of  the 
price  level.  Second,  in  certain  instances  it  has  been  possible  to  test  the 
hypothesis  empirically  […]  and  the  hypothesis  has  fared  pretty  well  when 
tested  on  data  on  stock  prices,  commodities  prices,  and  interest  rates. 
(Emphasis added). 

 
 
As seen in Lucas’s case (Lucas 1972a,b; Lucas and Prescott, 1971), the argument 
 
is that rational expectations relate available information to expected variables in such a 

 

10 

way  permit  building  equilibrium  (stationary)  models  that  can  be  tested  and  that  can 
provide forecasts. That is the meaning of the term “operational” for Sargent and Lucas. 
 
 
3.2 The origins of rational expectations in Sargent’s work 
 
 
According to Sent (2006: 15), Sargent’s work was always guided by attempts to 
establish  a  connection  between  neoclassical  economics  and  econometrics,  in  a  way  to 
develop a universal economic science. Sargent’s early interpretation and use of rational 
expectations were econometrically motivated by the idea that the econometrician and the 
agents of a model should behave symmetrically (Sent, 2006: 38). This idea can be found 
in  Sargent’s  (1971)  paper  “A  Note  on  the  Accelerationist  Controversy”,  where  he 
discusses  two  types  of  process  of  expectations’  formation.  One  is  a  kind  of  adaptive 
expectations, where people form their expectations considering the errors of predictions 
of past inflations. The other is the rational expectations, where people know the actual 
process of inflation and, thus, can make the same prediction as the econometrician that 
builds  the  models.  In  this  specific  paper,  Sargent  (1971)  defends  that  this  last  kind  of 
expectation should be used in models testing the Friedman-Phelps accelerationist version 
of the Phillips curve.5 
 
In  a  following  paper  -  Sargent’s  (1972a)  “Rational  Expectations  and  the  Term 
Structure of Interest Rates” - the same idea about the symmetry between the agents and 
the econometrician can be found. Sargent (1972a) tests a combination of two hypothesis 
on the behavior of the term structure of interest rates. One is that forward rates are forced 
to equality with the short rate that investors expect to prevail in the subsequent periods. 
The other is that the expectations of investors are rational in the sense of Muth (1961). 
The two hypothesis combined form the hypothesis of efficient markets. The first one had 
been  subject  to  various  empirical  tests  alone,  without  assuming  rational  expectations. 
Sargent (1973) argues that the right test should be the one that combined the two of them, 
since  rational  expectations  would  guarantee  that  agents  would  not  waste  information 
available to form expectations, just like the econometrician building he model. 

These early works show that Sargent’s motivation to use rational expectations in 
his models were, indeed, econometrical. In other words, Sargent’s motivation was based 
on the  operationality  of  the  rational  expectations  hypothesis.  I  would  add  that  rational 
expectations were especially suitable to analyze financial markets. These two aspects of 
Sargent’s  motivation  and  use  of  rational  expectations  would  be  criticized  in  his 
macroeconomic model presented at Brookings Institute (Sargent, 1973).6 
 
 
3.3 Reactions to rational expectations in Sargent’s macro models 

 
Sargent’s  (1973)  paper  had  two  commentators  at the  presentation  at  Brookings 
Institute. One of them was David Fand and the other was Stephen Goldfeld. After their 

                                                             
5 It is interesting that Sargent (1971: 34-5) also discusses which hypothesis would be more 
reasonable for agents to assume in the model. His conclusion is that agents should have 
rational expectations because it was a better description of the inflation time series in the 
U. S., in the previous years. 
6 Before the 1973 macro paper presented at Brookings, Sargent (1972b) published a paper 
in  which  he  was  already  analyzing  the  relation  between  anticipated  inflation  and  the 
nominal rate of interest, but it was not a complete macro model. 

11 

 

comments,  there  was  a  general  discussion  about  the  paper.  The  rational  expectations 
hypothesis was  subject to criticism  by  most of the participants of the seminar, and the 
basic  argument  was  that  it  was  not  a  good  description  of  how  macroeconomic 
expectations were actually formed in the real world. 

David  Fand  (p:  474)  questioned  how  a  model  with  rational  expectations  would 
apply in different situations and different types of worlds, asking if a change from fixed 
to floating rates, for example, would be interpreted as a structural change. 
Stephen Goldfeld (p: 475) asked if one should actually believe in the assumptions 
 
underlying  Sargent’s  model.  Goldfeld  considered  the  model  based  on  rational 
expectations  as  “the  heart  of  Sargent’s  paper”,  saying  that  agents  knew  essentially 
everything  about  the  model.  He  went  on  saying  that  “it  is  very  strongly  restrictive  to 
assume that the public really knows the model and its parameters”, and that “softening 
the  assumption  of  complete  knowledge  really  requires  adding  the  assumption  of 
linearity”, and  someone  could  not  find these assumptions congenial. Goldfeld (p:  477) 
also asked about the short-run policy  implications of the validity of the natural rate of 
unemployment  and  of  the  Fisher  hypothesis.  He  questioned  how  rational  expectations 
should be formed in a world in which the government is able to impose different kinds of 
policies. 
In the general discussion, Robert J. Gordon (p: 478) said that he was skeptical that 
 
output fluctuations in the real world were due to errors in price predictions. He also argued 
that  the  overall  price  level  was  typically  downward  inflexible,  making  a  rational 
expectations  model  inappropriate  in  explaining  anticipated  movements.  He  said  that 
upward  and  downward  movements  could  be  symmetrical  for  commodity  and  security 
markets, but not for the aggregate price behavior. Robert J. Gordon (p:479) also argued 
that even the forecasts of experts did not seem to be unbiased and serially uncorrelated, 
as  proposed  by  Sargent  in  his  model,  giving  examples  such  as  the  consistent 
underprediction of prices for years after the Second World War and the cyclical pattern 
of businessmen’s errors in anticipations of their own investments. 
 
Thomas Juster (p: 479) argued about the cost of forming rational expectations. He 
said that there are different types of economic agents with different  incentives to make 
the effort to do the rational expectations kind of forecast. Only a small class of economic 
actors would behave in accordance with rational expectations, while most of households 
and small business would not. 
 
Artur  Okun  (p:  479)  said  that  the  question  related  to  the  rational  expectations 
should be “whether enough participants had the incentive to arbitrage to make rationality 
dominate in markets”. 
William  Poole  (p.  479)  defended  Sargent’s  model  with  rational  expectations 
 
against Keynesian models with adaptive expectations, but argued that it should consider 
the accumulation of knowledge in the formation of expectations. He said that information 
and  knowledge  available  to  form  rational  expectations  change  over  time  and  different 
people  have  different  access  to  it;  policy  makers  typically  have  more  rapid  access  to 
information and have fuller information than private agents, what enables policymakers 
to improve economic performance. 
Finally, Franco Modigliani (p. 480) argued that some tradeoff between inflation 
 
and unemployment could exist in a world with rational expectations because of vacancies 
and  other  features  that  departed  from  market  clearing,  making  the  natural  rate  of 
unemployment  “just  an  intellectual  curiosity”.  Sargent  (p.  480)  replied  to  Modigliani 
saying  that  whether  it  was  right  or  wrong,  the  natural  rate  of  unemployment  had 
immediate relevance on the impact caused by systematic and predictable changes on the 
economy. 

 

12 

 
 
4. Conclusion 
 

The rational expectations hypothesis was originally  formulated by  Muth (1961) 
with the intention to describe the behavior of firms in a specific industry regarding the 
formation of price expectations. This hypothesis was used by Lucas in his early research 
in the analysis of investments by firms located in an industry (Lucas 1966, 1967; Lucas 
and Prescott, 1971). It was also used by Sargent in his early research in the analysis of 
financial markets, mainly with an econometric motivation (Sargent, 1972). Afterwards, 
the same hypothesis made its way into macroeconomic models through the hands of both 
Lucas  and  Sargent  as  an  operational  tool  to  analyze  and  to  test  macroeconomic 
(aggregated)  models  and  to  deduce  economic  policies  from  it,  as  in  Lucas  (1972a,  b, 
1973)  and  Sargent  (1973).  The  first  reactions  to  the  use  of  rational  expectations  in 
macroeconomics were that it was not suitable to describe  macroeconomic phenomena, 
that it was not a good description of how people learned and obtained information to form 
expectations and that it was useless for short run economic policy. These arguments can 
be  summarized  in  the  idea  that  rational  expectations  were  not  reasonable  to  analyze 
macroeconomic phenomena. Lucas and Sargent defended the hypothesis by saying that it 
was  operational  in  the  sense  that  it  related  current  and  past  information  to  expected 
variables  in  such  a  way  that  equilibrium  (stationary)  models  could  be  built  and 
econometric tests and predictions could be made. 
 
 
5. References 
 
Cagan,  P.  (1968).  Theories  of  Mild,  Continuing  Inflation:  A  Critique  and  Extension. 
Inflation: Its causes, Consequences and Control, Stephen W. Rousseas (ed.). New York: 
New York University Press, 1968. 

De Vroey (2016). A History of Macroeconomics from Keynes to Lucas and Beyond. New 
York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 

Eckstein,  O.  (ed.).  (1972).  The  Econometrics  of  Price  Determination  Conference. 
Washington D. C. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 

Fisher,  F.  M.  (1972).  Discussion  of  Papers  in  Session  I,  in  The Econometrics  of  Price 
Determination Conference. Washington, D. C., October 30-31, 1970. 

Gordon,  R.  J.  (1976).  Can  Econometric  Policy  evaluation  be  salvaged?  A  comment. 
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 1 (1): 47-61. 

Hoover, K. D. (1988). The New Classical Macroeconomics. Oxford: Blackwell. 

Klamer, A. (ed.). (1983), Conversations with Economists. USA: Rowmand & Allanheld. 

Lucas,  R.  E.  Jr. (1966).  Optimal  Investment  with  Rational  Expectations.  Unpublished, 
Carnegie Tech. 

Lucas,  R.  E.  Jr.  (1967).  Adjustment  Costs  and  the  Theory  of  Supply.  The  Journal  of 
Political Economy 75 (4): 321-334. 

 

13 

Lucas, R. E. Jr. (1972a). Expectations and the Neutrality of Money. Journal of Economic 
Theory 4 (2): 103-124. 

Lucas, R. E. Jr. (1972b). Econometric Testing of the Natural Rate Hypothesis, in R. E. 
Lucas Jr. (ed.), Studies in Business-Cycle Theory. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1981, pp. 90-
103.  Reprinted  from  Otto  Eckstein  (ed.)  The  Econometrics  of  Price  Determination 
Conference. Washington D. C. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 50-9. 

Lucas, R. E. Jr. (1976a). Econometric policy evaluation: A critique. Carnegie-Rochester 
Conference Series on Public Policy, 1 (1): 19-46. 

Lucas, R. E. Jr. (1976b). Reply. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 
1 (1): 61-62. 

Lucas,  R.  E.  Jr.  (1983).  Robert  E.  Lucas  Jr.,  in  A.  Klamer  (ed.),  Conversations  with 
Economists. USA: Rowmand & Allanheld. 

Lucas, R. E. Jr. (2004). Robert E. Lucas, Jr. in W. Breit and B. T. Hirsch (eds.) Lives of 
the  Laureates:  eighteen  nobel  economists.  Fourth  edition.  Cambridge,  USA:  The  MIT 
Press. 

Lucas, R. E. Jr., Prescott, E. C. (1971). Investment under Uncertainty. Econometrica 39 
(5): 659-681. 

Lucas, R. E. Jr., Rapping, L. A. (1969a). Real Wages, Employment and Inflation. Journal 
of Political Economy 77 (5): 721-754. 

MacAvoy, P. W. (1972). Discussion of Papers in Session I, in The Econometrics of Price 
Determination Conference. Washington, D. C., October 30-31, 1970. 

Muth,  J.  F.  (1961).  Rational  Expectations  and  the  Theory  of  Price  Movements. 
Econometrica, 29 (3): 315-335. 

Sargent, T. J. (1971). A Note on the “Accelerationist” Controversy.  Journal of Money, 
Credit and Banking 3 (3), pp. 721-5. Reprinted in Robert E. Lucas and Thomas J. Sargent 
(eds.)  Rational  Expectations  and  Econometric  Practice.  Minneapolis:  University  of 
Minnesota Press, pp. 521-51. 

Sargent,  T.  (1972a).  Rational  Expectations  and  the  Term  Structure  of  Interest  Rates. 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 83 (1), pp. 127-40. 

Sargent, T. (1972b). Anticipated Inflation and the Nominal Rate of Interest.  Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 86 (2): 212-225. 

Sargent, T. (1973). Rational Expectations, the Real Rate of Interest, and the Natural Nate 
of Unemployment. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity N.2 (1973), 429-480. 

Sent, E-M. (2006). The Evolving Rationality of Rational Expectations: an assessment of 
Thomas Sargent’s achievements. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.  

Solow,  R.  M.  (1970).  Discussion  of  Robert  J.  Gordon’s  “The  Recent  Acceleration  of 
Inflation and Its Lessons for the Future”. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Arthur 
M. Okun and George L. Perry (eds.), vol. 1. 

 

14 

Tobin, J. (1968). Discussion of Phillip Cagan’s “Theories of Mild, Continuing Inflation: 
A Critique and Extension”. Inflation: Its causes, Consequences and Control, Stephen W. 
Rousseas (ed.). New York: New York University Press, 1968 

Tobin,  J.  (1972a).  The  Wage-Price  Mechanism:  Overview  of  the  Conference,  in  The 
Econometrics  of  Price  Determination  Conference.  Washington,  D.  C.,  October  30-31, 
1970. 

Tobin, J. (1972b). Inflation and Unemployment. American Economic Review, vol. 62 No. 
1/2: 1-18. 

Tobin, J. (1983). James Tobin, in A. Klamer (ed.), Conversations with Economists. USA: 
Rowmand & Allanheld. 

 

 

15 

