Heterogeneity in Inflation Expectations and Macroeconomic Dynamics under 

Evolutionarily Satisficing Learning 

    Gilberto Tadeu Lima  
    University of São Paulo 
     giltadeu@usp.br 

 

 
 
 

 
 
   Jaylson Jair da Silveira 
   Federal University of Santa Catarina 
   jaylson.silveira@ufsc.br 

 
 
Abstract:  Drawing  on  a  considerable  empirical  literature  that  reveals  persistent  and  endogenously 
time-varying  heterogeneity  in  inflation  expectations,  this  paper  embeds  two  inflation  forecasting 
strategies  –  one  based  on  costly  ex  ante  full  rationality  or  perfect  foresight,  and  the  second  based  on 
costless  ex  ante  bounded  rationality  or  extrapolative  trend-following  –  in  a  dynamic  macroeconomic 
model.  Drawing  also  on  the  significant  empirical  evidence  that  inflation  forecast  errors  may  have  to 
exceed  some  threshold  before  agents  abandon  their  previously  selected  inflation  forecasting  strategy, 
we  describe  agents  as  switching  between  inflation  forecasting  strategies  according  to  evolutionarily 
satisficing  learning  dynamics.  We  find  that  convergence  to  a  long-run  equilibrium  consistent  with 
growth, unemployment and inflation at their natural levels may be achieved even when heterogeneity in 
inflation expectations (with predominance of the extrapolative trend-following foresight strategy) is an 
attractor  of  an  evolutionarily  satisficing  learning  dynamic  perturbed  by  mutant  agents.  Therefore,  in 
keeping with robust empirical evidence, heterogeneity in strategies to form inflation expectations (with 
prevalence of boundedly rational expectations) can be a stable long-run equilibrium. 
 
Keywords: Heterogeneous inflation expectations; perfect foresight; extrapolative foresight; satisficing 
learning dynamics. 
 

Resumo:  Baseado  em  uma  considerável  literatura  empírica  que  detecta  que  a  heterogeneidade  das 
expectativas  de  inflação  é  persistente  e  varia  endogenamente  no  tempo,  o  artigo  embute  duas 
estratégias de previsão da inflação – uma, custosa ex ante, baseada em racionalidade plena ou previsão 
perfeita, a outra, sem custo ex ante, baseada em racionalidade limitada ou previsão extrapolativa – em 
um  modelo  macroeconômico  dinâmico.  Baseado  também  na  evidência  empírica  de  que  os  erros  de 
previsão  devem  ultrapassar  certo  limiar  antes  que  os  agentes  abandonem  a  estratégia  de  previsão  da 
inflação previamente selecionada, supomos que os agentes mudam de estratégia de previsão da inflação 
conforme uma dinâmica de aprendizado evolucionariamente satisficing. Mostramos que a convergência 
para o equilíbrio de longo prazo em que as taxas de inflação, crescimento e desemprego estão em seus 
níveis  naturais  pode  ser  obtida  mesmo  quando  a  heterogeneidade  de  expectativas  de  inflação  (com 
predominância da estratégia de previsão  extrapolativa)  é um  atrator de uma dinâmica  de aprendizado 
evolucionariamente satisficing perturbada por agentes mutantes.  Logo, em conformidade com robusta 
evidência  empírica,  heterogeneidade  nas  estratégias  de  formação  de  expectativas  de  inflação  (com 
predominância de expectativas limitadamente racionais) pode ser um equilíbrio de longo prazo estável. 
 
Palavras-chave:  expectativas  de  inflação  heterogêneas;  previsão  perfeita;  previsão  extrapolativa; 
dinâmica de aprendizado de satisficing. 
 

J.E.L. Classification Codes: E03; E31; C62; C73. 
 
Classificação Anpec: Área 4 – Macroeconomia, Economia Monetária e Finanças. 
 

* We are grateful to Larry Samuelson and William Brock for helpful comments  and suggestions. Nonetheless, 
we take full responsibility for any remaining errors. We are also grateful to CNPq (Brazil) and FAPESP (Brazil) 
for research funding. 

 

 

1 

1. Introduction 

There is compelling empirical evidence from both survey data and laboratory experiments that 
inflation  expectations  are  persistently  heterogeneous  and  formed  mostly  through  boundedly  rational, 
rule-of-thumb  mechanisms  or  heuristics  (see,  e.g.,  Hommes,  2013,  for  a  detailed  overview). 
Meanwhile, there is also robust evidence from survey data that sometimes inflation forecast errors must 
pass  some  threshold  before  decision  makers  decide  to  abandon  their  previously  selected  inflation 
predictor (Branch, 2004, 2007). 

Motivated  by  these  several  pieces  of  robust  empirical  evidence  (which  we  report  and  discuss 
more  thoroughly  in  the  next  section),  we  extend  a  dynamic  macroeconomic  model  to  explore 
implications of heterogeneous inflation expectations which vary over time according to  evolutionarily 
satisficing  learning  dynamics  (with  and  without  mutation).  From  a  methodological  perspective,  the 
intended contribution of this paper lies in particular in an alternative way of modeling of the dynamics 
of inflation predictor switching when inflation forecast errors have to cross some threshold in order to 
induce a switch. Our proposed modeling strategy is intended to incorporate this documented threshold 
or  inertia  effect  in  a  more  representative  way  than  has  been  carried  out  in  the  existing  literature 
(Branch, 2004, 2007; Lines and Westerhoff, 2010), in which such threshold is modeled as a component 
of  the  cost  associated  with  the  use  of  a  predictor  (and  a  cost  which  is  usually  taken  as  exogenously 
fixed and deterministic). It is true, as argued in Branch (2004, 2007), first, that if forecast errors have to 
pass some threshold in order to induce a switch, there is inertia in predictor switching; and second, that 
costs act as thresholds through which forecast errors must cross to induce switching between prediction 
methods. In our model, however, although the existence of a cost incurred by agents to use a predictor 
also imposes inertia, satisficing predictor choice in and of itself is already an inherent source of inertia 
in  predictor  switching.  It  is  therefore  analytically  convenient,  if  not  required,  that  these  two  distinct 
inherent  sources  of  inertia  in  predictor  switching  are  not  bunched  together  in  a  single  channel.  For 
instance, in our model, as in Lines and Westerhoff (2010), there is an exogenously fixed cost associated 
with perfect inflation prediction. Yet, unlike in Lines and Westerhoff (2010), we make it explicit that 
this  cost  involves  the  fact  that  perfect  inflation  prediction  requires  perfectly  knowing  the  frequency 
distribution of inflation predictors in the population of agents. As it was early pointed out by Brock & 
de Fontnouvelle (2000), the perfect foresight predictor involves very complex calculations given that it 
has  to  take  into  account  the  equilibrium  effects  of  (all)  the  other  predictor(s).  Thus,  it  is  analytically 
convenient  that  those  two  sources  of  inertia  in  predictor  switching  are  incorporated  to  the  model 
separately. Meanwhile, if the cost attached to the use of an inflation predictor, when broadly conceived, 
ensures  that  the  empirical  estimate  of  the  proportion  of  agents  using  it  most  closely  fit  the  data,  as 
documented in Branch (2004, 2007), our suggested satisficing choice protocol can be seen as similarly 
empirically  accommodating.  Indeed,  as  acknowledged  in  the  closing  of  Branch  (2004),  the  data  are 
supportive of the model of the paper, but not completely so, given that such model could not account 
for inertia-generating bias towards a predictor. The author then concludes that the  empirical  evidence 
found in the paper indicate that a theoretical account of these biases or predispositions is called for. In 
this context, the model set forth in this paper suggests an explanation of inflation predictor choice based 
on evolutionarily satisficing learning. 

As further described in Section 3, our formal methodological approach follows the spirit of the 
suggestive  contributions  of Herbert Simon and conceives of choice as  primarily  intending to  meet  an 
acceptability  threshold  rather  than  to  select  the  best  of  all  possible  alternatives,  hence  the  notion  of 
satisficing  behavior.  Consequently,  while  in  both  Branch  (2004,  2007)  and  Lines  and  Westerhoff 
(2010)  the  inflation  predictor  selection  follows  the  discrete  choice  model  set  forth  in  Brock  and 
Hommes  (1997),  in  this  paper  the  inflation  predictor  choice  follows  an  evolutionarily  satisficing 
learning dynamic subject  to  a perturbation analogous to  mutation in natural  environments.  In fact, by 
replacing  the  demand  for  choosing  the  best  inflation  predictor  possible  for  the  agent  with  a 
conceptually  and  formally  precise  notion  of  being  acceptably  or  tolerably  inaccurate  an  inflation 
prediction,  our  evolutionarily  satisficing  learning  mechanism  provides  a  fruitful  alternative  way  of 
rationalizing the inertia finding in Branch (2004, 2007). In the latter, the finding that agents abandon a 

 

2 

previously  selected  predictor  only  after  forecast  errors  cross  some  threshold  is  seen  as  reflecting  that 
agents  have inherent  predispositions to  use one predictor over another.  In the model herein,  the same 
finding  is  seen  as  reflecting  that  agents  have  an  inherent  predisposition  not  to  one  predictor  over 
another,  but  to  satisficing  choice  behavior.  Indeed,  as  our  proposed  satisficing  behavior  is  subject  to 
mutation,  we  are  ascribing  to  agents  another  inherent  predisposition,  which  is  a  predisposition  to 
experiment once and a while (as explained below). According to Herbert Simon’s original usage of the 
term “satisficing”, choices are identified that are suitable enough by comparing their attributes to some 
standard. While in Simon (1955, 1956) choices are compared to the “aspiration level” of how good a 
choice might be made, in the model of this paper inflation predictor choices are compared analogously 
to the aspiration level of how acceptably or tolerably inaccurate a given inflation predictor choice might 
be made in light of the uncertainties surrounding the future. 

As a result, while in Branch (2004) agents are admittedly perceived as inherently predisposed to 
using an inflation predictor in a way that does not depend on accuracy, our conception that agents are 
instead  inherently  predisposed  to  satisficing  choice  does  not  mean  that  accuracy  is  overlooked.  What 
satisficing  predictor  choice  means  is  that  agents,  instead  of  looking  for  the  highest  of  all  possible 
accuracies, in fact look for an acceptable level of accuracy or, to put it another way, are satisfied with 
(or  tolerate)  a  positive  level  of  inaccuracy  in  inflation  prediction.  Therefore,  our  notion  of  satisficing 
predictor choice is consistent with the viewpoint stated in Branch (2004) that “the agent will not switch 
his prediction method because the forecast error is ‘reasonable’. Only forecast errors above a threshold 
will  induce  changes  in  predictor  choice.”  (p.  613)  Besides,  we  plausibly  assume  that  the  level  of 
inaccuracy in inflation prediction that is deemed reasonable or acceptable or tolerable is agent-specific 
and  randomly  distributed  acrosss  agents.  In  fact,  this  heterogeneity  across  agents  in  acceptable 
prediction errors is in accordance with the empirical evidence found in Branch (2004). 

Revealingly,  the  evolutionarily  satisficing  learning  mechanism  proposed  herein,  in  addition  to 
incorporating the threshold effect documented in Branch (2004, 2007) in a representative, conceptually 
sound  and  intuitive  way,  carries  relevant  implications  for  the  long-run  equilibrium  configuration  of  a 
macroeconomic model as the one set forth in the related contribution by Lines and Westerhoff (2010). 
In fact, the evolutionarily satisficing dynamics across inflation predictor choice suggested in this paper 
is  coupled  to  the  equilibrium  dynamics  of  the  endogenous  macroeconomic  variables.  Meanwhile, 
although  our  suggested  evolutionarily  satisficing  choice  mechanism  is  embedded  in  a  specific 
macroeconomic model featuring inflation prediction, readers are nonetheless invited to contemplate the 
possibility that other instances of predictor (or, more broadly still, behavior) switching are also subject 
to satisficing evolutionary learning. 

In  keeping  with  the  empirical  evidence  on  inflation  expectations  and  following  Lines  and 
Westerhoff (2010), the  aggregate  expected inflation is  a weighted  average of the inflation forecast  of 
agents who play the costly ex ante full rationality or perfect foresight strategy and the inflation forecast 
of  agents  who  play  a  costless  ex  ante  bounded  rationality  or  extrapolative  trend-following  foresight 
strategy.  Differently  from  the  discrete  choice  framework  adopted  in  Lines  and  Westerhoff  (2010), 
however,  our  evolutionarily  satisficing  learning  mechanism,  if  not  perturbed  by  a  noise  analogous  to 
mutation  in  natural  environments,  necessarily  generates  pervasive  extrapolative  trend-following 
foresight (all agents eventually decide to use the bounded rationality inflation forecasting strategy) as a 
long-run  equilibrium  solution.  Meanwhile,  in  the  presence  of  mutation  the  evolutionarily  satisficing 
learning  mechanism  necessarily  culminates  with  heterogeneity  in  strategies  to  establish  inflation 
expectations  as  a  long-run  equilibrium,  which  is  in  keeping  with  the  empirical  evidence.  In  either 
situation  (with  and  without  mutation)  the  long-run  equilibrium  is  nonetheless  characterized  by  the 
natural  values  of  the  output  growth,  unemployment  and  inflation  being  achieved.  In  fact,  a  long-run 
equilibrium  configuration  consistent  with  the  achievement  of  the  natural  values  of  the  endogenous 
macroeconomic  variables  does  not  emerge  because  all  agents  adopt  the  perfect  foresight  inflation 
forecasting strategy. Instead, it is either all agents (without mutation) or the greater proportion of them 
(with  mutation)  that  eventually  decide  to  follow  the  bounded  rationality  inflation  forecasting  strategy 
because the natural values of the output growth, unemployment and inflation are being achieved. 

 

3 

As  the  general  case,  the  model  herein  features  “mutation”  as  a  perturbation  in  the  satisficing 
evolutionary  mechanism,  leading  some  decision  makers  to  select  an  inflation  forecasting  strategy  at 
random. We should emphasize that “mutation” is a metaphor for all sorts of payoff-unrelated reasons, 
outside  the  more  explicit  part  of  the  model,  for  why  agents  might  switch  inflation  predictor,  and  we 
take  the  rate  of  mutation  as  being  independent  across  agents  and  over  time.  Two  rationales  for  the 
presence of mutation are that an agent exits the economy with some (fixed) probability and is replaced 
with  a  new  agent  who  still  does  not  know  anything  about  the  decision-making  environment,  or  that 
each agent simply experiments occasionally with exogenously fixed probability. In any case, it follows 
that  our  model  features  three  layers  of  randomness:  first,  the  level  of  acceptable  inflation  forecast 
accuracy is randomly and independently determined across agents and over time; second,  the specific 
agents who behave as mutants in each period, which measure is given by a mutation rate which is fixed 
and  independent  across  agents  and  over  time,  are  randomly  drawn  from  the  population;  and  third, 
agents who behave as mutants choose an inflation foresight strategy at random. 

Meanwhile,  a  question  that  arises  is  whether  the  presence  of  mutation  happens  to  prevent 
convergence  towards  a  long-run  equilibrium  configuration  consistent  with  the  achievement  of  the 
natural values of the endogenous macroeconomic variables, and the answer is not necessarily. In fact, it 
turns out that the long-run equilibrium distribution of inflation forecasting strategies across agents and 
its  local  stability  properties  depend  on  whether  the  satisficing  learning  dynamics  are  perturbed  by 
mutation:  in  the  absence  (presence)  of  mutant  agents,  the  long-run  equilibrium  configuration,  which 
may  be  a  local  attractor,  is  characterized  by  the  natural  values  of  the  endogenous  macroeconomic 
variables  and  the  extinction  of  the  perfect  foresight  strategy  (survival  of  both  inflation  forecasting 
strategies). Thus, pervasive perfect foresight is neither a necessary condition for the achievement of the 
natural  values  of  the  rates  of  output  growth,  unemployment  and  inflation,  nor  an  inevitable 
consequence  of  the  achievement  of  these  natural  values.  In  fact,  our  analytical  results  show  that 
heterogeneous  inflation  expectations  on  the  part  of  agents  need  not  necessarily  thwart  the  successful 
handling of stabilization policy-making. This is actually the case even when inflation expectations are 
not only formed heterogeneously but also, as a direct consequence of the propensity of decision makers 
to  switch  between  inflation  forecasting  strategies  according  to  evolutionarily  satisficing  criteria, 
endogenously time-varying. 

The  remainder  of  the  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  The  next  section  presents  the  motivating 
empirical  evidence  and  briefly  discusses  (and  broadly  compares  the  present  contribution  to)  a 
representative  sample  of  the  related  literature,  while  Section  3  lays  out  the  structure  of  the  basic 
macroeconomic  model  on  which  our  investigation  is  based.  Section  4  explores  the  consequences  for 
macroeconomic stability properties in the long-run equilibrium of heterogeneous inflation expectations 
that  market  participants  switch  between  as  described  by  evolutionarily  satisficing  learning  dynamics 
with and without mutation. Section 5 then concludes. 

2. Motivating evidence and related literature 

The  extensive  empirical  literature  on  inflation  expectations  formation  can  be  divided  into  two 
groups depending on the type of evidence used in the investigation: studies based on survey data; and 
laboratory experiments with human subjects. In either case, a common finding is the strong empirical 
support  for  time-varying  heterogeneity  in  inflation  expectations  with  predominance  of  some  form  of 
bounded  rationality  (see,  e.g.,  Duffy,  2008,  and  Hommes,  2011,  2013,  for  thorough  overviews  of 
experiments  dealing  with  formation  of  expectations  about  macroeconomic  variables).  The  principal 
reasons for this heterogeneity that have been suggested in the literature are that market participants rely 
on different models, have access to different information sets, or have different cognitive capacities for 
processing information. 

In the experimental literature, Adam (2007) documents that subjects’ inﬂation expectations are 
not  captured  by  the  rational  expectations  predictor,  whereas  predictors  based  on  lagged  inﬂation 
capture  inﬂation  expectations  quite  well.  Pfajfar  and  Zakelj  (2011)  find  evidence  of  persistent 

 

4 

heterogeneity in the inflation forecasting process both across subjects and time. They find that subjects 
form expectations based on different models, and despite the most popular rule is trend extrapolation, a 
sizable proportion of subjects uses adaptive expectations, adaptive learning (as described in Evans and 
Honkapohja, 2001) or sticky information type models (as proposed in Mankiw and Reis, 2002). Pfajfar 
and  Zakelj  (2014)  find  evidence  that  switching  between  different  rules  to  form  inflation  expectations 
describes  the  behavior  of  subjects  better  than  a  single  rule.  Experimental  evidence  for  persistent 
heterogeneity in inflation expectations is found in Roos and Luhan (2013), who find that adaptive and 
static  (or  naïve)  inflation  expectations  are  often  observed.  Heterogeneous  and  time-varying  inflation 
expectations have also been found in studies based on survey data. Mankiw, Reis and Wolfers (2004) 
and  Pfajfar  and  Santoro  (2010)  use  US  survey  data  to  find  considerable  heterogeneity  in  inflation 
expectations,  and  Blanchflower  and  MacCoille  (2009)  use  UK  survey  data  to  find  strong  support  for 
heterogeneous and backward-looking inflation expectations.  

 
The  literature  also  features  macroeconomic  models  with  heterogeneous  inflation  expectations 
from  which  predictions  are  sometimes  tested  empirically.  Branch  (2004)  develops  a  model  where 
agents form their forecasts of inflation by selecting a predictor from a set of costly alternatives whereby 
they may rationally choose a method other than the most accurate due to an inherent inclination to use 
one  predictor  over  another.  Agents  are  nonetheless  seen  as  rationally  heterogeneous  in  that  each 
predictor  choice  is  optimal  for  them;  strictly  speaking,  agents’  expectations  are  seen  as  boundedly 
rational  and  consistent  with  optimizing  behavior.  In  our  framework,  agents’  expectations  are  seen  as 
boundedly  rational  precisely  because  they  are  instead  consistent  with  satisficing  behavior;  in  sum, 
agents are seen instead as satisficingly heterogeneous. In Brazier et al. (2008) and De Grauwe (2010), 
agents employ two heuristics to forecast inflation: one is based on one-period lagged inflation, the other 
on  the  official  inflation  target.  While  in  both  models  heuristic  switching  is  described  by  a  discrete 
choice model à la Brock and Hommes (1997), in the model herein agents switch between  forecasting 
strategies  as  described  by  evolutionarily  satisficing  learning  dynamics  with  and  without  mutation. 
Branch  and  McGough  (2010)  embed  predictor  selection  in  a  model  with  heterogeneity  in  inflation 
forecasts.  They  follow  Brock  and  Hommes  (1997)  in  setting  the  degree  of  heterogeneity  to 
endogenously  vary  over  time  depending  on  past  forecast  errors  (net  of  a  fixed  cost).  Agents  choose 
between a costly rational predictor and a costless adaptive predictor. In our model, in turn, the choice of 
inflation  foresight  strategy  involves  costly  rational  and  costless  trend-following  foresight  strategies, 
with agents  switching between strategies  as described by  evolutionarily  satisficing learning dynamics 
rather than the discrete choice model set forth in Brock and Hommes (1997). 

Our  contribution  is  mostly  related  to  the  model  set  forth  in  Lines  and  Westerhoff  (2010),  in 
which  the  interplay  between  heterogeneity  in  inflation  expectations  and  the  coupled  dynamics  of 
inflation, output growth and unemployment is explored. Agents switch between trend-following (which 
is costless ex ante) and perfect foresight (which is costly ex ante) strategies to predict future inflation, 
and the fractions of agents using one or the other inflation predictor is updated over time as described 
by  the  discrete  choice  model  in  Brock  and  Hommes  (1997).  The  authors  show  analytically  that  the 
unique equilibrium of inflation, output growth and unemployment features the natural values of these 
macroeconomic variables, but this equilibrium outcome loses stability through a bifurcation at a critical 
value  which  depends  on  the  cost  associated  with  perfect  foresight  and  the  parameter  measuring  how 
sensitive agents are to selecting the most attractive predictor. The authors also do numerical simulations 
of the model to explore its global dynamic behavior and investigate conditions under which it leads to 
endogenous, complex fluctuations in macroeconomic variables and the proportions of agents using one 
or the other predictor. 

Our  contribution  differs  from  the  interesting  one  offered  in  Lines  and  Westerhoff  (2010)  in 
several  broad  respects (a comparison  of specific  results is  effected in  Section 4). First,  although  both 
contributions  employ  the  same  dynamic  macroeconomic  model  (which  features  Okun’s  law,  an 
expectations-augmented  Phillips  curve  and  an  aggregate  demand  relation),  the  two  corresponding 
models  differ  considerably  in  the  manner  they  incorporate  the  empirical  evidence  documented  in 
Branch  (2004)  that  inflation  forecast  errors  must  exceed  a  threshold  in  order  to  induce  a  switch  of 

 

5 

inflation predictors.  Lines and Westerhoff (2010) follow the suggestion made in Branch (2004, 2007) 
to treat the cost associated with the use of a predictor in the Brock and Hommes (1997) framework as 
also  reflecting  (along  with  information  collection  and  processing  costs)  such  inertial  behavior  (or 
predisposition effect) based on acceptable ranges of forecast errors. In our model, although we maintain 
the  assumption  made  in  Lines  and  Westerhoff  (2010)  that  there  is  an  ex  ante  cost  associated  with 
perfect  inflation  foresight,  the  inertial  behavior  found  empirically  in  Branch  (2004)  is  modeled  more 
characteristically  by  appealing  to  Herbert  Simon’s  intuitively  suggestive  notion  of  satisficing  choice 
behavior. Indeed, this cogent notion conceives of choice as intending to meet an acceptability threshold 
rather than to select the best of all possible alternatives, which makes it a representative way to model 
inertial  behavior  arising  from  acceptable  ranges  of  forecast  errors.  Also,  we  treat  the  threshold  effect 
found empirically in Branch (2004) as randomly agent-specific. In Brock and Hommes (1997), agents 
use  a  discrete  choice  model  to  select  a  predictor  where  the  deterministic  part  of  the  utility  of  the 
predictor  is  the  performance  measure,  and  the  intensity  of  choice  parameter  specifies  how  good  a 
measure  the  deterministic  component  is  of  the  predictor  utility.  While  the  standard  discrete  choice 
model  features  deterministic  and  random  individual-specific  characteristics,  in  our  model  the  payoff 
associated with an inflation foresight strategy features a deterministic component and a random agent-
specific  error-tolerance  threshold.  Yet  in  our  model  such  random  component  is  not  random  shocks 
faced by  agents, but instead random agent-specific error-acceptance (or, equivalently, error-tolerance) 
thresholds; although  in  both  models the random  component  affects  the payoff of each of the possible 
choices.  Incidentally,  as it turns out,  our satisficing  evolutionary  choice dynamics with  agent-specific 
acceptable  prediction  errors  that  are  randomly  and  independently  distributed  across  agents  and  over 
time can be seen as in keeping with the following suggestion in Branch (2004): “It would be fruitful for 
future  research  to  examine  a  ‘richer’  dynamical  structure  then  the  model  at  hand.  One  possible 
accounting  for  the  inertia  finding  is  that  a  predictor  choice  in  period 
 is  not  independent  from  the 
choice in 
. The serial correlation could be the result of time-varying random costs or random utility 
shocks.” (p. 616) 

Second, in Lines and Westerhoff (2010) the frequency distribution of inflation predictors in the 
population of agents evolves over time as described by the predictor switching mechanism set forth in 
Brock  and  Hommes  (1997),  while  in  our  model  this  frequency  distribution  follows  evolutionarily 
satisficing learning dynamics with and without mutation. As a result, in Lines and Westerhoff (2010), 
as in Brock and Hommes (1997), for a strictly positive and finite intensity of choice (or intensity with 
which firms  react  to  increases in  relative net  benefit) and information cost,  there is  a strictly positive 
share of firms using the strictly dominated perfect foresight strategy even in the long-run equilibrium. 
In our model, in turn, with a strictly positive and finite information cost and the absence of mutation, a 
strictly  dominated  inflation  foresight  strategy  inevitably  vanishes  asymptotically.  In  our  model, 
therefore, the long-run evolutionarily satisficing equilibrium configuration is characterized either by all 
firms  playing  the  trend-following  extrapolative  foresight  strategy  (in  the  absence  of  mutation)  or  by 
most firms playing such strategy (in the presence of mutation). In either situation, however, as in Lines 
and  Westerhoff  (2010),  the  long-run  equilibrium  is  characterized  by  the  natural  values  of  the  output 
growth, unemployment and inflation being achieved. 

Third, the role played by mutation in our model is analytically analogous to the one played by a 
finite  intensity  of  choice  in  the  discrete  choice  framework  followed  in  Lines  and  Westerhoff  (2010). 
The  analogy  arises  because  in  both  cases  the  implication  is  that  not  all  agents  will  select  the  best 
performing  inflation  predictor  as  reflected  in  the  corresponding  relative  net  attractiveness,  but  the 
underlying  rationale  is  different  in  each  model.  Lines  and  Westerhoff  (2010)  define  the  intensity  of 
choice  as  a  measure  of  how  sensitive  agents  are  to  selecting  the  most  attractive  predictor.  In  our 
satisficing choice framework, meanwhile, a mutant is either an agent who exits the economy with fixed 
probability and is replaced with a new agent who is unfamiliar with predictor choice, or an agent who 
experiments occasionally with fixed probability. In either case, a mutant  agent chooses each available 
predictor  with  equal  probability.  Besides,  recall  that  Brock  and  Hommes  (1997)  and  Branch  (2004) 
define the intensity of choice as a measure of how fast agents switch predictors for a given change in 

 

6 

t1trelative net benefit. Therefore, in the context of a discrete choice framework, one might suggest that it 
would be more representative to treat the evidence of inertia (or predisposition effect) found in Branch 
(2004) not as a component of the cost associated with the use of a predictor, but instead as a reflection 
of a finite intensity of choice. In fact, Branch (2004) concedes that the assumption of a finite intensity 
of  choice  is  a  simple  way  to  incorporate  inertia.  Besides,  although  Branch  (2004)  declares  to  have 
found  separate  evidence  of  a  finite  intensity  of  choice  and  inertia  stemming  from  the  costs,  he 
acknowledges that this inertia may be a reflection of agents’ ‘inattentiveness’, as emphasized in Brock 
and Hommes (1997), and that his findings support a rich variety of behavior. In this context, our model 
suggests  an  alternative  explanation  of  predictor  choice  behavior  based  on  satisficing  evolutionary 
learning which is consistent with these findings.1 

Fourth, the model in  Lines and Westerhoff (2010) can  exhibit  local  instability of the long-run 
equilibrium  and  complicated  global  equilibrium  dynamics,  while  in  our  model  (with  and  without 
mutation) the long-run evolutionary equilibrium configuration is unique and possibly locally stable. In 
Lines and Westerhoff (2010), as in  Brock and Hommes (1997), a rational  choice between  a cheap  ex 
ante  destabilizing  (boundedly  rational)  predictor  and  a  costly  ex  ante  (perfect  foresight)  stabilizing 
predictor  leads  to  the  existence  of  complicated  dynamics  when  the  intensity  of  choice  to  switch 
predictors is high. In fact, the model in Lines and Westerhoff (2010) shows that with information costs 
it  may  be  rational  for  firms  to  select  methods  other  than  perfect  foresight,  with  the  conflict  between 
cheap  free  riding  and  costly  sophisticated  prediction  being  a  potential  source  of  instability  and 
complicated global dynamics. In our model, meanwhile, the evolutionary competition between costless 
ex  ante  bounded  rationality  and  costly  ex  ante  sophisticated  inflation  prediction  may  be  a  source  of 
local  stability  even  if  there  is  exogenous  mutation.  Thus,  although  instability  is  inherent  in  such 
circumstances when more sophisticated prediction methods are more expensive (Brock and Hommes, 
1997),  the  evolutionarily  satisficing  learning  suggested  in  this  paper  may  take  the  strategy-revision 
process to a locally stable long-run equilibrium with either the majority or all agents playing a costless 
ex ante trend-following extrapolative foresight strategy.2 

3. The model 

3.1. The macroeconomic setting 

As in Lines and Westerhoff (2010), for comparability of results, the macromodel on which the 

 
analysis in this paper is conducted can be stated as follows: 

(1) 

 

, 

                                                           
1 Speaking of ‘inattentiveness’, Lima and Silveira (2015) provide evolutionary game-theoretic micro-foundations 
to the nominal adjustment of the price level in response to a monetary shock by introducing an analytical notion 
dubbed ‘boundedly rational inattentiveness’. A firm can pay a cost (featuring a random component) to update its 
information set and establish the optimal price or use costless non-updated information to set a lagged optimal 
price. The distribution of information-updating strategies across firms and the extent of the nominal adjustment 
of the price level to a monetary shock co-evolve according to evolutionary dynamics. While in Lima and Silveira 
(2015) the population dynamics is driven by an asymmetric evolutionary protocol (only firms that do not pay the 
information-updating  cost rely  on random  pairwise  comparisons  of  losses), in the  model  herein the  population 
dynamics  is  governed  by  a  satisficing  evolutionary  protocol  based  on  random  agent-specific  acceptable 
prediction errors. 
2 In most of the above respects, our model likewise differs from the one in Lines and Westerhoff (2012), which 
is  closely  related  (and  obtains  qualitative  results  similar)  to  Lines  and  Westerhoff  (2010).  These  two 
contributions employ the same macroeconomic model and specify inflation predictor switching following Brock 
and Hommes (1997). Yet in Lines and Westerhoff (2012) extrapolative expectations are paired with regressive 
expectations  (which  predict  the  return  of  inflation  towards  its  normal  value)  as  costly  predictor  instead  of 
rational expectations. Even so, the associated cost is again supposed to reflect a predisposition effect in addition 
to information collection and processing. 

 

7 

1()tttnuugg(2) 

(3) 

 

 

, 

, 

where 

 denotes  the  unemployment  rate  in  period 

, 

 represents  the  natural  (or  normal) 

unemployment  rate, 

 is  the  output  growth  rate  in  period 

, 

 is  the  natural  (or  normal)  output 

growth rate, 

 stands for the nominal money growth rate, which is exogenously fixed, 

 is the actual 

rate of inflation in period 

, 

 is the aggregate expected rate of inflation for period 

, which is formed 

by agents in period 
, and lower case Greek letters denote strictly positive parameters. Equation (1) 
is simply Okun’s law, according to which changes in the rate of unemployment are negatively related 
to the rate of output growth, equation (2) is an expectations-augmented Phillips curve, and equation (3) 
is a simple linear aggregate demand relation. 

Inserting (2) into (3) and the resulting expressions into (1), we get: 

(4) 

where 

(5) 

 

 

 is the natural (or normal) inflation rate. Substituting (4) in (2), we obtain: 

, 

. 

Consequently,  for  a  given  vector  of  structural  and  policy  parameters  represented  by

,  the  state  transition  of  the  unemployment  rate  and  the  actual  inflation  rate 

depends not only on the current unemployment rate, but also on the aggregate expected inflation. 

3.2. Inflation expectations formation 

At a  given period 

, each agent  either follows the costly  ex ante perfect  foresight  strategy, so 

that her expected rate of inflation is given by: 

(6) 

 

, 

or  follows  a  costless  ex  ante  extrapolative  trend-following  foresight  strategy  and  form  inflation 
expectations given by: 

(7) 

 

, 

where 

 is  a  parameter.  Hence,  again  for  comparability  of  results,  the  two  available  inflation 

foresight strategies are also the same as in Lines and Westerhoff (2010). 

At a given period t there is a fraction 

 of the population of agents, which may vary 

from  one period to  the next  one, forming  extrapolative trend-following inflation expectations, that is, 
they  use  the  bounded  rationality  inflation  predictor  in  (7).  We  refer  to  this  type  of  agent  as  an 
extrapolative forecaster. The remaining fraction, 
, is made up of fully informed agents that pay an 

exogenously  fixed  and  strictly  positive  ex  ante  cost  to  play  the  perfect  foresight  strategy  in  (6).  We 
refer to this type of agent as a perfect forecaster. Given this predictor distribution across the population 
of  agents,  the  average  aggregate  expected  rate  of  inflation  rate  can  then  be  expressed  as  a  weighted 
average of these two predictors as follows: 

(8) 

 

. 

 

8 

()etttnuuttgmtutnutgtngmttett1t11()()11etntntnuuuunnmg11()()11etntntnuu(,,,)nnnumgtRtt112()Etttt[0,1]tx1tx11(1)eERtttttxxTherefore,  the  cost  associated  with  perfect  foresight  is  actually  the  cost  associated  with  a  potential 
heterogeneity  in  the  choice  of  inflation  forecasting  strategy  across  agents.  In  fact,  as  shown  in  (8), 
playing  the  perfect  inflation  foresight  strategy  inevitably  requires  perfectly  knowing  the  frequency 
distribution of inflation forecasting strategies across agents. 

Using (6), (7) and (8), the gap between the average aggregate expected rate of inflation and the 

natural (or normal) rate of inflation can be expressed as follows: 

(9) 

 

. 

3.3 Average inflation expectations dynamics as evolutionarily satisficing learning 

Although the frequency distribution of predictors is predetermined at a given period 

, it evolves 
over  time  according  to  evolutionarily  satisficing  learning  dynamics.  Yet,  as  in  Lines  and  Westerhoff 
(2010), we assume that agents strictly prefer inflation predictors with a high forecasting accuracy and, 
therefore,  rely  on  squared  prediction  error  as  a  (publicly  observable)  fitness  measure.  Following  the 
nomenclature  in  Lines  and  Westerhoff  (2010),  the  attractiveness  of  the  extrapolative  trend-following 
forecasting strategy can be defined as follows: 

(10) 

 

. 

Given (6), it follows that 

. Thus, the attractiveness  of the perfect  foresight  strategy, as in 

Lines and Westerhoff (2010), is given by: 

(11) 

 

, 

where 

 stands  for  the  exogenously  fixed  cost  associated  with  playing  the  perfect  foresight 

strategy,  as  this  playing  behavior  does  necessitate  knowing  the  frequency  distribution  of  inflation 
forecasting  strategies  across  agents,  which  is  not  explicitly  acknowledged  in  Lines  and  Westerhoff 
(2010). Moreover, in  our model, more closely in  accordance  with  the evidence in  Branch (2004) that 
inflation  prediction  errors  have  to  exceed  some  threshold  to  induce  predictor  switching,  the 
attractiveness  of  a  prediction  strategy  is  compared  with  the  attractiveness  the  agent  considers 
acceptable. 

Let  us  then  describe  the  evolutionarily  satisficing  learning  dynamics  embedded  in  the  law  of 
, which is in  the spirit of the contributions  of 
motion  of the proportion of extrapolative forecasters, 
Herbert  Simon.3 As  classically  elaborated  by  Simon  (1955,  1956),  satisﬁcing  is  a  theory  of  choice 
centered  on  the  process  through  which  available  alternatives  are  examined  and  evaluated.  By 
conceiving of choice as intending to meet an acceptability threshold rather than to select the best of all 
possible  alternatives,  satisficing  theory  evidently  contrasts  with  optimization  theory.  As  Simon 
persuasively  suggests,  this  contrast  is  analogous  to  ‘looking  for  the  sharpest  needle  in  the  haystack’ 
(i.e.,  optimizing)  versus  ‘looking  for  a  needle  sharp  enough  to  sew  with’  (i.e.,  satisﬁcing)  (Simon, 
1987,  p.  244).  Hence,  as  in  Lines  and  Westerhoff  (2010),  in  our  model  agents  choose  an  inflation 
predictor from a set of alternative predictors whose ex ante cost ordering increases in a predictor’s ex 
ante  precision,  whereas  the  proportion  of  agents  in  the  population  using  a  certain  predictor  varies 
positively  with  a  formally  precise  measure  of  relative  attractiveness.  In  our  model,  however,  as  it  is 
quite plausibly assumed that there is heterogeneity in the choice idiosyncrasies of satisficing agents, an 

                                                           
3 The  formal  derivation  of  this  evolutionarily  satisficing  learning  mechanism  (without  mutation)  is  based  on 
Vega-Redondo (1996, p. 91). 

 

9 

1121[(1)()()](1)()etnttntnttnxxt2()EEttta0Rtt2()RRtttatxacceptable  range  of  prediction  error  is  explicitly  and  separately  modeled  as  randomly  varying  across 
agents.4 

In our specification, an extrapolative forecaster 

and compares it with the attractiveness she considers acceptable, which is denoted by 

 takes the current attractiveness given by (10) 
 

. Taking 

as  the  current  period,  if 

,  the  extrapolative  forecasters 

 considers  changing  her  strategy  for 

forming  inflation  expectations  in 
 becomes  a  strategy  reviser. 
The  attractiveness  that  is  deemed  acceptable  by  an  agent  depends,  inter  alia,  on  her  idiosyncrasies. 
Reasonably,  we  assume  that  the  attribute  of  acceptable  attractiveness  is  randomly  and  independently 

,  that  is,  the  extrapolative  forecaster 

determined across agents and over time. More precisely, we assume that 

 is a random variable 

with  cumulative  distribution  function 

 which  is  continuously  differentiable. 

Consequently,  the  probability  that  a  randomly  drawn  agent 
 in  the  subpopulation  of  extrapolative 
forecasters  will  consider  that  the  currently  observed  attractiveness  of  her  foresight  strategy  is 
unacceptable is simply: 

(12) 

 

. 

The measure of extrapolative forecasters who become perfect forecasters is then given by: 

(13) 

 

. 

Analogously, the measure of perfect forecasters who becomes extrapolative forecasters is given by: 

(14) 

 

. 

Therefore,  the  subtraction  of  (13)  from  (14)  and  use  of  (7),  (10)  and  (11)  yields  the  following 
evolutionarily satisficing learning dynamic: 

(15) 

 

where: 

(16) 

 

, 

, 

which is specified by using (7), (10) and the following auxiliary variables: 

(17) 

 

 and 

. 

As  it  turns  out,  an  increase  in  the  relative  attractiveness  of  the  extrapolative  trend-following 
foresight  strategy  in  the  current  period  (a  decrease  in 
)  leads  to  an  increase  in  the  proportion  of 
agents playing this inflation foresight strategy in the next period, whereas the opposite occurs when the 
relative  attractiveness  of  the  perfect  inflation  foresight  strategy  rises  (a  decrease  in 
).  Thus,  the 
evolutionarily  satisficing  learning  dynamics  in  (15)  reflects  the  operation  of  a  selection  mechanism 
according  to  which  the  proportion  of  agents  playing  a  given  inflation  forecasting  strategy  at  a  given 
period in time varies positively with the relative fitness or attractiveness of such strategy. 
                                                           
4 We  should  note  that  the  model  in  Lines  and  Westerhoff  (2010)  also  features  “a  permanent  evolutionary 
competition  between  the  prediction  rules”  (p.  247).  The  authors  explicitly  allude  to  Simon’s  suggestion  that 
agents  should  be  seen  as  boundedly  rational  when  they  recognize  that  because  agents  “lack  the  cognitive 
capabilities  to  derive  fully  optimal  actions…they  strive  to  do  the  right  thing”  (p.  249).  However,  although the 
gist of Simon’s approach to choice behavior is that decision makers satisfice rather than optimize, the model in 
Lines  and  Westerhoff  (2010)  does  not  incorporate  the  evidence  in  Branch  (2004)  that  inflation  forecast  errors 
have  to  cross  some  threshold  in  order  to  induce  a  switch  by  appealing  to  Simon’s  fitting  notion  of  satisficing 
behavior. 

 

10 

iia1t1iEtaaitiiiaa:[0,1]Fi111PrPr()()iEiEEtttaaaaFa11()EttxFa111111(1)Pr(1)Pr()(1)()iRiRRttttttxaaxaaxFa111111(1)()(,,)tttttttxxxFxFgyz21111111(,,)(1)()()()Etttttntntngyzayz1tty1ttzy()gIn order to  further  enrich the predictor switching process  and  gain  in  analytical  generality, we 
also consider the possibility that the evolutionarily satisficing learning dynamics in (15) operate in the 
presence of a perturbation mechanism, analogous to mutation in natural environments. In a biological 
setting, mutation is interpreted literally as consisting of random changes in genetic codes. In economic 
settings,  as  pointed  out  by  Samuelson  (1997,  Ch.  7),  mutation  refers  to  a  situation  in  which  a  player 
refrains from comparing payoffs and switches strategy at random. Thus, the present extension features 
mutation  as  an  exogenous  perturbation  in  the  evolutionarily  satisficing  learning  mechanism  leading 
some decision makers to choose an inflation foresight strategy at random. Following Kandori, Mailath 
and  Rob  (1993),  two  rationales  can  be  provided  to  this  random  choice.  First,  at  every  period  a  given 
measure of agents exit the economy with some (exogenously fixed) probability and are replaced one-
to-one  with  new  agents  who  happen  to  know  nothing  about  (or  are  relatively  inexperienced  in)  the 
decision-making process in question. Second, each agent simply “experiments” occasionally with some 
exogenously  fixed  probability.  More  generally,  this  noise  component  could  also  capture  the  effect  of 
sporadic exogenous institutional factors such as changes of administration in the monetary authority or 
other changes in the policy-making framework. However, we would have to further assume that these 
changes do not affect the structure of the basic macroeconomic model in (1)-(3) (i.e., these institutional 
changes do not affect the structural stability of the model in (1)-(3)).  

Drawing  on  Gale,  Binmore  and  Samuelson  (1995),  mutation  can  be  incorporated  into  the 
evolutionarily satisficing learning mechanism in  (15) as follows.  Let 
 be the measure of 
mutant agents that choose an inflation foresight strategy in a given revision period independently both 
of their acceptable forecast error and of the attractiveness of the inflation foresight strategy just played. 
Thus,  there  are 
 perfect  forecasters  behaving  as  mutants. 

 extrapolative  forecasters  and 

As  we  assume  that  mutant  agents  choose  either  one  or  the  other  of  the  available  inflation  foresight 
 extrapolative  forecaster  mutant  agents  and 
strategies  with  equal  probability,  there  are  then 

 perfect  forecaster  mutant  agents  changing  foresight  strategy.  The  net  flow  of  mutant 

agents becoming extrapolative forecaster agents in a given revision period, which can be either positive 
or negative, is then the following: 

(18) 

 

. 

Following Gale, Binmore and Samuelson (1995), this exogenous perturbation can be linearly added to 
the  evolutionary  protocol  in  (15)  to  yield  the  following  noisy  evolutionarily  satisficing  learning 
dynamic of the frequency distribution of inflation foresight strategies across agents: 

(19) 

 

. 

4. Behavior of the model in the long-run evolutionary equilibrium 

 
Note  that  the  macrodynamics  of  the  rates  of  output  growth,  unemployment  and  inflation  is 
coupled  with  the  microdynamics  of  the  frequency  distribution  of  inflation  foresight  strategies  across 
firms.  In  fact,  plugging  (9)  into  (5)  and  considering  the  auxiliary  variables  defined  in  (17),  we  can 
establish that: 

(20) 

 

Meanwhile, inserting (20) into (9) and the resulting expressions into (4), we get: 

(21) 

 

 

11 

. 

. 

(0,1)1tx1(1)tx1/2tx1(1)/2tx1111111222tttxxx1111111(1)(1)()(2,,)1ttttttttxxxFxFgyxz111111()(1)()()tntnttntntuuxyx11111(1)()()ttntntntntxuuuuyxAs  a  result,  the  state  transition  of  the  economy  is  determined  by  the  first-order  difference  equation 
system  given  by  (19)-(21)  and  the  auxiliary  variables  defined  in  (17),  which  state  space  is  given  by 

. 

In the following proposition we establish the existence and uniqueness of the evolutionary long-

run equilibrium of the dynamic system given by (19)-(21) and the auxiliary variables defined in (17). 

Proposition  1:  For  a  given  vector  of  parameters 

,  the  dynamic  system 

given by (19)-(21) and the auxiliary variables in (17) has a unique long-run evolutionary equilibrium 

which is given by 

, with 

. 

Proof: See Appendix 1. 

In  the  long-run  evolutionary  equilibrium,  therefore,  the  extrapolative  forecasting  strategy  is 

either  the  only  strategy  to  survive  (

),  in  the  absence  of  mutant  behavior  (

),  or  the  most 

played foresight strategy (

), in the presence of mutation 

. Nonetheless, note that 

the  long-run  equilibrium  values  of  the  endogenous  macroeconomic  variables  (

, 

,  and 

)  are  the 

same in either case. Although pervasive extrapolative inflation foresight (all agents eventually decide to 
follow  the  boundedly  rational  inflation  forecasting  strategy)  is  an  evolutionarily  satisficing  long-run 
equilibrium  outcome  when  mutation  is  absent,  this  equilibrium  configuration  is  nonetheless 
characterized  by  the  natural  values  of  the  rates  of  inflation,  output  growth  and  unemployment  being 
achieved. The intuition is straightforward: when mutation is absent, once the economy converges to the 
long-run equilibrium, the extrapolative foresight strategy fares as well as the perfect foresight strategy, 
but it is less costly. In fact, given the nature of the information imperfection which imposes a cost on 
perfect  foresight,  all  agents  following  the  perfect  foresight  strategy  (
)  is  not  a  long-run 
) is that all agents are paying the cost 
equilibrium. The reason is that the substance of this result (
to  learn  the  measure  of  a  behavioral  heterogeneity  that  simply  does  not  exist.  Meanwhile,  when 

mutation is absent, 
 is  a long-run equilibrium, for the substance of this result is that no agent  is 
paying  the  cost  to  find  out  the  measure  of  a  non-existing  behavioral  heterogeneity.  Therefore,  by  the 
same  logic, 
 is  a  long-run  equilibrium  in  the  presence  of  mutant  agents  because  in  this 
situation there are agents paying a behavioral heterogeneity cost that actually has to be paid. 

As  in  Lines  and  Westerhoff  (2010),  therefore,  in  our  model  the  unique  long-run  equilibrium 
solution  features  the  natural  (or  normal)  values  of  the  macroeconomic  variables  (rates  of  inflation, 
unemployment and output growth). Moreover, in each model the long-run equilibrium solution for the 
frequency  distribution  of  inflation  foresight  strategies  across  agents  depends  on  the  respective  key 
parameters:  information  cost  associated  with  perfect  foresight  and  intensity  of  choice  (in  Lines  and 
Westerhoff,  2010)  and  information  cost  associated  with  perfect  foresight  and  mutation  rate  (in  our 
model).  As  elaborated  in  Section  2,  a  strictly  positive  mutation  rate  is  nonetheless  analytically 
analogous to a finite strictly positive intensity of choice, as they both imply that, due to some source of 
randomness,  not  all  agents  will  select  the  best  performing  predictor  as  reflected  in  the  respective 
relative  net  attractiveness.  In  fact,  we  would  suggest  that  the  rationales  we  have  put  forward  for  the 
presence of mutation may  apply to  (and  add to  the existing justifications for) a finite strictly positive 
intensity of choice. 

While  in  our  model  the  proportion  of  extrapolative  trend-follower  agents  in  the  long-run 
 in  Proposition  1,  the  respective  value  in  Lines  and 

equilibrium  is  given  by  the  expression  for 
Westerhoff (2010, p. 250) is given by: 

(22) 

 

, 

 

12 

511{(,,,,):01,01}tttttttxuyzxu(,,,,,)nnnumg*(,,,,)nnnnxu*(1)()2(1/2,1](1)()FxF*1x0*1/21x(01)ttutg0x0x*1x*1/21x*x1(1/2,1]1ewhere 

 is the intensity of choice and 

 is also the exogenously fixed cost associated with 

 or 

,  it  follows  that  all  agents  choose  the 
playing  the  perfect  foresight  strategy.  In  the  limit  for 
).  Therefore,  as  when 
extrapolative  trend-following  strategy  in  the  long-run  equilibrium  (
mutation  is  absent  in  our  model  (
),  which  is  equivalent  to  the  intensity  of  choice  tending  to 
positive infinity in the Lines and Westerhoff (2010) model, the perfect foresight strategy also ceases to 
be  played  in  the  long-run  equilibrium  (
);  and  this  is  so  no  matter  how  low  happens  to  be  any 
strictly positive ex ante cost associated with playing the perfect foresight strategy. The intuition is that 
in  the limit  for either 
, the long-run equilibrium  is  characterized by both  foresight 
strategies being equally successful in predicting inflation, but whereas the extrapolative trend-following 
strategy does so without any ex ante cost, the perfect foresight strategy does so at a strictly positive ex 
ante cost. Consequently, except in the limit for 
 (in the model in Lines and Westerhoff, 2010) 
or in the limit for 
 (in our model), in the unique long-run equilibrium, which is common to both 
models, although both  strategies are effective in  predicting inflation, there is  nonetheless  a tail  of the 
population of agents that selects the least attractive inflation predictor due to randomness. And, per (10) 
and (11), this least attractive inflation predictor is the perfect foresight one. Meanwhile, as in the limit 
for 
 in  the  model  in  Lines  and  Westerhoff  (2010),  it 
follows that exactly half of the agents play each inflation foresight strategy in the long-run equilibrium. 
The  intuition  is  straightforward:  in  either  case,  agents’  choice  of  inflation  predictor  becomes 
completely random.  

 in  our  model,  in  the  limit  for 

Additionally,  in  the  limit  for 

,  which  substance  is 
that  the  two  available  foresight  strategies  become  equivalent  in  the  long-run  equilibrium  due  to  their 
sharing of the same level of attractiveness. Meanwhile, in the limit for 
, 

,  the  result  obtains  that 

, it follows that 

whereas 
.  Therefore,  in  the  limit  for  the  information  cost  associated  with  the  perfect 
foresight  strategy  tending  to  positive  infinity,  while  such  strategy  fails  to  survive  in  the  long-run 
equilibrium  in  the  Lines  and  Westehoff  (2010)  model,  in  our  model  the  occurrence  of  mutation 
prevents the extinction of such strategy in the long-run equilibrium, albeit in a minority position for any 
.  In  effect,  the  randomness  introduced  by  mutant  behavior  comes  to  rescue  the  perfect 
foresight strategy in such equilibrium configuration where the extrapolative trend-following strategy is 
permanently  relatively  more  attractive.  In  this  situation,  intuitively,  the  higher  the  mutation  rate,  the 
lower the predominance of the extrapolative trend-following strategy in the long-run equilibrium. 

However, a natural question that arises regards whether the dynamic described in (19)-(21) and 
(17) can take the economy to the long-run equilibrium configuration established in Proposition 1. For 
instance,  in  an  economy  with  no  mutant  agents  and  where  initially  there  is  heterogeneity  in  inflation 
expectations, can all agents eventually learn to perfectly predict the rate of inflation, but without having 
to play the costly ex ante perfect foresight strategy? The answer is  yes, as formally established in the 
following proposition. 

Proposition  2:  For  a  given  vector  of  parameters 

,  the  unique  long-run 

evolutionary equilibrium given by 

 of the dynamic system given by (19)-(21) and 

the auxiliary variables in (17) is locally asymptotically stable if 

. 

Proof: See Appendix 2. 

Consequently,  the  predictor  switching  game  explored  in  this  paper  is  subject  to  evolutionary 
learning  dynamics  that  can  take  it  to  a  long-run  equilibrium  configuration  in  which,  albeit  either  the 
majority  or  even  all  agents  choose  to  play  the  extrapolative  foresight  strategy  to  form  inflation 
expectations, the rates of inflation, output growth and unemployment all  achieve their natural  values. 

 

13 

10*1x00100*1/2x1*1/2x(0,1)(,,,,,)nnnumg*(,,,,)nnnnxu**2cxxThus, inflation expectations that are persistently heterogeneous need not prevent the successful conduct 
of macroeconomic stabilization policy through the setting of the growth rate of nominal money by the 
monetary  authority.  Besides,  when  there  is  mutation,  so  that  the  two  available  inflation  forecasting 
strategies  survive  in  the  long-run  equilibrium  solution  (yet  the  extrapolative  forecasting  strategy 
predominates), such long-run equilibrium level of heterogeneity varies expectedly, considering (A-5) in 
Appendix 1, with the ex ante cost associated with perfect foresight and the measure of mutant agents: 

(23) 

(24) 

 

 

, 

. 

Intuitively,  in  the  long-run  equilibrium  configuration  with  coexistence  of  the  two  inflation 
forecasting  strategies,  the  higher  the  ex  ante  cost  associated  with  perfect  foresight,  the  greater  the 
predominance of agents playing the extrapolative foresight strategy (recall from Proposition 1 that, in 
the presence of mutation, the extrapolative forecasting strategy is the most played strategy in the long-

run  evolutionary  equilibrium  (
).  Yet  the  predominance  of  agents  who  select  the 
extrapolative  foresight  strategy  varies  negatively  with  the  rate  of  mutation.  The  intuition  is  that,  the 
greater the random noise in the selection process of inflation forecasting strategy, the greater has to be 
the proportion of perfect forecasters in the long-run equilibrium to ensure that the aggregate expected 
inflation is consistent with the natural rate of inflation.5 

While  in  our  model  the  unique  long-run  evolutionary  equilibrium  is  locally  asymptotically 
 in 

 is lower than the critical value given by the expression for 

stable if the extrapolation parameter 

Proposition 2, the respective critical value in the Lines and Westerhoff (2010, p. 250) model is given by 

.  Intuitively,  in  both  models  the  corresponding  critical  value  for  the  extrapolation 

parameter  varies  positively  with  the  reaction  parameters 
,  and  negatively  with  the  long-run 
equilibrium  value  of  the  proportion  of  extrapolative  trend-following  agents,  which  in  turn  varies 
positively  with  the  information  cost  associated  with  perfect  foresight.  Consequently,  in  the  limit  for 
 (in our model), as all 
agents  choose  the  extrapolative  trend-following  strategy  in  the  common  long-run  equilibrium,  the 
likewise common basin of attraction (or corridor of stability) given by 
 attains its 

 (in the Lines and Westerhoff (2010) model) or in the limit for 

 and 

 in 
smallest  possible size. Meanwhile,  as in  the limit  for 
the  model  in  Lines  and  Westerhoff  (2010)  (or  in  the  limit  for 
 in  both  models),  since  exactly 
half  of  the  agents  choose  each  inflation  foresight  strategy  in  the  long-run  equilibrium,  the  resulting 
 attains its largest possible size. Interestingly, 
common basin of attraction given by 

 in  our model,  in the limit  for 

therefore,  in  both  models  a  larger  extent  of  a  specific  kind  of  randomness  makes  for  a  locally  more 
stability-prone  long-run  equilibrium.  In  fact,  in  both  models  the  critical  value  for  the  extrapolation 
parameter  varies  negatively  with  the  long-run  equilibrium  value  of  the  proportion  of  extrapolative 
trend-following  agents,  which  in  turn  varies  negatively  with  the  extent  of  randomness  in  inflation 
predictor  switching  as  measured  respectively  by  the  mutation  rate  and  intensity  of  choice  (recall  that 
our  model  features  three  layers  of  randomness,  of  which  the  distribution  of  tolerable  prediction 
inaccuracy across agents is the only one unrelated to mutation). 
                                                           
5 Moreover,  since  the  stable  eigenvalue  corresponding  to  the  evolutionarily  satisficing  learning  dynamics  is 
given by 
 (see Appendix 2), the lower is the measure of mutant agents or the higher is the 

ex ante cost associated with perfect inflation foresight, the lower is the speed of convergence of the frequency 
distribution  of  inflation  forecasting  strategies  to  its  long-run  equilibrium  configuration.  The  intuition  is  that 
perfect forecasters play a crucial role in guiding the evolutionarily satisficing learning dynamics. 

 

14 

*2(1)()02[(1)()]xFF*2()02[(1)()]]xFF*1/21xc2LWc00.5(1)LWcc1000.5LWcc1(1)[1()]FMoreover, in our model, when mutant behavior is absent (

the  extrapolation  parameter 

is  given  by 

), the resulting critical value for 
than 

is  strictly 

lower 

,  which 

 for  any 

 and 

 in  the  Lines  and  Westerhoff  (2010) 

model.  In  words,  in  the  absence  of  mutation,  the  long-run  equilibrium  in  our  model  is  more  locally 
instability-prone  than  the  long-run  equilibrium  in  the  Lines  and  Westerhoff  (2010)  model  with  any 
strictly finite intensity of choice and information cost. In the latter model, however, either in the limit 
, the critical value for the extrapolation parameter is given by 
for 
 in 

, which is strictly lower than 

 or in the limit for 

 for any 

 and 

our model, since in  that case 
.  In words, when the model in  Lines and Westerhoff 
(2010)  features  either  the  intensity  of  choice  or  the  information  cost  tending  to  positive  infinity,  its 
long-run  equilibrium  becomes  more  locally  instability-prone  than  the  long-run  equilibrium  in  our 
model with any strictly positive mutation rate and any (even if extreme-value) information cost.6 

Meanwhile, when the information cost attached to perfect foresight, the intensity of choice and 
), so 
the rate of mutation all assume non-extreme values (that is, 
that 
, respectively, in both models the extent of the long-run predominance 
of  extrapolative  trend-followers  varies  positively  (and  hence  the  size  of  the  basin  of  attraction  of  the 
respective  unique  long-run  equilibrium  varies  negatively)  with  the  information  cost  associated  with 
perfect  foresight.  In  fact,  as  discussed  earlier,  in  the  limit  for 
 and 

,  it  follows  that 

 and 

 and 

, 

 in  that  limit.  Meanwhile,  in  the  limit  for 

,  it  follows  that 

 and 

 

in that limit. Moreover, in the limit for 
 (which strictly 
positive value, in the presence of mutation, intuitively varies positively with the mutation rate) in that 
 for a sufficiently high value of the information cost 
limit. Consequently, it follows that 

, it then follows that 

associated  with  perfect  foresight,  which  implication  that 

 means  that  the  unique  long-run 

equilibrium in our model is locally more stability-prone than the (also unique) long-run equilibrium in 
the  Lines  and  Westerhoff  (2010)  model  when  the  information  cost  associated  with  perfect  foresight 
becomes relatively high. 

Note, however, that it is not possible to unambiguously evaluate how the difference in terms of 
 varies  with  the  information  cost  associated  with 

local  stability  properties  as  expressed  by 

perfect foresight. In fact, this difference is given by: 

(25) 

 

, 

which varies with the information cost associated with perfect foresight according to: 

(26) 

 

, 

which sign is ambiguous. Considering (A-5), (22) and (25), in the limit for 

 and 

 in  that  limit,  so  that 

, it follows that both 
 in  that  limit,  which  implies  that  in  both 

                                                           
6 Arguably,  mutant agents, who are presently assumed to play either one or the other of the inflation foresight 
strategies  with  equal  probability,  might  eventually  switch  to  playing  the  extrapolative  strategy  with  higher 
probability as the information cost associated with perfect foresight would become to be considered too high. In 
fact, an agent might even become reluctant to intentionally behave as mutant for experimentation reasons in such 
situation.  However  interesting,  we  abstract  from  these  analytical  possibilities  in  our  paper  and  leave  them  for 
future research. Incidentally, the robust empirical evidence provided in Branch (2004, 2007) is that the intensity 
of choice and information costs are both finite. 

 

15 

00.5(1)c0.51(1)LWce000.5(1)LWc**()/2cxx010*01/21x00011/21*1/21x01/2*1/2x1*1/2x*()/20x*1/21xLWccLWcc122(1)()LWcceF2'()1(1)()2[2(1)()]LWccFeF01/2*1/2x()0LWccmodels the common basin of attraction of the common unique long-run equilibrium attains its largest 
possible size in that limit. Meanwhile, in the limit for 
 

, it follows that 

 and 

in  that  limit,  which  then  implies  that 

 (which  intuitively  varies  positively  with  the 

rate of mutation) in that limit. As a result, it follows that 

 (and hence 

) for a sufficiently 

high value of the information cost associated with perfect foresight. 

5. Conclusion 

The empirical motivation for this paper comes from two series of evidence on the formation of 
inflation  expectations.  First,  inflation  expectations  are  endogenously  time-varying,  persistently 
heterogeneous  across  decision  makers  and  formed  mostly  through  boundedly  rational  procedures. 
Second,  inflation  forecast  errors  may  have  to  pass  some  threshold  before  decision  makers  decide  to 
abandon  their  previously  selected  inflation  predictor.  Against  this  backdrop,  the  intended  theoretical 
contribution  of  this  paper  lies  primarily  in  the  exploration  of  macroeconomic  implications  of 
heterogeneous inflation expectations which are endogenously time-varying according to evolutionarily 
satisficing learning dynamics subject to a random noise analogous to mutation in natural environments. 
In the alternative modeling approach to inertia in inflation predictor switching devised in this paper, a 
key role is played by Herbert Simon’s understanding of choice as intending to meet some acceptability 
threshold  rather  than  to  select  the  best  of  all  possible  alternatives,  hence  the  core  idea  of  satisficing 
instead of optimal choice. 

In  a  specification  of  inflation  predictor  choice  featuring  perfect  foresight  in  competition  with 
extrapolative  trend-following,  we  find  that  the  frequency  distribution  of  prediction  strategies  across 
agents  in  the  long-run  equilibrium  depends  on  the  relative  importance  of  an  objective  measure  of 
accuracy in inflation prediction as compared to random components operating at different layers of the 
predictor  choice  process.  Also,  there  is  a  definite  relationship  between  the  frequency  distribution  of 
inflation  prediction  strategies  and  the  local  stability  properties  as  two  distinct  features  of  the  unique 
long-run  equilibrium,  which  is  characterized  by  the  endogenous  macroeconomic  variables  at  their 
natural  values  and  at  least  exactly  one  half  of  the  population  of  agents  playing  the  extrapolative 
strategy.  In  fact,  the  higher  the  proportion  of  extrapolative  trend-following  agents  in  the  long-run 
equilibrium,  the  less  locally  stability-prone  it  is  such  evolutionary  equilibrium.  Meanwhile,  the  more 
inflation predictor choice is subject to random disturbance, the lower is the proportion of extrapolative 
trend-following  agents  in  the  long-run  equilibrium  outcome.  Thus,  randomness  in  inflation  predictor 
choice plays a locally stabilizing role in our suggested evolutionarily satisficing learning dynamics. 

Finally, we have suggested the notion of evolutionarily satisficing learning in  the context  of a 
given dynamic macroeconomic model and applied it to the exploration of the specific but relevant issue 
of whether endogenously time-varying (and eventually persistent) heterogeneity in strategies to predict 
inflation is necessarily detrimental to successful stabilization policy, which answer was found to be no. 
However,  the  likely  prospect  that  other  instances  of  choice  behavior  are  also  subject  to  satisficing 
learning deserves future investigation. 

References 

Adam,  K.  (2007)  Experimental  evidence  on  the  persistence  of  output  and  inflation,  The  Economic 
Journal, 117(520), 603–636. 

Blanchflower,  D.  G.  and  MacCoille,  C.  (2009)  The  formation  of  inflation  expectations:  an  empirical 
analysis for the UK, NBER Working Paper 15388, September. 

Branch, W. A. (2004) The theory of rationally heterogeneous expectations: evidence from survey data 
on inflation expectations, The Economic Journal, 114(497), pp. 592–621. 

Branch,  W.  A.  (2007)  Sticky  information  and  model  uncertainty  in  survey  data  on  inflation 
expectations, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 31(1), pp. 245–276. 

 

16 

1*1/2x*()/20x*xLWccBranch,  W.  and  McGough,  B.  (2010)  Dynamic  predictors  selection  in  a  New  Keynesian  model  with 
heterogeneous expectations, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 34(8), pp. 1492–1508. 

Brazier,  A.,  Harrison,  R.,  King,  M.  and  Yates,  T.  (2008)  The  danger  of  inflating  expectations  of 
macroeconomic  stability:  heuristic  switching  in  an  overlapping  generations  monetary  model, 
International Journal of Central Banking, 4, pp. 219–254. 

Brock, W. A. and de Fontnouvelle, P. (2000) Expectational diversity in monetary economies,  Journal 
of Economic Dynamics & Control, 24(5-7), pp. 725-759. 

Brock, W. A. and Hommes, C. H. (1997) A Rational route to randomness, Econometrica, 65, pp. 1059–
1160. 

De Grauwe, P. (2010) Animal spirits and monetary policy, Economic Theory, pp. 1-35. 

Duffy,  J.  (2008)  Experimental  macroeconomics,  in:  Durlauf,  S.  and  Blume,  L.  (eds.)  New  Palgrave 
Dictionary of Economics, New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 

Evans,  G.  and  Honkapohja,  S.  (2001)  Learning  and  expectations  in  macroeconomics,  Princeton: 
Princeton University Press. 

Farebrother,  R.  W.  (1973)  Simplified  Samuelson  conditions  for  cubic  and  quartic  equations,  The 
Manchester School, pp. 396-400. 

Gale, J., Binmore, K. and Samuelson, L. (1995) Learning to be imperfect: the ultimatum game, Games 
and Economic Behavior, 8(1), pp. 56-90. 

Hommes,  C.  H.  (2011)  The  heterogeneous  expectations  hypothesis:  some  evidence  from  the  lab, 
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 35, pp. 1–24. 

Hommes,  C.  H.  (2013)  Behavioral  rationality  and  heterogeneous  expectations  in  complex  economic 
systems, Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press. 

Kandori, M., Mailath, G. J. and Rob, R. (1993) Learning, mutation, and long run equilibria in games, 
Econometrica, 61(1), pp. 29-56. 

Lima,  G.  T.  and  Silveira,  J. J.  (2015)  Monetary  neutrality  under  evolutionary  dominance  of  bounded 
rationality, Economic Inquiry, 53(2), pp. 1108-1131. 

Lines, M. and Westerhoff, F. (2010) Inflation expectations and macroeconomic dynamics: the case of 
rational  versus  extrapolative  expectations,  Journal  of  Economic  Dynamics  and  Control,  34,  pp.  246-
257. 

Mankiw, N. G. and Reis, R. (2002) Sticky information versus sticky prices: a proposal to  replace the 
New Keynesian Phillips curve, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(4), pp. 1295-1328. 

Mankiw, N. G., Reis, R. and Wolfers, J.  (2004) Disagreement about inflation expectations, in: NBER 
Macroeconomics Annual 2003, v. 18, pp. 209-270. 

Pfajfar, D. and Zakelj, B. (2011) Inflation expectations and monetary policy design: evidence from the 
laboratory, Tilburg University CentER Discussion Papers, 2011-2091. 

Pfajfar, D. and Zakelj, B. (2014) Experimental evidence on inflation expectation formation, Journal of 
Economic Dynamics and Control, 44, pp. 147-168. 

Roos, M. W. and Luhan, W. J. (2013) Information, learning and expectations in an experimental model 
economy, Economica, 80(319), pp. 513-31. 

Samuelson,  L.  (1997)  Evolutionary  Games  and  Equilibrium  Selection,  Cambridge,  MA:  The  MIT 
Press. 

 

17 

Simon H. A. (1955) A behavioral model of rational choice, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 69(1), pp. 
99–118. 

Simon H. A. (1956) Rational choice  and the structure of the environment,  Psychological Review,  63, 
pp. 129–138. 

Simon H. A. (1987) Satisﬁcing, in: Eatwell J., Milgate, M. and Newman, P. (eds.) The New Palgrave: 
A Dictionary of Economics, Vol. 4, New York: Stockton Press. 

Vega-Redondo, F. (1996) Evolution, Games and Economic Behaviour, Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press. 

 

Appendix 1: Proof of Proposition 1 

An evolutionary long-run equilibrium of the dynamic system given by (19)-(21) and (17) should satisfy 

the  conditions  given  by 

, 

,  and 

 for  any 

. Therefore, we can use (20) and (21) to establish that: 

(A-1)   

(A-2)   

, 

. 

It is easy to see that for any given 

 there is a unique solution for the homogeneous linear 

system (A-1)-(A-2), given by 

, such that: 

(A-3)   

 and 

. 

Considering (A-3), it follows that 

. Therefore, based on (17), we have that 

 and 

 in  the  long-run  evolutionary  equilibrium.  As  a  result, 

considering (16), it follows that 

 in the long-run equilibrium 

solution.  From  the  noisy  evolutionarily  satisficing  learning  dynamic  in  (19),  the  following  condition 
has then to be satisfied: 

(A-4)   

. 

The solution for this condition is given by: 

(A-5)   

. 

Let  us  prove  that 
follows that 

(A-6)    

for all 

, and: 

(A-7)    

 

 for  all 

.  Since 

 and 

,  it 

. Therefore, we can use the latter inequality to establish that: 

, 

, 

18 

*1ttxxx1ttuuu*123tttt{1,2,3,...}t**()()0nnuu***()()0nnxuu*[0,1]x**0nnuu*n*nuu123ttttn12ttny123tttnzy1111(,,)(0)0EttttFaFgyzF**1(1)(1)()02xFx*(1)()2(1)()FxF*(1/2,1]x[0,1)[0,1)()(0,1)F(1)()0F*(1)()212(1)()(1)()(1)()2FFFxF[0,1)*(1)()]2(1)()2(1)()1(1)()]FFFxFfor  all 

.  Finally,  it  is  easy  to  check  that 

 for 

.  This  completes  the  proof  that 

there  is  one,  and  only  one,  equilibrium  solution 

 of  the  system  represented  by 

(19)-(21) and (17). 

 

 

Appendix 2: Proof of Proposition 2 

Consider the Jacobian matrix of the  linearization around the evolutionary  long-run equilibrium of the 
system given by (19)-(21) and (17): 

(A-8)   

. 

 be an eigenvalue of the Jacobian matrix (A-8) and 

Let 
the following characteristic equation of the linearization around the equilibrium: 

 the 

 identity matrix. We can then set 

(A-9)   

. 

We can use the Laplace expansion to express (A-9) as follows: 

(A-10)  

. 

Consequently,  two  of  the  eigenvalues  can  already  be  explicitly  determined,  which  are  given  by 
,  it  follows  that 

.  Given  that 

 and 

 and 

. 

Considering (A-10), the remaining eigenvalues have to satisfy: 

 

19 

(0,1)*1x0*(,,,,)nnnnxu************(1)1()0000(1)00(,,,,)(1)000100000010nnnnFxxxxxJxuxxxxxxI55***********(1)1()0000(1)00(1)0001000001FxxxxxJIxxxxxx***********(1)(1)(1)1()010xxxxxxxxJIFxxx1(1)[1()]F20[0,1)()(0,1)F101(A-11)  

, 

which can be re-written as: 

(A-11-a) 

where: 

(A-12)  

, 

, 

, and 

. 

Given  (A-11-a),  we  can  then  make  use  of  a  set  of  stability  conditions  for  a  third  order  characteristic 
equation  to  determine  if  the  remaining  three  eigenvalues  are  inside  the  unit  circle.  In  fact,  based  on 
Farebrother  (1973,  p.  397,  inequalities  3),  we  can  then  establish,  as  done  in  Lines  and  Westerhoff 
(2010, p. 256), the following set of necessary and sufficient for the cubic polynomial (A.11-a) to have 
roots that are strictly smaller than one in absolute value: 

(A-13)  

, 

, 

, and 

. 

Inserting (A-12) into (A-13), we obtain: 

(A-14)  

(A-15)  

(A-16)  

(A-17)  

, 

, 

. 

, if 

, 

Therefore, if 

, all the eigenvalues of (A-10) are strictly less than one in absolute value, 

so the equilibrium configuration given by 

 of the system given by (19)-(21) and 

(17) is locally asymptotically stable. 

 

 

 

 

20 

***********(1)(1)010xxxxxxxxxxx320abc**(2)xax**(12)xbx**xcx10abc10abc210bacc330abc*10abcx**4(1)10xabcx**2*2[2]10()xxbaccx**2cxx*3330abcx**2cxx*(,,,,)nnnnxu