THE FOUNDATION AND EARLY YEARS OF THE ASSOCIATION FOR EVOLUTIONARY 

ECONOMICS AND ALLAN GRUCHY’S INSTITUTIONALISM 

 

Felipe Almeida 
Universidade Federal do Paraná 

 
 

 
 
Resumo 

Área 1 - História do Pensamento Econômico e Metodologia 

Geralmente,  estudos  da  história  do  pensamento  econômico  sobre  o  institucionalismo 
americano  focam  nos  seus  fundadores  –  principalmente,  Thorstein  Veblen  e  John 
Commons  –  ou  no  institucionalismo  pré-década  de  1930.  Essa  década  testemunhou  o 
declínio  do  institucionalismo  americano,  isso  pode  ter  gerado  uma  redução  de  estudos 
sobre  a  história  do  institucionalismo  sobre  pós-Segunda  Guerra  Mundial.  No  entanto,  os 
institucionalistas  protagonizaram  um  capítulo  importante  da  organização  da  ciência 
econômica  nos  EUA:  o  surgimento  das  associações  dissidentes.  No  final  da  década  de 
1950, a insatisfação dos institucionalistas com American Economic Association culminou 
na  fundação  da Association  for Evolutionary  Economics  (AFEE)  em  1965.  Allan Gruchy 
foi  uma  figura  central  na  fundação  da  AFEE.  O  objetivo  deste  artigo  é  enfatizar  como  a 
perspectiva de Gruchy sobre o institucionalismo estava alinhada com a fundação da AFEE 
e como a administração desta associação, durante a década de 1970, mudou tal perspectiva. 

 
Palavras-chave:  Allan  Gruchy,  Association  for  Evolutionary  Economics,  Journal  of  Economic 
Issues, Warren Samuels, Institucionalismo Americano 
 
Classificação JEL: B25 
 
 
 
Abstract 

Studies  on  the  history  of  economic  thought  regarding  American  institutionalism  usually 
relies on its founding fathers — Thorstein Veblen and John Commons, mainly — or on pre-
1930s  institutionalism.  The  1930s’  decline  in  American  institutionalism  importance  may 
resulted in  few studies on  history of institutionalism  post-WWII.  However, institutionalists 
star  in  an  important  chapter  of  US  economics  organisation:  the  emergence  of  dissenting 
associations. The late-1950s dissatisfaction of institutionalists with the American Economic 
Association  culminated  in  the  Association  for  Evolutionary  Economics  (AFEE)  in  1965. 
Allan  Gruchy  was  a  leading  figure  in  founding  the  AFEE.  This  paper  aims  to  highlight 
alignment of Gruchy’s view of institutionalism with the AFEE foundation, and how AFEE’s 
internal affairs, during the 1970s, changed his perspective.  

 
Keywords:  Allan  Gruchy,  Association  for  Evolutionary  Economics,  Journal  of  Economic  issues, 
Warren Samuels, American Institutionalism 
 
JEL Classification Codes: B25 
 
 
 
 
 

 

1 

 

1. Introduction 
 

In  the  beginning  of  the  20th  century,  American  institutionalism  was  a  prominent  branch  of 
economics science (Hodgson 2004; Rutherford 2011). By the 1950s, institutionalist economists had 
lost  their  influence  over  American  economics,  and  were  dissatisfied  with a  recently  emerged  new 
mainstream (Cavalieri and Almeida 2015). Therefore, in the late 1950s, institutionalists  organized 
themselves  to  fight  against  the  decline  of  institutional  economics;  as  a  result,  the  Association  for 
Evolutionary  Economics  (AFEE)  was  founded  in  1965  (Cavalieri  and  Almeida  2017).  The  AFEE 
was  founded  by  the  heirs  of  the  interwar  institutionalism,  with  Allan  Gruchy  as  a  leading  figure 
among the AFEE’s founders. Even though Gruchy was not institutionalist royalty, as was Clarence 
Ayres,  he  was  well  known  among  dissenters.  Ayres  himself  recognized  Gruchy’s  importance  for 
post-war  institutionalism.  In  1953,  Ayres  stressed  that  he  considered  Gruchy  as  the  “leading 
interpreter  of  institutionalism”  at  that  time  (Ayres  to  Gruchy,  16  September  1953,  Ayres  Papers, 
Box 3F288). 

Gruchy graduated with first class honours from the University of British Columbia in 1926. 
In 1927, he entered graduate school at the University of California at Berkeley.  In the same  year, 
Gruchy had contact with American institutionalism for the first time, in a course  by  Paul Homan. 
However,  Gruchy  left  Berkeley  because of  differences  with  Professor  Ira  B.  Cross  (Dillard  1990; 
1991). In 1929, he earned the M.A. degree with honours from the McGill University and, in 1931, 
obtained his Ph.D. degree from the University of Virginia under Professor E. Alvis Kincaid. After 
being  a  visiting  assistant  professor  at  the  University  of  Virginia,  professor  of  economics  and 
sociology at the College of St. Thomas in Minneapolis, and taking a position at Ohio University in 
Athens, Ohio, Gruchy became a faculty member of the University of Maryland (Dillard 1990).  

Gruchy  was a faculty member of the University of Maryland from 1937 to 1986,  when he 
retired  following  a  heart  attack  (Dillard  1990).  Four  years  later,  in  1990,  Gruchy  passed  away 
(Gruchy  and  Rutherford  1990)1.  During  his  49  years  at  University  of  Maryland,  Gruchy  built  a 
reputation  of  an  amazing  educator,  hence  his  classes  were  always  oversubscribed  (Briggs  1990; 
Dillard  1990).  Gruchy’s  contributions 
to  American  institutionalism  were  several:  (1)  a 
methodological proposal to analyse American institutionalism as holistic (see Gruchy 1947); (2) an 
empirical  proposal  that  focused  on  social  provisioning  and  economic  planning  as  key  to 
organisation  of  the  American  economy  (see  Gruchy  1974,  1977,  1982a);  and  (3)  a  taxonomical 
proposal to classify American institutionalists after 1939 (see Gruchy 1969, 1972). As discussed by 
Dillard  (1991),  Gruchy’s  contributions  were  a  means  to  an  (ambitious)  end:  the  reconstruction  of 
economics.  

However, for this paper’s purpose it is also important to take into consideration that Gruchy 
was not always an easy person (Gruchy  and Rutherford 1990). Hence, Gruchy had several battles 
during his career. This paper relies on one of these battles: Gruchy’s dissatisfaction with the kind of 
institutionalism that the Association for Evolutionary Economics was promoting during the 1970s. 
The goal of this paper is to highlight how Gruchy’s view of American institutionalism was aligned 
with  the  AFEE  foundation,  and  how  the  association’s  early  years  changed  his  perspective  on  the 
meaning of institutionalism. 

The paper unfolds in three more sections. The coming section provides a brief history of the 
AFEE  foundation.  It  stresses  the  diversity  among  early  AFEE  members,  and  introduces  Gruchy’s 
notion  that  institutional  holism  and  neoinstitutionalim  are  a  reading  of  American  institutionalism 
from  the  post-war  era,  and  are  aligned  with  the  pluralism  and  eclecticism  of  the  early  AFEE 
members.  Section  3  highlights  the  early  history  of  the  Journal  of  Economic  Issues,  that  is,  the 
journal of AFFE. It addresses how events concerning the journal affected Gruchy’s perspective on 
institutional economics. Those events culminated in Gruchy’s strong criticism of Warren Samuels’ 

                                                             
1 This obituary is authored by Allan Gruchy and Malcolm Rutherford, as it is Gruchy’s obituary, it was clearly written 
just by Rutherford and he, in a very kind way, gave credit to Gruchy.  

2 

 

editorship,  and  Gruchy’s  review  of  his  institutionalists’  taxonomy.  Some  final  notes  conclude  the 
paper. 
 
 
2. The Foundation of AFEE, Holism, and Neoinstitutinalism 
 

The AFEE was founded because post-war institutionalists were extremely dissatisfied with 
the path taken by economic science. This dissatisfaction can be split into three main perspectives: 
(1) frustration with the American Economic Association (AEA) Programs (Almeida 2016; Cavalieri 
and  Almeida  2017;  Bush  1991;  Gambs  1980);  (2)  Professional  training:  the  curriculum  of  top 
universities was no longer considering American instituionalism (Cavalieri and Almeida 2015); and 
(3)  aversion  to  an  early  version  of  Keynesianism2  (Rutherford  2001:  Chapter  10;  Cavalieri  and 
Almeida 2015). Institutionalists’ dissatisfaction was strong enough to motivate them to make moves 
toward  building  an  association  other  than  the  AEA.  In  the  first  moves  to  make  a new  association 
possible, Allan Gruchy came on the scene. Gruchy, along with John Gambs from Hamilton College 
(New York), sent an invitation for a meeting during the end of an AEA meeting in 1959. The goal 
of  the  meeting  was  the  dissatisfaction  with  economic  science  and  the  desire  to  reconstruct  it.  A 
small group of 11 economists met in a room at the Windsor Hotel in Washington D.C. — the place 
of  the  1959  AEA  meeting3.  In  1963,  these  11  people  and  many  others  became  known  as  the 
“Wardman Group”4. In 1959, the group decided to organize rump sessions, following AEA’s annual 
meeting5 (Matters Discussed at the First Meeting, December 1959, Gruchy Papers). 

The  foundation  of  the  AFEE  holds  a  peculiar  feature  for  a  birthing  association:  the 
significant  diversity  of  its  members.  This  diversity  was  not  only  about  the  presence  of  non-
institutionalists in the association, but also the large interpretation of what being an institutionalist 
stood for. Rutherford (2015) classifies this large diversity among institutionalists into three groups: 
(1)  Ayresians:  Texan  institutionalists  led  by  Clarence  Ayres6;  (2)  Commonsians:  heirs  of  John 
Commons’  legacy;  and  (3)  a  group  that  is  difficult  to  classify  since  it  is  much  looser  than  non-

                                                             
2  Rutherford  (2011:  Chapter  10)  stresses  that  the  Keynesian  thought  that  institutionalists  were  critical  of,  was  Alvin 
Hansen’s  version.  Hence,  it  took  place  before  the  emergence  of  the  Post-Keynesian  approach.  For  Cavalieri  and 
Almeida  (2015),  the  Richard  Ely  Lecture  delivered  by  Joan  Robinson  in  1971  was  a  breakpoint  for  institutionalists’ 
criticism. After Robinson’s lecture, Keynes’ writings came gradually to be understood as compatible with a dissenter’s 
perspective.  As  this  paper  will  highlight  later,  the  intent  to  build  a  Veblenian  association  turned  to  be  a  pluralistic 
AFEE.  This  plural  perspective  means  that  AFEE  founders  started  to  look  for  an  organization  of  an  intellectual 
movement (American  institutionalism),  but found an association  interested  in rethinking  and reconstructing economic 
science in a broader sense. The fact that Dudley Dillard and Wallace C. Peterson were members of the AFEE in its early 
days meant that there was room for Keynesian thinking in the association (see Cavalieri and Almeida 2015 and Whalen 
2016). Regarding Gruchy, despite his friendship with Dillard, he was a critic of Keynesianism for his entire career. His 
criticism  evolved  from a  philosophical and theoretical  basis (as  in Gruchy 1948 and 1949) to economic policy  (as  in 
Gruchy 1972 and 1982b.)    
3 The 11 people were Joseph Brown, J. Fagg Foster, John Gambs, Allan Gruchy, William Hewitt, Forest Hill, Robert 
Patton, James Reese, Arthur Schweitzer, James Street, and Washington Glade (Minutes of the Meeting, 29 December 
1959, Gruchy Papers). Their meeting took place in Fagg Foster’s hotel room at the Windsor Hotel (Foster to Ayres, 18 
October 1967, Ayres Papers, Box 3F287; Rutherford 2001, 185; Cavalieri and Almeida 2017: 613).  
4 The  literature  (such as Bush 1991, Gambs 1980, and O’Hara 1995) and oral tradition refer to  the  group that would 
found  the  AFEE  as  the  “Wardman  Group”  since  1959.  The  group  adopted  this  name  in  1963  only  (Cavalieri  and 
Almeida  2017).  It  relied  on  the  hotel  where  the  1959  AEA  meeting  took  place.  In  1959,  the  hotel  was  renamed  the 
Sheraton-Park Hotel. Rutherford (2013) stresses that the original name was the “AEA Group” which then, in 1963, was 
changed to the “Wardman Group”.  
5  In  1961,  28  economists  requested  to  be  informed  of  the  group’s  activities  (Manuscript  by  Gambs,  February  1962, 
Gambs  Papers).  In  1963,  the  group  comprised  150  economists  (Minutes  of  a  Meeting  of  Dissent  Economists,  28 
December  1963,  Gruchy  Papers).  Among  the  economists  listed  in  1963,  we  can  find  “big  names”  such  as  Joseph 
Dorfman,  Carter  Goodrich,  Albert  Hirschman,  Simon  Kuznets,  and  Gardiner  Means  —  Dorfman  and  Means  would 
become  active  AFEE  members  (Minutes  of  a  Meeting  of  Dissent  Economists,  28  December  1963,  Gruchy  Papers). 
These “big names” suggest that the “Wardman Group” was achieving success in putting a qualified group of dissenters 
economists together.  
6 As this paper will emphasize latter, Ayresians became known as the Cactus Branch since 1963. 

3 

 

Ayresian  institutionalists;  it  included,  for  example,  John  Kenneth  Galbraith  and  Allan  Gruchy. 
Cavalieri and Almeida (2017) argue that they agree in general with Rutherford’s (2015) grouping of 
institutionalists — but one can affirm that Cavalieri and Almeida (2017) stresses an even broader 
diversity.  Cavalieri  and  Almeida  (2017)  analyse  the  educational  background  and  theoretical 
affiliations  of  key  people  associated  with  AFEE’s  foundation,  and  pointed  to  42  people  as  key 
associates.  These  included  members  from  the  11  people  who  attended  the  first  meeting  of  the 
Wardman Group, as well as presidents, vice-presidents, board members of the AFEE, and editors of 
the  Journal  of  Economic  Issues  (JEI)  —  the  AFEE’s  journal.  This  paper  analyses  the  later 
foundation of this journal. Cavalieri and Almeida (2017) found a connection between 14 of the 42 
members: they studied or taught at Columbia University, and 10 had a connection to the University 
of Texas at Austin. For Rutherford (2011: Chapter 8), Columbia “was not very collegial”, its focus 
was not to create “a band of faithful followers”. Considering the University of Texas at Austin, one 
may  argue  that  Clarence  Ayres  was  a  charismatic  leader.  However,  the  late  David  Hamilton,  an 
Ayres’  student,  stressed  that  professors  who  influenced  Texan  institutionalists  —  such  as  Ruth 
Allen,  E.E.  Hale,  R.H.  Montgomery,  C.A.  Wiley,  and  Ayres  himself  —  did  not  take  the  same 
institutional perspective into consideration (Hamilton 2004)7. 

Additionally, Cavalieri and Almeida (2017) stress that among the 42 key people associated 
with  AFEE’s  foundation,  we  can  find  (1)  Commonsians  (such  as  the  Michigan  State  University 
common  type  of  institutionalist);  (2)  Ayresians  (such  as  John  Gambs);  (3)  Dewey-Veblen 
institutionalists,  who  do  not  take  the  Ayresian  perspective  into  consideration  (such  as  W.  Paul 
Strassman  —  a  non-Commosian  MSU  institutionalist);  (4)  Pluralistics  (such  as  Warren  Samuels); 
and (5) early adopters of the rising heterodox version of  Keynesianism (such as Dudley Dillard)8. 
Hence, we can assume that American institutionalism, which developed without association with a 
clear  paradigm,  research  programs,  or  methodology  (Asso  and  Fiorito  2008;  Rutherford  2011; 
Fiorito 2012) maintained its diversity — or became even more diverse — over time. Cavalieri and 
Almeida  (2017)  highlight  an  additional  issue:  of  the  42  key  people  associated  with  AFEE’s 
foundation, 22 held PhDs after the inter-war period (Gruchy included); hence, they had contact with 
American institutionalism as a paradigm in decline. 

Gambs and Gruchy became aware of the diversity of the group that would become AFEE’s 
founders in the early  initiatives  to build a new association.  In 1963,  Gambs took  sabbatical leave, 
and travelled through the U.S. looking for dissenting economists interested in building a Veblenian 
association  (Cavalieri  and  Almeida  2017;  O’Hara  1995;  Rutherford  2015).  Gambs  interviewed 
about  40  people,  and  grouped  them  into  Veblenians  and  non-Veblenians.  Additionally,  Gambs 
stressed that there was diversity in the interpretation of what being a Veblenian meant among the 
interviewed.  According  to  Gambs,  many  non-Veblenians  severely  rejected  the  idea  of  joining  a 
group  of  “institutionalists”,  but  they  agreed  to  participate  in  a  group  on  the  “reconstruction  of 
economics” (Report on Interviews with American Economists, 1963, Gruchy and Gambs Papers). 

AFEE’s leading founders (here referring to Allan Gruchy, John Gambs, and Clarence Ayres) 
had to deal with such diversity. Among them, Ayres was indisputably more representative of post-
war  institutionalism  than  the  others  (see  Rutherford  2011:  Chapter  11).  According  to  the  Nobel 
laureate  James  Buchanan,  Ayres  was  a  leading  member  of  the  profession  at  the  beginning  of  the 
20th century (Buchanan 1976: 163). For Bob Coats, Ayres was part of the mainstream of American 
dissenters (Coats 1992: 373). Edwin Witte also recognized Ayres’ prominent place in 20th century 
economics.  During  his  AEA  presidency,  Witte  referred  to  Ayers  as  “the  Dean  of  all  institutional 

                                                             
7  Cavalieri  and  Almeida’s  (2017:  615,  footnote  3)  42  names  are:  Bushrod  Allin,  Clarence  Ayres,  A.A.  Baylor,  John 
Blair, Kendall Cochran, Dudley Dillard, Joseph Dorfman, Douglas Dowd, J. Fagg Foster, Daniel Fusfeld, John Kenneth 
Galbraith, John Gambs, Meredith Givens, Washington Glade, Carter Goodrich, Wendell Gordon, Allan Gruchy, David 
Hamilton, Robert Heilbroner, William Hewitt, Forest Hill, Louis Junker, William Kapp, Gardiner Means, Walter Neale, 
William  Pardridge,  Robert  Patton,  James  Reese,  Julius  Rubin,  Louis  Salkever,  Warren  Samuels,  David  Schwartz, 
Arthur  Schweitzer,  Harvey  Segal,  Ben  Seligman,  W.  Paul  Strassman,  Marc  Tool,  Harry  Trebing,  Colston  Warne, 
Murray Weidenbaum, Theresa Wolfson, and George Zinke. 
8 This diversity can also be found in Rutherford (2011 and 2015). 

4 

 

economists  now  living”  (Witte  to  Ayres,  30  April  1956,  Ayres  Papers,  Box  3F296).  As  far  as  I 
understand,  the  “Dean”  was  responsible  for  AFEE’s  pluralism  and  eclecticism,  while  Gambs  and 
Gruchy were hesitant about it. 

In  1963,  Gambs  defended  a  membership  that  was  more  open  to  pluralism  and  eclecticism 
(Report on Interviews with  American Economists, 1963, Gambs and  Gruchy Papers).  Almost two 
decades  later,  Gambs  revealed  that,  even  though  he  and  Gruchy  accepted  and  even  defended 
pluralism and eclecticism, they found it difficult to deal with the apparently irreconcilable pluralism 
among AFEE members (Gambs 1980). Despite the fact that Gruchy and Gambs accepted pluralism 
and eclecticism in the AFEE, they tried to extract theoretical and political consensus from the group 
at  three  different  occasions:  (1)  in  the  early  1960,  Gambs  tried  to  organize  a  book  that  would 
summarise  post-war  institutionalism  (Gruchy  to  Gambs,  8  March  1960;  Schweitzer  to  Gambs,  11 
April  1960,  Gambs  Papers);  (2)  in  1965,  just  after  the  official  foundation  of  the  AFEE,  Gambs 
insisted  on  an  official  AFEE  project  —  that  would  extract  consensus  for  the  AFEE  —  called  the 
“Position Papers”; and (3) in 1968, Gambs published a manifesto in the Journal of Economic Issues.  
In the publication of Gambs (1968) entitled “What Next for the Association for Evolutionary 
Economics?”  a  series  of  “Position  Papers”  was  written,  in  which  the  soul  of  the  AFEE  was 
introduced  as  critical  to  its  future.  This  obsession  with  extracting  a  consensus  raised  significant 
concern  from  Ayres.  He  was  rather  blunt  in  a  letter  to  Gruchy,  and  considered  Gambs’  reiterated 
attempts at “hammering out” a commitment among members as detrimental to the AFEE (Ayres to 
Gruchy,  30  September  1967,  Ayres  Papers,  Box  3F288).  Despite  the  content  of  Gambs  (1968), 
Gruchy  informed  Ayres  that  it  was  not  his  intention  to  promote  an  ideological  consensus  for  the 
AFEE, but to address the path that institutional economics was taking (Gruchy to Ayres, 6 February 
1968,  Ayres  Papers,  Box  3F288).  In  the  end,  the  plurality  and  eclecticism  of  AFEE  membership 
seemed to triumph over the attempt to extract convergence.  

The next section stresses some facts of the history of the Journal of Economic Issues (JEI) 
— the AFEE’s journal. However, as some events related to the JEI were associated with pluralism 
among  AFEE  members,  these  events  will  be  highlighted  here.  The  JEI  became  true  by  an 
arrangement  between  the  AFEE  and  the  University  of  Texas  at  Austin;  Clarence  Ayres 
intermediated  this  arrangement.  By  the  arrangement,  the  editor  must  be  a  faculty  member  of  the 
University of Texas at Austin.  Ayres proposed  his department colleague  Forest  Hill as editor, and 
Gruchy  received  it  well  (Gruchy  to  Ayres,  14  June  1966,  Gruchy  Papers).  In  practice,  Gruchy 
assisted Hill with the composition of the editorial board. Gruchy stressed that the journal should not 
only  be  about  American  institutionalism;  he  highlighted  that  the  JEI’s  scope  should  be  “social 
economics” (Gruchy to  Hill, 21 July 1966,  Gruchy Papers)9.  Hence I may affirm that, despite the 
fact  of  originally  looking  for  a  Veblenian  association,  Gruchy  understood  that  a  Veblenian  group 
would be a part of the AFEE, but that it would be broader than Veblenian institutionalism.  
 
The point that I make here is that the events related to the foundation of the AFEE  were in 
line  with  Gruchy’s  view  of  American  institutionalism  —  more  specifically,  Gruchy’s  holistic 
approach to institutional economics and Gruchy’s neoinstitutionalism notion. The interpretation that 
I  offer  here  is  that  Gruchy’s  holistic  approach  and  neoinstitutionalism  are  two  sides  of  the  same 
coin,  and  that  the  coin  is  Gruchy’s  personal  interpretation  of  the  American  institutionalist 
movement.  On  the  one  hand,  Gruchy  was  looking  to  methodologically  deal  with  American 
institutionalism  as  a  unit,  through  holism.  On  the  other  hand,  Gruchy  was  trying  to  classify 
institutionalists  in  a  non-sectarian  way  in  other  to  characterize  them  as  a  group,  namely,  the 
neoinstitutionalists.  

Rutherford  (2015:  104)  highlighted  the  importance  of  Gruchy’s  effort  to  redefine 
institutionalism.  Gruchy  relied  on  the  argument  that  institutionalism  is  a  “holistic”  approach  to 
                                                             
9 As Gruchy, Ayres also stressed that the JEI should be more encompassing than American institutionalism. For Ayres, 
the JEI should rely on publishing high-quality articles not usually published by an established journal (Ayres to Junker, 
10 January 1967, Ayres Papers, Box 3F289). Hence, Ayres defended that the JEI should be an eclectic journal dealing 
with what was being forgotten by well-known journals.  
 

5 

 

economic theorizing. In essence, In The Modern Economic Thought (1947), Gruchy highlights that 
economics  is  a  cultural  science,  hence  it  is  holistic.  Others  cultural  sciences  are  anthropology, 
sociology, psychology, and political science; the distinction of economics is the analysis of material 
issues of culture. Nevertheless, economics does not mean that material issues should be studied  in 
isolation  from  the  other  holistic  sciences.  The  material  issues  of  a  society  are  embedded  in  its 
culture, that is, the basis on which social provisioning relies (Gruchy 1947; see also Dillard 1991). 
For Gruchy (1947), a common feature of holistic approaches in economics is the understanding of 
behaviour  as  a  social  rather  than  individual  matter.  Gruchy  and  Rutherford  (1990)  affirmed  that 
Gruchy’s institutional holism regards an evolutionary and cultural background to study an economic 
system as an evolving process. Any part of this system could be fully understood by analysing the 
relations in the whole dynamic economic process. Into this system, the individual is a social being 
who learns by collective standards or norms of conduct (Gruchy and Rutherford, 1990).  

As stated by Gruchy, the basis of institutional holism was present in both Thorstein Veblen’s 
notion  of  institution,  and  John  Commons’  collective  economics,  Wesley  Mitchell’s  quantitative 
economics,  John  M.  Clark’s  social  economics,  Rexford  Tugwell’s  experimental  economics,  and 
Gardiner  Means’  administrative  economics  (Gruchy  1947).  Those  were  the  thinkers  that  Gruchy 
(1947) associated with holistic economics. Dillard (1991: 387) stresses that despite the diversity of 
interests  and  approaches  among  the  economists  Gruchy  analysis  found  a  “surprising  amount  of 
uniformity in their conception of economics”. According to Gruchy and Rutherford (1990), holism 
leads  institutionalism  to  use  less  formalistic  methods  (more  likely  studies  of  cultures  and  their 
evolution),  and it  became the  basis  for  virtually  all  methodological  debates  regarding  institutional 
economics. 
that  Gruchy’s  “holistic 
institutionalism”  had  a  distinct  influence  on  post-war  institutionalists.  Holism  supported 
institutionalism  to  step  away  from  comparisons  with  natural  sciences  —  something  common  in 
even  Veblen’s  work.  Considering  the  AFEE  foundation,  Gruchy’s  holistic  method  for  the 
institutionalist  approach  is  a  very  good  way  to  deal  with  pluralism  and  eclecticism  among  AFEE 
members.  As  Gruchy’s  institutional  holism  puts  Veblen  next  to  Commons,  Tugwell,  and  Means, 
Gruchy  was  recognizing  that  different  types  of  institutionalism  could  comprise  the  same  kind  of 
holistic approach. Hence, someone may assume that the goal of Gruchy’s holism was to encompass 
different kinds of institutionalism. The same is true for Gruchy’s neoinstitutionalism.  

(2015:  104)  also  stresses 

In  essence,  Rutherford 

According  to  Bush  (2009:  294),  “Allan  Gruchy  (1972)  appears  to  have  adopted  the  term 
‘neoinstitutionalism’  from  [Marc]  Tool  […]”.  Bush  (2009)  stresses  that  Marc  Tool,  in  his  1953 
doctoral  dissertation,  coined  the  term  neoinstitutionalism;  Tool’s  term  was  much  more  restrictive 
than Gruchy’s. Tool was a member of a group of American institutionalists known as  the “Cactus 
Branch”. This was a nickname given by Gambs to the Ayresian wing of American institutionalism 
(Report  on  Interviews  with  American  Economists,  1963,  Gruchy  and  Gambs  Papers)10.  For 
Cavalieri and Almeida (2017), the Cactus Branch was the most cohesive  group of institutionalists 
during the time of the AFEE foundation. Cactus Branchers had close and continuous contact with 
each  other  because  of  their  geographical localization  (they  were  at  universities  in the  Southwest); 
the  Southwestern  Social  Science  Association  and  the  Southwestern  Social  Science  Quarterly 
worked as a forum for exchanging and disseminating their ideas. Additionally, Ayres’ great contact 
with  his  former  students,  and  his  charismatic  leadership,  created  a  successful  network  among  the 
Cactus Branchers (Cavalieri and Almeida 2017)11. 

Tool’s notion of neoinstitutionalism reflected the group to which he belonged. For Tool, the 
neoinstitutionalists  would  be  the  ones  developing  American  institutionalism  according  to  Ayres’ 
interpretation of Veblen’s writings. Gruchy’s neoinstitutionalism is much more encompassing than 
Tool’s, revealing itself as a more adequate classification of institutionalism in the early days of the 

                                                             
10  Marc  Tool  wrote  his  dissertation  under  J.  Fagg  Foster  at  the  University  of  Denver;  Foster,  in  turn,  was  a  former 
Clarence Ayres’ student (Tool 1982). Tool’s dissertation  is entitled  “The Philosophy of Neo-Institutionalism:  Veblen, 
Dewey, and  Ayres”.  As the title  suggests, Tool’s  dissertation  introduced a neoinstitutinalism term relying exclusively 
on Ayres’ interpretation of Veblen’s writings.  
11 For more details about the Cactus Branch, see Sturgeon (1981). 

6 

 

AFEE.  Gruchy  introduced  his  full  notion  of  neoinstitutionalism  in  Contemporary  Economic 
Thought  (1972),  but  before  the  publication  of  this  book  he  presented  his  neoinstitutionalism 
perspective  in  his  AFEE  presidential  speech  in  196812.  This  speech  was  published  as  Gruchy 
(1969). According to Gruchy (1969 and 1972), there were some institutionalists since 1939 — such 
as, Clarence Ayres, John Kenneth Galbraith, Gunnar Myrdal, Gerhard Colm, and Adolph Lowe13 — 
whose writings could be seen as an extension of  the works of Veblen,  Hobson, Commons, Clark, 
Mitchell, and other heterodox  economists from the first three decades of 20th century.  For  Gruchy 
(1969 and 1972), the first group received the label of neoinstitutionalists because they were inspired 
by the “old institutionalism” (except for Ayres who  was greatly influenced by  Veblen and Dewey  
in  his  formative  years).  However,  they  offered  a  fresh  institutionalism  to  analyse,  which  Gruchy 
(1972) called, a mature capitalism.  

As stated by Gruchy (1969), neoinstitutionalism made economics science less technical and 
more  social,  accepting  conventional  economics  for  “what  it  is  worth”,  and  going  beyond  this  to 
develop a broader economics that is concerned with not only decision making in the market place, 
but also “the larger evolving of the economic system” (Gruchy 1969: 6–7). For Gruchy (1969), the 
larger view of economic reality led the neoinstitutionalists to believe that they had a perspective of 
economics  that  would  be  more  relevant  to  the  major  economic  problems  of  their  time.  This 
perspective was based on an analysis of the “social reality” and the “dynamics of the process” of an 
evolving social system, of which the economic system forms part (Gruchy 1972). For Gruchy (1969 
and  1972),  economics  should  be  social  economics.  Hence, the  neoinstitutionalists saw  differences 
between  physical  and  social  sciences,  and  physical  and  social  data  (Gruchy  1972).  The  nature  of 
physical  data  does  not  change  over  time  and,  through  a  lack  of  the  purposive  issues  of  physical 
sciences,  needs  and  wants  do  not  rise  questions.  Social  data  are  different  because  they  not  only 
evolve, but are also purposeful (Gruchy 1972).  

Gruchy (1969 and 1972) affirms that a simple comparison between conventional economics 
and neoinstitutionalism would be a contrast between “market economics” and “system economics”. 
The  key  concern  of  neoinstitutionalists  were “wants,  goals,  and  values” and  “process”  rather  than 
“efficiency”  and  “equilibrium”  (Gruchy  1969).  Gruchy  (1972)  adds  that  conventional  economics 
relies  on  a  “science  of  choice”  or  a  “science  of  efficiency”,  while  neoinstitutionalism  is  a  “social 
science”.  For  the  neoinstitutionalists,  according  to  Gruchy  (1969),  the  capitalist  system  is  not  a 
monolithic or a metaphysical entity that holds interests common to all individuals, but an evolving 
arrangement  of  human  relationship  regarding  the  disposal  of  resources  for  socially  shaped 
satisfaction.  Neoinstitutionalists  study  choice  among  possible  uses  of  resources,  but  with 
consideration  of  a  cultural  view  of  reality  concerning  historical  time  and  geographical  place 
(Gruchy  1972).  According  to  Gruchy  (1972),  neoinstitutionalism  pointed  to  the  reconstruction  of 
economics  by  a  shifting  prediction  for  organization  and  control  —  which  was  what  “mature 
capitalism” was demanding.  

For Dillard (1991), Gruchy’s neinstitutionalism — and I would like to add holism — were 
means  to  an  end,  and  represented  the  reconstruction  of  economics  in  line  with  American 
institutionalism.  Contemporary  Economic  Thought  was  published  when  the  AFEE  was  stablished 
and, as far as I can understand, it respected the eclecticism and plurality of the association member 
— mainly because Gruchy was not defending or hammering out a specific kind of institutionalism. 
On  the  contrary,  Gruchy’s  neoinstitutionalism  was  encompassing  among  possible  institutional 
approaches of that time. Gambs (1980: 29) stresses that Contemporary Economic Thought “should 
have been considered something of a guiding light to AFEE”. However, the events associated with 
the reception of Contemporary Economic Thought by the JEI took a very different path than the one 
seen by Gambs. To explore this episode of Gruchy and AFEE, the history of the JEI should be taken 
into consideration.  

                                                             
12 Gruchy as the third AFEE president after the terms of Clarence Ayres and John Gambs. 
13  These  are  the  names  highlighted  by  both  Gruchy  (1969)  and  Gruchy  (1972).  However,  the  latter  also  included 
François Perroux in the list. 

7 

 

3. Journal of Economic Issues, Disagreements, and New Taxonomies for Institutionalists  
 

Just  after  the  foundation  of  the  AFEE,  its  executive  board  and  first  president,  Clarence 
Ayres,  decided  to  create  an  AFEE  journal.  In  addition,  as  AFEE  was  started  to  be  seen  as  an 
alternative to AEA, its journal would be an alternative to the American Economic Review kind of 
journal.  In  early  1966,  the  State  University  of  New  York  agreed  to  sponsor  the  AFEE  journal 
(Ayres  to  Gruchy,  Gambs,  Seligman,  Dorfman,  and  Hamilton,  27  March  1966,  Gruchy  Papers). 
However, the arrangement between AFEE and the State University of New York  was not realised. 
In  the  same  year,  the  University  of  Texas  at  Austin  agreed  to  sponsor  and  publish  the  AFEE’s 
journal  —Ayres  possibly  played  a  key  role  in  the  realisation  of  this  arrangement.  Ayres,  as 
president  of  the  association,  proposed  Forest  Hill  —  his  colleague  at  the  University  of  Texas  at 
Austin — as editor (Ayres to Gruchy, 14 June 1966, Gruchy Papers). The journal chosen name was 
Journal of Economic Issues (JEI). 

The JEI was founded in 1967 (Hill to Ayres, 29 December 1966, Gruchy Papers), two years 
after  the  foundation  problems  had  arisen.  In  1969,  it  was  clear  to  the  AFEE  executive  board  that 
Hill’s editorship was characterized by delays in distribution and responses to contributors (Gruchy 
to Ayres, 5 July 1969, Ayres Papers, Box 3F288 and Minutes of Meeting of the Executive Board of 
AFEE, 12 April 1969, Gruchy Papers). The problem with delays was so serious that  the executive 
board assisted  Hill with his tasks as editor (Minutes of Meeting of the Executive Board of AFEE, 
12 April 1969, Gruchy Papers). In the end, the feeling of the executive board was that Hill failed as 
editor  (Ayres  to  Gruchy,  20  July  1969,  Gruchy  Papers  and  Ayres  to  Gruchy,  19  August  1969, 
Gruchy Papers)14. Ben Seligman, AFEE’s vice-president, offered to AFEE an arrangement with the 
University  of  Massachusetts  —  where  he  was  a  professor  —  similar  to  the  arrangement  with  the 
University  of  Texas  at  Austin  to  publish  the  JEI.  Consequently,  Harvey  Segal,  a  colleague  of 
Seligman at University of Massachusetts, replaced Hill (Minutes of General Business Meeting, 29 
December  1969,  Ayres  Papers,  Box  3F285).  However,  Segal’s  tenure  as  JEI  editor  was  short. 
Seligman  —  the  main  link  between  the  University  of  Massachusetts  and  the  AFEE  —  suddenly 
passed  away  in  1970  (Trebing  to  Ayres,  28  October  1970,  Ayres  Papers,  Box  3F285),  and  Segal 
resigned his position as JEI’s editor in July 1971 (Segal to Fusfeld, 8 July 1971, Ayres Papers, Box 
3F285).  

In line with the other arrangements, the Michigan State University made a good offer to be 
responsible for the JEI in 1971 (Minutes of the Meeting of the Executive Board, 8 July 1971, Ayres 
Papers,  Box  3F285).  Warren  Samuels  took  the  position  as  editor,  thus  ending  the  editorial 
instability.  Samuels’  tenure  as  JEI  editor  took  place  from  1971  to  1981.  For  Almeida  (2016), 
Samuels’  editorship  was  important  for  the  JEI  because  it  ended  editorship  instability  and  built  a 
high international reputation for the journal. However, Samuels’ editorship deepened AFEE’s and 
JEI’s issues on pluralism and eclecticism, far beyond the discussion during the AFEE’s foundation 
(Almeida 2016 and Cavalieri and Almeida 2017). Samuels’ perspective on institutional economics 
and pluralism was more encompassing than AFEE’s leading founding fathers — Ayres, Gambs, and 
Gruchy.  A letter exchange between Ayres — the most moderate AFEE’s  leading founding fathers 
—  and  Samuels  in  August  1968  is  illustrative.  In  this  letter,  Ayres  wrote  good  comments  on 
Samuels’  interpretation  of  institutional  economics  and  references  to  major  institutionalists. 
Nevertheless,  Ayres  also  criticized  Samuels’  perspective  on  conventional  economics  theory. 
Samuels  was  of  the  opinion  that  the  future  of  institutional  economics  relied  on  an  approach  with 
conventional  economics  (Samuels  to  Ayres,  27  August  1968,  Ayres  Papers,  Box  3F294).  Ayres, 
however,  affirmed  that  these  two  bodies  of  knowledge  contradicted  each  other,  and  that  such  an 
approach would be impossible (Ayres to Samuels, 15 August 1968, Ayres Papers, Box 3F294).  

                                                             
14 In Ayres to Gruchy, 20 July 1969, the former wrote “Dear Allab”, considering the position of the letter “n” and “b” 
on a QUERTY keyboard, and the content of the letter, I assume that Ayres intended to write “Dear Allan” and the letter 
was addressed to Allan Gruchy. 

8 

 

Clearly,  Samuels’  perspective  on  institutional  economics  showed  up  on  the  JEI’s  pages;  it 
extremely displeased AFEE members, who  understood that the  AFEE and JEI  associated with the 
reconstruction  of  economics  that  relied  on  institutional  approaches.  Samuels’  perspective  created 
animosity between him and Gruchy, which I argue changed the latter’s view of who institutionalists 
were. The Gruchy-Samuels asperity seems to have reached its peak in 1974, when the JEI published 
four reviews of Gruchy’s Contemporary Economics Thought (Gruchy 1972)15. Gruchy understood 
one of the reviews as an attack from conventional economics on institutionalism (Gruchy to Willard 
Muller, February 4, 1974, Gruchy Papers). The author of this review was Bob Coats. According to 
Backhouse  et  al.  (2008),  it  was  one  of  Coats’  most  highly  critical  reviews.  Obviously,  there  are 
institutionalists  who  disagree  with  Coats’  review  —  such  as  Liebhafsky  (1980).  My  point  is  that 
Gruchy’s reaction to Coats’ review is more important than the content of the review.  According to 
Backhouse et al. (2008: 428): “[t]his [Coats’ review] resulted in Gruchy’s waging a long and bitter 
campaign  to  remove  Samuels  from  the  editorship  of  the  JEI”.  In  reality,  it  is  more  complex  than 
that: the review episode led Gruchy to revise his institutionalists’ taxonomy — Gruchy became less 
open-minded to different institutional approaches — and Samuels became Gruchy “arch enemy” (it 
was not just about JEI editorship)16.  

Since  1974,  Gruchy  showed  an  open  criticism  to  Samuels’  editorship  —  on  several 
occasions Gambs supported Gruchy. For Gruchy (1978 and 1982b), Samuels was a leader figure of 
a  group  of  AFEE  members,  who  were  endeavouring  to  promote  a  new  general  theory  of 
institutional economics.  According to Gruchy, looking for what  he called general theory,  Samuels 
organized  symposia  from  1972  to  1977.  Gruchy  complained  that  the  symposia  organized  by 
Samuels introduced “fringe” issues  (Gruchy’s term) into institutional economics (Gruchy to R. D. 
Peterson, 5 December 1976, Gruchy Papers). Gruchy classified those issues as quite interesting, but 
stated  that  they  did  little  to  give  AFEE  an  “image”  or  a  “focus”  (Gruchy  to  Samuels,  March  15, 
1974,  Gruchy  Papers).  In  1972,  the  symposium  theme  was  “Macroeconomic  Institutional 
Innovation”, and its goal was “to consider how the United States might reorganize and redirect both 
its  instruments  of  macroeconomic  policy  and  its  decision-making  structure  dealing  with 
macroeconomic problems” (Samuels 1972: 1).  

Gruchy  complained  about  symposia  themes  in  a  general  sense.  However,  if  one  considers 
the  1972  symposium,  this  complaining  conflict  with  another  of  Gruchy’s  criticisms:  a  lack  of  a 
clear-cut  image  of  AFEE  with  regard  to  economic  policy  (Gruchy  1978,  1982b,  and  Gruchy  to 
Samuels, March 15, 1974, Gruchy Papers). As stated by Gruchy (1978, 1982b), recommendation of 
economic policy was a major form of  providing an intellectual identity.  Keynesians, conventional 
economists, and radical economists built identities through policy recommendation; for Gruchy, the 
AFEE  should  follow  this  path  (Gruchy  1978  and  1982b),  as  it  had  not  evolved  since  the  AFEE 
foundation  (Gruchy  1978).  For  Gruchy  (1978),  this  non-policy  position  partly  explained  that  the 
AFEE had little influence on theoretical and applied economics since its foundation17.  

In  regards  to  other  symposia,  the  other  themes  were  “Law  and  Economics”  (1973), 
“Markets,  Institutions,  and  Technology”  (1974),  “The  Chicago  School  of  Political  Economy” 
(1975), “Commons and Clark on  Law and Economics” (1976), and “Contributions to Institutional 
Economics” (1977). Hence, the themes of 1973 and 1976 were aligned but not closely related with 
Gruchy’s  neoinstitutionalism.  In  1974,  the  symposium  was  in  commemoration  of  the  work  of 
Clarence Ayres, a cornerstone of Gruchy’ neoinstitutionalism; the 1977 theme was too broad not to 
                                                             
15  Publishing  four  reviews  of  the  same  book  was  a  strategy  of  the  JEI  avoid  “taking  sides”.  The  four  reviews  of 
Gruchy’s Contemporary Economics Thought was published as Coats et al. (1974). 
16 An illustrative fact about this antagonism is given in Gruchy (1989). At the end of his life, dealing with serious health 
issues,  Gruchy  wrote  a  note (Gruchy  1989),  to  criticize  Samuels’  contribution  to the  New  Palgrave:  A  Dictionary  of 
Economics. 
17  Gruchy  introduced  his  criticism  on  what  he  understood  as  a  lack  of  policy  position  directly  to  Samuels  in  a  letter 
(Gruchy to Samuels, March, 15 1974, Gruchy Papers). In the same letter, Gruchy stressed that he would like to see the 
JEI’s editor being  more critical of the conventional economics. As this paper previously highlighted, Samuels did not 
share the split between conventional economics and institutional economics with Gruchy, Ayres, and others. Hence, it 
would make no sense to Samuels to be critical of the conventional economics.  

9 

 

consider  an  institutional  perspective.  However,  Gruchy  (1982b:  236)  stressed  with  respect  to  the 
1977 symposium, that:  

 

[a]lmost 20 years were to elapse after the founding of the AFEE before it devoted a symposium 
to the topic of the nature and scope of institutional economics, but […] the symposium largely 
ignored  the  basic  questions  of  nature  and  significance  of  mainstream  institutionalism  and 
considered instead a wide variety of highly specialized topics such as information systems, price 
theory, trade unions, the property institution, socialist planning, and development economics. 

 
Regarding  the  context  of  the  AFEE’s  foundation,  the  1975  theme  could  seem  polemical, 
because  it  took  the  Chicago  School  into  consideration  and  the  AFEE’s  founding  fathers  had  the 
feeling that they  were cast out  of the AEA because  of the type of economist  that was common in 
Chicago.  

Symposium and policy position were Gruchy’s (hard) complaints about Samuels’ editorship. 
However, the review episode pushed Gruchy to officially demand changes in the AFEE’s internal 
affairs.  On  June  6,  1974,  Gruchy  wrote  to  Gambs  (Gruchy  Papers)  about  AFEE’s  “statement  of 
purpose”  which,  in  Gruchy’s  opinion,  should  be  rewritten.  For  Gambs  (1980),  this  statement  of 
purpose  was  in  Article  II  of  the  AFEE’s  constitution,  and  he  agreed  with  Gruchy  that  it  was 
inadequate18. Gruchy and Gambs’ point was that Article II made sense during the foundation of the 
AFEE  but,  after  the  establishment  of  the  association,  Article  II  legitimated  the  JEI’s  editor’s 
adoption of his/her own policy (Gambs 1980). Gruchy and Gambs — supported by Daniel Fusfeld 
— drafted an amendment to AFEE’s constitution, to clarify Article II (Gambs 1980). The statement 
of  purpose  would  be  “to  promote  dissident  non-Marxian  economics”  (Gambs  1980:  30).  In  1975, 
the Executive Board turned down this proposed amendment. Gruchy and Gambs resigned from the 
AFEE in the same year. However, Gruchy returned to be an active AFEE member by the end of his 
life (Dillard 1990)19.    

The animosity between Gruchy and Samuels prompted the former to revisit his taxonomy on 
institutionalists.  Contemporary Economic  Thought was about introducing neoinstitutionalism, thus 
reinforcing  the  holistic  methodology  of  institutional  economics  previously  addressed  in  Modern 
Economic Thought. However, in the former introduction of Gruchy’s neoinstituionalism, his AFEE 
presidential  address,  other  segments  of  dissenters  were  mentioned  (however,  without  much 
emphasis).  For  Gruchy  (1969),  there  were  two categories  of  dissenters.  The  first would  be a  non-
academic  type  of  dissenter20,  while  the  other  was  an  academic  one  that  was  divided  in  three  sub-
groups:  (1)  the  ones  who  would  like  to  reconstruct  conventional  economics,  making  it  more 
realistic; it would be closer to reality by utilizing more feedback from empirical studies; (2) the ones 
who  believed  that  conventional  economics’  scope  was  too  limited,  and  that  an  interdisciplinary 
approach  was  necessary;  hence  economics  needed  to  be  combined  with  other  social  sciences, 
instead of being reconstructed; and (3) the neoinstitutionalists (Gruchy 1969).  

However,  following  the  review  episode,  Gruchy  recovered  that  taxonomy  of  dissenters  to 
classify institutionalists. In a 1975 letter to Gambs, Gruchy highlighted that there were three group 

                                                             
18 The content of Article II was: “[t]he purpose and objectives of the Association, a non-profit organization, shall be to 
foster, in the broadest manner, the development of economic study and of economics as a social science based on the 
complex interrelationships of man and society and in a manner such that will acknowledge the need to join questions of 
economic  theory  to  questions  of  economic  policy.  Toward  this  end  the  organization  may  conduct  meetings;  issues 
publications;  make  available  information  on  economics  and  economic  policy;  cooperate  with  other  organizations; 
stimulate research; and undertake any other activities in the advancement of its purposes and objectives” (Constitution 
of the Association for Evolutionary Economics, Gruchy Papers). 
19  Samuels’  tenure  as  JEI  editor  ended  in  1981,  since  the  Michigan  State  University  had  to  stop  sponsoring  the  JEI 
because of budget cuts (letter from Walter Neale to all Board Members and all members of publications (editor search) 
committee, January 6, 1981, Gruchy Papers). 
20  As  this  paper  is  discussing  academic  issues,  this  kind  of  dissenter  are  not  key  for  my  analysis.  However,  Gruchy 
(1969)  stresses  that  this  group  criticized  and  disapproved  of  conventional  economics  and  the  consequences  of  its 
operations.  

10 

 

of  institutionalists:  (1)  A  group  that  objected  to  conventional  economics  and  called  themselves 
institutionalists,  but  did  not  know  exactly  why.  This  group,  for  Gruchy,  represented  a  significant 
part of AFEE membership during its early years. (2) Commonsians who, according to Gruchy, were 
dissenters who wanted a more realistic, socially inclined, and less technical economic science. This 
group  demanded  economics  to  be  more  involved  with  empirical  work  and  inter-disciplinarity 
(mainly  combining  law,  economics,  and  sociology).  For  Gruchy,  Samuels  would  be  part  of  this 
group.  (3)  “Mainstream  institutionalists”,  the  neoinstitutionalists,  who  believed  that  conventional 
economics was too limited in scope and, therefore, needed reconstruction. Their goal was mainly to 
replace  conventional  economic  analysis  in  its  entirety  (Gruchy  to  Gambs,  29  July  1975,  Gruchy 
Papers and Gambs Papers).  

institutionalists 

the  segmentation  of 

The 1975 taxonomy can be understood as a version of the 1969 taxonomy of dissenters that 
was  applied  to  institutional  economics  only.  However,  a  more  important  feature  of  the  1975 
classification  was 
into  a  Commonsian  group  and 
neoinstitutionalists.  Before  1975,  Gruchy  understood  that  institutionalists  were  inspired  by 
Commons  and  Commons  followers  as  part  of  neoinsitutionalists.  This  can  be  illustrated  by  a 
passage of Contemporary Economic Thought, which stresses that neoinstitutionalists were inspired 
by “[…] the work of Thorstein Veblen and latter institutionalists such as John R. Commons, Wesley 
C.  Mitchell  and  John  M.  Clark”  (Gruchy  1972:  1).  In  his  letter to  Gambs,  Gruchy  goes  beyond  a 
review  of  his  taxonomy,  stressing  that  tensions  emerged  in  the  AFEE  mainly  because  the 
Commonsian  group  rejected  the  mainstream  institutionalists  (Gruchy  to  Gambs,  29  July  1975, 
Gruchy  Papers  and  Gambs  Papers).  Classifying  Samuels  in  a  Commonsian  group  is  in  line  with 
Rutherford’s perspective of Samuels’ editorship. For Rutherford (2013), Samuels’ editorship held a 
broad approach to institutional economics, which was close to Commons’ understanding thereof.  

In the beginning of the 1980s, Gruchy introduced another taxonomy.  In this new taxonomy, 
Gruchy highlighted four groups of institutionalists and stressed that those groups were “distinct and 
conflicting”  (Gruchy  1982b:  228).  The  groups  were:  (1)  mainstream  institutionalists  or 
neoinstitutionalism;  (2)  general  institutionalism;  (3)  radical  institutionalism;  and  (4)  applied 
institutionalism. As stated by Gruchy (1982b: 228):  

 
[t]he general  institutionalists do not accept mainstream institutionalism as  it has been developed by 
the  post-1939  mainstream  institutionalists.  Instead  they  seek  to  construct  a  new  general  theory  of 
institutional  economics  that  they  say  would  be  on  a  higher  and  more  abstract  level  than  the 
theorizing of the present-day mainstream institutionalists.  
 
The  radical  wing  would  provide  a  Marxist  perspective  of  the  advanced  industrial  system. 
Applied  institutionalism,  would  represent  the  majority  of  the  AFEE  members  who  “take 
institutional  economics  to  be  only  a  supplement  to  neoclassical  microeconomics  and  Keynesian 
macroeconomics” (Gruchy 1982b: 228)21.  

As  stated  by  Gruchy  (1982b),  general  institutionalists,  also  known  as  anti-mainstream 
institutionalist,  understand  that  mainstream  institutionalism  failed  in  delivering  an  institutional 
theory  that  would  be  superior  to  conventional  economics.  Gruchy  classifies  Samuels  as  a  general 
institutionalist  and  himself  as  a  mainstream  institutionalist.  For  Gruchy  (1982b),  general 
institutionalism was looking for a general theory of institutional economics by relying on a general 
model of power, knowledge, and psychology that would be built on numerous monographic studies 
in  economics  and  related  social  sciences.  For  Gruchy,  this  conflict  within  institutional  economics 
lead it towards a current state that was far from satisfactory, as institutionalism failed to work as a 
unit.  Gruchy  (1978)  highlights  that  AFEE  held  a  lack  of  clear-cut  theoretical  image  because  its 
members  mainly  defended  a  vague  notion  of  evolutionary  economics  as  a  new  general  theory  of 
institutionalism, as a substitute for mainstream institutionalism.  

                                                             
21  Gruchy  (1978)  reinforces  the  same  taxonomy  without  considering  radical  institutionalism.  It  is  understandable 
because radical institutionalism was a birthing segment of institutional economics in the late 1970s and early 1980s. 

11 

 

Comparing Gruchy’s taxonomies from 1975 and 1982, and considering the events regarding 
the  AFEE  and  the  JEI  during  the  1970s,  it  is  possible  to  perceive  that  Gruchy  omitted  a  clear 
mention  of  Commons  and  Commosians,  and  named  Samuels’  group  as  general  institutionalism. 
However,  the  aversion  of  mainstream  institutionalists  by  Samuels’  group  remained  central  in 
Gruchy’s perspective. According to Gruchy, the tensions in  the AFEE emerged mainly from these 
different  academic  perspectives  (Gruchy  1978  and  1982b  and  Gruchy  to  Gambs,  29  July  1975, 
Gruchy Papers and Gambs Papers). 

During the late 1970s and early 1980s, Gruchy seemed to be different from the person who 
once  advised  the  first  editor  of  the  JEI  that  the  journal  should  rely  on  “social  economics”.  In 
Gruchy’s (1982b: 226) words 

 

[t]his [AFEE] was the first organization that sought formally to bring together economists who worked in 
the mainstream tradition of Veblen, Wesley Clair Mitchell, John Maurice Clark, and Clarence E. Ayres. It 
was the  intention of the  founders of the  AFEE that this  association would  have as  its  main purpose the 
advancement  of  mainstream  institutionalism  as  it  was  developed  by  institutionalists  from  Veblen  to 
Myrdal. 

  
And 
 

In 1959 the  Association  for Evolutionary Economics (AFEE) was  founded  for the purposes of  bringing 
institutionalists  together  and  providing  a  forum  for  the  discussion  and  advancement  of  mainstream 
institutional economics. It was the hope of the founders of the AFEE that this association would enlarge 
the  influence  of  the  mainstream  institutionalism  that  had  developed  over  the  decades  from  Veblen  to 
Galbraith (Gruchy 1978: 271). 

 
 
4. Final Notes 
 

In  the  late  19th  and  early  20th  centuries, American  institutionalism  emerged  as  no  clear-cut 
research  program  or  methodology.  Decades  later,  the  same  was  true  for  post-war  institutionalism. 
This diversity made itself clear during the AFEE foundation. Among the early AFEE members who 
identified  themselves  as  institutionalists,  one  could  find  pluralism  and  eclecticism.  This  paper 
argues, that this diversity among the early AFEE members was aligned with Allan Gruchy’s holistic 
approach  to  institutional  economics,  and  with  his  notion  of  neoinstitutionalism.  Gruchy’s 
neoinstitutionalism  was  introduced  by  his  AFEE  presidential  address  and  developed 
in 
Contemporary  Economic  Thought,  a  book  published  in  1972.  Four  reviews  of  Gruchy’s  (1972) 
reviews were published in 1974. Gruchy deeply disliked one of the reviews, understanding it as an 
attack from conventional economics on institutionalism. He associated it with Warren Samuels’ JEI 
editorship.  It  was  the  beginning  of  strong  bad  blood  between  Gruchy  and  Samuels.  The  former 
criticized  the  issues  focused  on  by  symposia  organized  by  Samuels,  and  a  lack  of  focus  of  the 
association  on  economic  policy.  For  Gruchy,  those  aspects  gave  the  AFEE  a  lack  of  clear-cut 
image.  Those  troubled  events  regarding  Gruchy’s  view  of  Samuels’  editorship,  and  his  animosity 
towards  Samuels,  led  Gruchy  to  revisit  his  taxonomy  of  institutionalists  a  couple  of  times.  It 
resulted in  a  different  segmentation  of institutionalists,  but  not  in  a  more  unified perspective  than 
neoinstitutionalism.  On  the  other  hand,  after  1975,  Gruchy  stressed  conflicting  groups  of 
institutionalists; he and Samuels were always in distinct and disagreeing groups.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

12 

 

Archive Collections Consulted 
 
Allan Gruchy Papers. In possession of the author (kindly provided to me by the late Fred Lee and 
Marco Cavalieri, who obtained these archives from Malcolm Rutherford).  
 
Clarence Ayres Papers. Briscoe Center of American History, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, 
Texas. 
 
John Gambs Papers. Hamilton College, Clinton, NY. 
 
 
References 
 
Almeida,  F.  2016.  “Inside  the  Organizational  Institutions  of  Institutional  Economics:  Why  Are 
There Two Institutionalist Associations?” Journal of Economic Issues 50 (2): 566–574. 
 
Asso, P., and Fiorito, L. 2008. “Was Frank Knight an Institutionalist?” Review of Political Economy 
20 (1): 59–77. 
 
Backhouse,  R.,  Caldwell,  B.,  Goodwin  C.,  and  Rutherford,  M.  2008.  “A.  W.  (Bob)  Coats,  1924–
2007.” History of Political Economy 40(3): 421–446. 
 
Buchanan, J. 1976. “Methods and Morals in Economics: The Ayres-Knight Discussion.” In Science 
and  Ceremony:  The  Institutional  Economics  of  C.  E.  Ayres,  edited  by  Breit,  W.,  and  W.  P. 
Culbertson Jr. Austin: University of Texas Press. 
 
Bush,  P.  1991.  “Reflections  on  the  Twenty-Fifth  Anniversary  of  AFEE:  Philosophical  and 
Methodological Issues in Institutional Economics.” Journal of Economic Issues 25(2): 321–346. 
 
Bush, P. 2009. “The Neoinstitutionalist Theory of Value”  Journal of Economic Issues 43(2): 293–
307. 
 
Briggs,  V.  1990.  “Allan  G.  Gruchy:  Master  Teacher  of  Undergraduate  Economics.” 
http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/briggsIV 
 
Cavalieri, M., and Almeida, F. 2015. “Institutionalists as Dissenters: Why Were Institutionalists So 
Dissatisfied with Economics During the Post-War Period” Journal of Economic Issues 49 (2): 475–
482. 
 
Cavalieri, M., and Almeida, F. 2017. “A History of the Foundation and the Early Years of AFEE: 
Pluralism and Eclecticism in Dissenting.” Journal of Economic Issues 51 (3): 613–634.  
 
Coats,  A.W.  1992.  “‘Clarence  Ayres’  Place  in  the  History  of  American  Economics:  An  Interim 
Assessment.” In On the History of Economic Thought: British and American Essays, volume one, 
edited by A.W. Coats, 359–377. London, UK: Routledge. 
 
Coats,  A.W.,  Gonce.  R.,  Shaffer,  J.,  and  Francis,  G.  1974.  “Four  Reviews  of  Allan  G.  Gruchy, 
Contemporary  Economic  Thought:  The  Contribution  of  Neoinstitutional  Economics”  Journal  of 
Economic Issues 8(3): 597–615.  
 
Dillard,  D.  1990.  “Allan  G.  Gruchy,  1906–1990:  A  Scholar’s  Life”  Journal  of  Economic  Issues 
24(3): 663–672. 

13 

 

 
Dillard,  D.  1991.  “The  Contributions  of  Allan  G.  Gruchy  to  Institutional  Economics”  Journal  of 
Economic Issues 25(2): 383–391. 
 
Fiorito, L. 2012. “American Institutionalism at Chicago: A Documentary Note.”  European Journal 
of History of Economic Thought 19(5): 829–836. 
 
Gambs, John. (1968). “What’s Next for the Association for Evolutionary Economics?”  Journal of 
Economics 2(1): 69–80.  
 
Gambs,  John.  1980.  “Allan  Gruchy  and  the  Association  for  Evolutionary  Economics.”  In 
Institutional  Economics:  Essays  in  Honor  of  Allan  G.  Gruchy,  edited  by  John  Adams,  26–30. 
Boston, MA: Martinus Nijhoff. 
 
Gruchy,  A.  1947.  Modern  Economic  Thought:  The  American  Contribution.  New  York:  Prentice-
Hall.  
 
Gruchy, A. 1948. “The Philosophical Basis of the New Keynesian Economics”  Ethics, 58(3): 235–
244, 
 
Gruchy, A. 1949. “J. M. Keynes’ Concept of Economic Science” Southern Economic Journal, 15(3): 249–
266. 
 
Gruchy, A. 1969. “Neoinstitutionalism and the Economics of Dissent.” Journal of Economic Issues 
3(1): 3–17. 
 
Gruchy,  A.  1972.  Contemporary  Economics  Thought:  The  Contributions  of  Neo-institutional 
Economics. Clifton: Augustus M. Kelley Publishers. 
 
Gruchy,  A.  1974.  “Government  Intervention  and 
Neoinstitutionalist Position” Journal of Economic Issues 8(2): 235–249. 
 
Gruchy,  A. 1977. “Institutionalism, Planning, and the Current Crisis”  Journal of  Economic Issues 
11(2): 431–448. 
 
Gruchy, A. 1978. “Institutional Economics: Its Influence and Prospects.” Economics and Sociology 
37(3): 271–281. 
 
Gruchy,  A. 1982a. “Planning in Contemporary  Institutional Thought”  Journal of Economic Issues 
16(2): 371–380. 
 
Gruchy, A. 1982b. “The current state of Institutional Economics: the movement’s limited impact on 
the conventional science is ascribed to disunity, disinterest in general theory” The American Journal 
of Economics and Sociology, 41(3): 225–242. 
 
Gruchy,  A.  1989.  “Institutionalism  in  the  New  Palgrave  Dictionary  of  Economics.”  Journal  of 
Economic Issues 23(3): 857–863. 
 
Gruchy, A., and Rutherford, M. 1990. “Obituary” Review of Political Economy, 2(3): 371–374. 
 
Hamilton, D. 2004. “Economic Heterodoxy at the University of Texas at Mid-Twentieth Century.” 
Research in the History of Economic Thought and Methodology, 22: 261–271. 

the  Social  Control  of  Business:  The 

14 

 

 
Hodgson, G. 2004. The Evolution of Institutional Economics: agency, structure and Darwinism in 
American institutionalism. London: Routledge. 
Liebhafsky,  H.  1980.  “Allan  Gruchy,  Neoinstitutionalist”  In  Institutional  Economics:  Essays  in 
Honor of Allan G. Gruchy, edited by John Adams, 19–25. Boston, MA: Martinus Nijhoff. 
 
O’Hara,  P.  1995.  “Association  for  Evolutionary  Economics  and  Association  for  Institutional 
Thought.”  In  Encyclopedia  of  Political  Economy,  edited  by  Phillip  O’Hara,  20–30.  London,  UK: 
Routledge.  
 
Rutherford,  M.  2011.  The  Institutionalist  Movement  in  American  Economics,  1918–1947. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 
Rutherford, M. 2013. “Warren Samuels, the Journal of Economics Issues, and the Association for 
Evolutionary Economics” Research in the History of Economic Thought and Methodology  31: 61–
72. 
 
Rutherford, M. 2015. “American Institutionalism After 1945.” Research in the History of Economic 
Thought and Methodology 33: 95–123. 
 
Samuels,  W.  1972.  “Macroeconomic  Institutional  Innovation:  Introduction.”  Journal  of  Economic 
Issues 6(4): 1–7. 
 
Sturgeon, J. 1981. “The History of the Association of Institutional Thought” Review of Institutional 
Thought 1(1): 40–53. 
 
Tool,  M.  1982.  “The  Veblen-Commons  Awards:  John  F.  Foster.”  Journal  of  Economic  Issues 
16(2): 351–352. 
 
Whalen,  C.  2016.  “Wallace  C.  Peterson:  A  Post-Keynesian  Institutionalist.”  Journal  of  Economic 
Issues, 50(2): 584–593. 

 

15 

