Reconsidering Frank Knight as an American Institutionalist 

Felipe Almeida 
Universidade Federal do Paraná 
 
Marindia Brites 
Universidade Federal do Paraná 
 
Gustavo Goulart 
Universidade Federal do Paraná 

 

 

Área 1 - História do Pensamento Econômico e Metodologia 

Resumo:  No  início  do  século  XXI,  Geoffrey  Hodgson  apresentou  uma 
controvérsia  sobre  Frank  Knight.  Hodgson  afirmou  que,  apesar  da  falta  de 
apoio historiográfico, Knight foi um institucionalista americano. De acordo 
com  Hodgson,  as  críticas  de  Knight  à  utilidade,  preferências  dadas, 
possibilidades  tecnológicas  fixas  e  individualismo  metodológico  seriam 
suficiente  para  classificar  Knight  como  um  institucionalista.  O  objetivo 
desse  artigo  é  investigar  a  classificação  controversa  apresebtado  por 
Hodgson.  Para  tal  é  realizado  um  estudo  tanto  da  perspectiva  do  Knight 
quanto  dos  Institucionalistas  sobre  utilidade,  preferências  e  tecnologia.  O 
artigo  conclui  que  o  Knight  e  o  Institutionalismo  americano  possuem  uma 
conexão ténue, na melhor das hipóteses. 
 
Palavras-chave: Frank Knight, Institucionalismo Americano 

Classificação JEL: B31; B25 

Abstract: At the beginning of the 21st century, Geoffrey Hodgson put out a 
controversial  assertion  about  Frank  Knight.  He  wrote  that,  despite  lack  of 
historiographic  support,  he  saw  Knight  as  an  American  Institutionalist.  He 
asserted  that  Knight‘s  criticisms  of  utility,  given  preferences,  fixed 
technological  possibilities,  and  methodological  individualism  made  him  fit 
into  the  Institutionalist  frame.  This  paper  aims  to  investigate  Hodgson‘s 
claims,  and  through  an  evaluation  of  Knight‘s  and  Institutionalists‘ 
perspective on utility, preferences, and technology, determine if it is indeed 
accurate  to  call  Knight  an  Institutionalist.  The  paper  concludes  ultimately 
that Knight and the American Institutionalist have a tenuous connection, at 
best.  

 

 

          Keywords: Frank Knight, American Institutionalism  

         JEL classification codes: B31; B25 

 

 
 

 
 

1 

Introduction 

At  the  beginning  of  the  21st  century,  the  British  institutionalist  Geoffrey 

Hodgson  provocatively  associated  Frank  Knight  with  American  institutionalism1 

(Hodgson  2001,  2004).  Additionally,  for  Hodgson,  ―[Knight]  was  also  one  of  the 

greatest  of  all  institutionalist  after  Veblen‖  (Hodgson  2004:  344).  Hodgson‘s 

perspective  prompted  a  reaction  among  historians  of  economic  thought.  The  most 

prominent response was Pier Francesco Asso and Luca Fiorito‘s ―Was Frank Knight an 

Institutionalist?‖ (2008).   

In this critical analysis of Hodgson and Knight, Asso and Fiorito (2008) argues 

against the idea of Knight as an American institutionalist demonstrating that he rejected 

both  the  institutionalist  approaches  of  instinct  and  behaviourism  and  empiricism 

adopted  by  some  institutionalists.  Malcolm  Rutherford  in  his  ―The  Institutional 

Movement  in  American  Economics‖  (2011)  also  comments  on  Hodgson  (2004). 

Rutherford  (2011:  Chapter  5)  shows  that  when  Knight  returned  to  the  University  of 

Chicago in 1927, he was expected to teach Institutional Economics. Rutherford stresses 

that  while  Knight  was  extremely  familiar  with  institutional  economics  and  was  a 

personal friend of Clarence Ayres, he strongly criticized its reliance on its ―scientism‖. 

Yet,  while  Hodgson‘s  classification  of  Knight 

is  not  shared  other 

historiographers,  they  too  point  out  that  Knight  took  the  role  of  institutions  very 

seriously,  influenced  heavily  by  Max  Weber  on  this  theme  (Asso  and  Fiorito  2008; 

Emmett 2009, 2013; Rutherford, 2011; Schweitzer, 1975). This paper attempts to offer 

a  new  analysis  of  Hodgson‘s  interpretation  of  Knight.  Specifically,  it  focuses  on 

comparing  Knight‘s  perspective  on  utility,  preference,  and  technology  with  that  of 

                                                 
1 The exact words of Hodgson (2004: 323) are: ―[t]he main purposes of this chapter are to situate Knight 
in the broad tradition of American institutional economics […]‖  

 

2 

American  Institutionalists  to  assess  whether  they  are  connected,  as  Hodgson  asserts 

(2004).  

In  this  paper,  we  analyse  Knight‘s  winter  1937  course  at  the  University  of 

Chicago, Economics 305: Economics from an Institutionalist Standpoint, using content 

mailed to Clarence Ayres (16 February 1937, Clarence Ayres Papers, Box 3F290). This 

course provides insight into Knight‘s perspective on Institutional Economics. To deepen 

our  analysis  of  this  course,  we  also  consider  Ayres‘s  reaction  to  Knight‘s  teachings, 

documented in a written correspondence between the two (Ayres to Knight, 23 February 

1937, Clarence Ayres Papers, Box 3F290).  

This  paper  unfolds  in  three  more  sections.  In  the  next  section,  we  compare 

Knight‘s perspective on utility theory with the Institutionalist standpoint. After that, we 

will use Hodgson‘s (2004) item  entitled ―taste and technology as variable‖ to evaluate 

Knight‘s  and  the  Institutionalist  viewpoints  on  given  wants  and  technological 

possibilities. Some  final  comments  closes  our  paper.  We  conclude  that  the  connection 

between Knight and American Institutionalists is weak.  

 

Utilitarianism and Newtonianism 

Item  1  of  Knight‘s  Economics  305—Economics  from  an  Institutionalist 

Standpoint,  1937  version,  was  called  ―The  Institutional  Movement.‖  Sub  Item  1.2, 

entitled  ―Readings  from  Veblen,  ‗father‘  of  the  movement‘‖  was  a  collection  of  eight 

essays  from  ―The  Place  of  Science  in  Modern  Civilization‖  (Veblen  1919)  and 

―Economic  Theory  in  the  Calculable  Future‖  (Veblen  1925).  These  essays  can  be 

understood  as  Veblen‘s  comments  and  criticisms  on  the  evolution  of  key  ideas  in 

economics.  Ayres  did  not  respond  positively  to  sub  item  1.2.  For  Ayres,  ―[…]  I  have 

 

3 

always  found  Veblen‘s  controversial  articles  quite  unsatisfactory.  They  attack;  they 

stigmatize;  they  express  impatience  with  the  whole  conceptual  system  of  economics 

orthodoxy;  but  they  give  little  or  no  clue  to  what  other  concepts  Veblen  lay  down  as 

fundamental  […]‖  (Ayres  to  Knight,  23  February  1937,  Clarence  Ayres  Papers,  Box 

3F290). 

Despite  Ayres‘s  criticism,  sub  item  1.2  is  relevant  to  our  paper  since  it  shows 

that  Knight  considered  ―Veblen‘s  controversial  articles‖  important  to  understand  the 

Institutional  Movement.  In  the  following  passages,  we  will  compare  Veblen‘s 

perspective, from papers from sub item 1.2, on utilitarianism with Knight‘s, looking for 

―connection  by  criticism‖  made  by  Hodgson.  Their  brief  comments  on  classical 

economics  shows  the  divergence  in  Veblen  and  Knight‘s  thinking  on  the  rise  of 

utilitarianism in economics.  

Knight  (2013)  strongly  criticises  classical  economics  (2013:  129):  ―[i]t  is 

essentially a policy, not a theory in any other sense than a theory of policy‖2. According 

to  Knight  (2013),  classical  economics  stood  for  a  ―line  of  policy,‖  and  for  criticizing 

policies  understood  as  wrong,  instead  of  an  analysis  of  economic  life  or  the  current 

system of economic relations. Initially, classical economists defended no policy but the 

one  protecting  property,  and  later  become  apologetic  of  laissez-faire.  According  to 

Knight  (2013:  130):  ―Hume  and  Adam  Smith  gave  the  first  analysis  to  be  taken 

seriously in the way of a mechanical-utilitarian explanation‖.  

Despite minor similarities, Veblen‘s perspective on classical economics is quite 

different  from  Knight‘s.  Like  Knight,  Veblen  (1899a)  also  affirmed  that  classical 

economics  focused  on  elements  of  policy,  but  for  Veblen,  this  was  more  than  simply 

                                                 
2 Clearly, Knight (2013) is a posthumously published paper. Although it is not possible  to know exactly 
when the paper was written, according to Emmett (2013), it was possibly during Knight‘s transition from 
the University of Iowa to the University of Chicago. Additionally, as Knight (2013) quotes F. H. Allport‘s 
―The Nature of Institutions‖ published in 1927, it must have been written after 1927 (Emmett 2013). 

 

4 

standing for a ―line of policy‖. Veblen did not criticise classical economics in a general 

sense;  in  fact,  he  introduced  no  criticism  to  Smith  and  Malthus.  In  Veblen‘  words 

(1899b: 130): ―[a]fter Adam Smith‘s day, economics fell into profane hands […] [a]part 

from Malthus, who, of all the greater economists, stands nearest to Adam Smith […]‖. 

Unlike  Knight  (2013),  Veblen  (1899b)  does  not  strongly  associate  Smith  with 

utilitarianism. In Veblen‘s words (1899b: 130–131): ―[t]here is no wide breach between 

Adam Smith and the utilitarians […] Adam Smith might well be classed as a moderate 

utilitarian […] Malthus has still a more of a utilitarian air […]‖. Veblen‘s key criticism 

of  classical  economics  was  regarding  the  adoption  of  Benthamism  and  then  hard 

utilitarianism3.  Hence,  Knight  and  Veblen  differ  on  when  and  how  the  utilitarian 

approach arose in economics. As we will discuss in the following passages, while they 

both critiqued what utilitarianism meant for economics, they did so for different reasons 

and to different ends.  

We  begin  with  an  analysis  of  Knight‘s  perspective  and  critiques  on 

utilitarianism.  For  Knight  (2013),  the  adoption  of  a  utility  theory  shifted  economics 

away  from  policies  and  propagandas  to  the  realm  of  pure  science.  Yet,  he  still  had 

significant  critiques  of  a  more  scientific  approach.  Knight  (2013;  135)  stresses  that  in 

the effort to make the field of economics more scientific, the attention was focused on 

―the most abstract aspect of the material, the mere mathematical relations of prices‖. For 

Knight  (1935a:  154):  ―[…]  prices  are  no  more  determined  by  psychological  utilities 

than psychological disutilities […] Price is determined by cost rather than utility but by 

                                                 
3 For Veblen, classical economics became associated with utilitarianism in the 19th century. In Veblen‘s 
words (1909: 232): ―[…] the marginal-utility school is substantially at one with the classical economics of 
the nineteenth century, the difference between the two being that the former is confined within narrower 
limits  and  sticks  more  consistently  to  its  teleological  premises.  Both  are  teleological,  and  neither  can 
consistently  admit  arguments  from  cause  to  effect  in  the  formulation  of  their  main  articles  of  theory. 
Neither can deal theoretically with phenomena of change, but at the most only with rational adjustment to 
change  which  may  be  supposed  to  have  supervened.‖  For  Veblen  (1909),  both  schools  take  as  starting 
point the traditional psychology of the hedonists of the early nineteenth century. 

 

5 

cost  in  a  physical,  technical  sense,  not  that  of  pain  or  sacrifice.‖  Knight  (2013:  135) 

reinforces this point by  affirming that  utility theorists ―weakened the appeal  to  human 

interests,‖  making  it  ―quite  unnecessary‖  to  provide  a  scientific  perspective  to 

economics4.  

Knight  (1935a)  also  criticizes  the  role  of  utility  principle  as  the  basis  of  the 

process of adjustment in the analysis of cost. Knight affirmed that some resources may 

be  free  and  transferable,  but  others  may  not,  and  the  scale  of  production  matters  for 

transference capacity.5  

Knight  (1935a)  stresses  that  while  utility  theorists  contributed  to  distributions 

approach,  they  formulated  a  confused  general  principle.  Knight  (1935a;  156)  affirms 

that  ―[i]t  is  true  that  the  distributive  shares  are  simply  the  values  of  the  productive 

services  and  that  these  are  derived  from  product  values.‖  In  offering  an  explanation 

relying  on  just  utility,  ―[…]  the  values  of  the  cost  goods  may  be  said  to  reflect  the 

relative utilities of the products, but the general situation is rather that ultimately all the 

productive resources cooperate in making each product. Hence the relative ‗utilities‘ of 

                                                 
4  Knight  was  critical  of  utility  theorists  for  their  lack  of  attention  to  the  role  of  human  beings  in 
economics. According to Knight (1935b: 1), when economics deals with human beings, its fundamental 
problems  is  based  on  the  relationship  between  ―man  and  his  world‖.  Concerning  utilitarianism,  Knight 
(1935a: 159) highlights that ―[t]he notion of increments of satisfaction undoubtedly implies that the value 
of  life  as  a  whole  is  some  definite  increasing  function  of  the  quantities  of  the  various  means  of 
satisfactions available  which  hardly agrees with common sense‖ (emphasis added). Moreover, ―[…] the 
utility  description  of  behaviour  as  an  affair  of  comparing  and  choosing  is  valid  only  in  so  far  as  men 
compare  and  choose;  no  one  in  his  senses  has  thought  of  it  as  the  exclusive  form  of  all  activity  in  all 
historic time.‖ (Knight 1935a: 159). 
5 Knight (1935a: 155) stresses that given a long time  for readjustment, which includes changes of forms 
of  capital,  retraining  of  workers  (in  such  case,  Knight  affirmed  that  law  of  constant  cost  would  be 
applicable), utility can determine the quantities produced but not the equilibrium price. More specifically, 
in  Knight‘s  words  (1935a:  155):  ―[…]  the  factors  of  production  are  hardly  transferable  instantly  in  any 
degree;  for  a  very  short  period  the  condition  approximates  that  of  fixed  supply.  In  so  far  as  this  is  the 
case, price is determined by the relative utilities of the supplies as they stand, cost exerting no influence at 
all.  Problems  actually  encountered  fall  between  these  two  limits;  the  longer  the  period  over  which  one 
looks  ahead,  the  greater  the  extent  to  which  prices  at  the  end  of  it  will  correspond  to  physical  cost 
conditions and the less the role of utility. For ordinary producers‘ calculations the role of cost is certainly 
far the greater, but the actual quoted price at any moment, the price at which consumers buy from dealers, 
reflects rather the demand conditions, supply being ‗given‘. The influence of relative utility as compared 
with  that  of  relative  cost  depends  on  the  comparative  elasticities  of  the  two  curves.  In  the  short  run, 
supply  is  highly  inelastic  and  demand  conditions  predominate;  in  the  long  run,  supply  generally  has 
practically  infinite  elasticity  and  predominates  over  demand,  the  latter  being  always  of  intermediate 
elasticity.‖ 

 

6 

units  of  different  resource  depend  on  the  relative  physical  quantities  which  they 

respectively contribute to each product‖ (Knight 1935a; 156).  

Additionally,  utility  theorists  gave  attention  to  demand—which  was  taken  for 

granted  by  the  Ricardians.  However,  for  Knight  (1935a:  158),  ―the  importance  of  its 

contribution cannot be overestimated‖ as demand has ever being recognized as a driving 

force of economic activity,  ―although generally physical cost relations exercise a much 

greater control over the superficial fact of exchange ratios‖.6 

For Knight  (1935a:  158),  utilitarianism  reflects  ―the eighteenth-century  craving 

for  a  principle‖  of  human  behaviour  and  social  organization  next  to  Newton‘s 

mechanics.7  As  stated  by  Knight  (1935b:  1-2):  ―[f]rom  a  rigorously  scientific  view-

point,  life  is  a  matter  of  mechanics‖  [emphasis  in  the  original].  In  economics,  this 

approach  introduced  ―simplicity  and  order‖  and  made  it  possible  to  analyse  problems 

through  mathematical  functions  and  methods  of  infinitesimal  calculus  (Knight  1935a: 

158). 

For  Knight  (1935a  and  1935b),  economics  was  dealing  with  concepts  and 

theoretical  development  by  relying  on  analogies  with  theoretical  mechanics,  which  he 

found  to  be  problematic  at  times.  For  example,  according  to  Knight  (1935c:  149), 

economics  studies  were  using  the  terms  ―static‖  and  ―dynamic‖  despite  a  clear 

definition  or  distinction  of  those  concepts  as  it  related  to  economics,  generating 

confusion as those terms have a definite meaning in mechanics ―unrelated to the main 

issue in economics‖ (1935b: 33-34).  

                                                 
6  Moreover,  according  to  Knight  (1935a:  158),  it  is  claimed  that  ―utility  theory  carries  the  analysis  of 
demand  beyond  the  surface  facts  of  quantity  and  price,  that  it  ‗explains‘  demand‖.  For  Knight  (1935a: 
158), ―it is in fact a favourite point of attack for the enemies of abstract theoretical economics as such.‖ 
7 Knight (1935c: 150) uses the term ―older Newtonian mechanics‖. Knight (1935c: 150) argues that since 
Newton, the objectification of force gave room for  metaphysical and unreal notions—yet engineers  still 
using the old concepts. 

 

7 

Further, Knight (1935c) highlights that the notions of force and equilibrium are 

also used as analogies between economics and mechanics, but notes that in economics, 

the  notion  of  force  is  problematic  because  of  its  association  with  psychology. 

Economists  biased  to  materialistic  approach  and  behavioristic  psychology  would  have 

some difficulty in being consistent while discussing forces and equilibrium. The result 

is  a  lack  of  focus  on  wants,  sacrifices,  and  satisfaction  to  exclusively  deal  with 

commodities and prices (Knight,  1935c:  150).8 Knight  (1935c:  150) argues that this is 

what a great number of economists did during his time, and as a result were restricted to 

statistical  trends  and  correlations.  Their  interest  in  and  reliance  on  these  metaphors 

caused  them  to  focus  on  statistical  models  and  on  their  mathematical  limits  in  a 

different  manner  from  the  sense  in  which  ―equilibrium‖,  ―tendency‖,  and  ―forces‖  are 

generally used (Knight, 1935c: 151).  

Knight  (1935c:  151)  adds  that  the  mechanical  equilibrium  is  a  mutual 

cancelation  of  forces  culminating  in  rest,  but  in  economics,  equilibrium  means  no 

economic  processes  are  induced.  For  Knight  (1935b:  34),  focusing  on  the  possibility 

and condition of equilibrium culminated in the study of the laws of economic changes 

neglected.  According  to  Knight  (1935b:  33–34),  a  key  issue  is  ―whether  the  forces 

acting under given conditions tend to produce an equilibrium, and if so how and if not 

                                                 
8  For  Knight  (1935c),  in  such  an  approach  between  economics  and  a  Newtonian  theoretical  mechanics, 
the role of conscious deliberation and effort become automatic responses. For Knight, economics does not 
deal with this issue in a complete sense, […] ―it accepts deliberation regarding means as real, but treats 
end as given in the situation and argues that deliberation regarding ends (which common sense accepted 
without  question)  is  ‗really‘  deliberation  regarding  means.‖  (Knight  [1935c:  152])  Another  issue 
regarding the approach between economics and mechanics is the lack of a clear definition of what ―force‖ 
is  in  human  behaviour.  It  could  be  conscious  interests,  some  kind  of  ―real  advantage‖  (biological, 
hedonistic,  aesthetical,  or  ethical)  or  merely  simple  situations  of  the  organism  (Knight  1935c).  Knight 
(1935b), in a general perspective of utility theorists, affirms that there is an economics that ―[…] reaches 
law as universal as those of mathematical and mechanics […] There are no laws regarding the content of 
economic behaviour, but there are laws  universally valid as to  its form‖ [emphasis in the original]. The 
core  issue,  for  Knight  (1935b:  1),  is  how  far  life  problems  can  be  reduced  to  the  form  of  using  given 
means to achieve given ends. Regarding the analysis of human beings‘ decision-making, it is important to 
address  that  Knight  was  highly  critical  of  how  economics  was  appropriating  behaviourism  from 
psychology (Knight 1935b: specially section III; see also Asso and Fiorito 2015). 

 

8 

what is their tendency; that is, it is a problem in dynamics.‖ For Knight (1935b: 33), it 

was ―a fatal gap in the science.‖ Hence, the ―crying need of economics theory‖ was the 

study  of  the  ―‗laws  of  motion‘,  the  kinetics  of  economics  changes‖  [emphasis  in  the 

original]  (Knight  1935b:  33).  Knight  (1935a:  160):  ―[…]  the  advocates  of  a  purely 

statistical science do not seem to realize that economics, if it is to have any relation to 

human problems of means and ends, must be concerned with goods and services not in 

themselves, but as representing values or sacrifices.‖ 

With  Knight‘s  perspective  outlined,  we  then  analysed  Veblen‘s  thoughts  on 

utilitarianism.  Both  Knight  and  Veblen  see  the  limits  of  utilitarianism,  and  have 

critiqued this approach. Veblen (1909: 234) introduces criticism of hedonism, focusing 

on  the  limits  of  its  psychological  approach.  For  Veblen  (1909:  231),  the  utilitarian 

approach in economics is just a matter of distribution analysis. Veblen (1908 and 1909) 

stressed that attempts are often made to extend the use of the principles of utility beyond 

the  distributive  field—as  well  as  to  apply  it  to  questions  involving  production  and 

consumption. However, those attempts took place in the distributive field—such as the 

distribution  of  goods  in  the  case  of  consumption.  Regarding  distribution,  Veblen‘s 

(1908) perspective on price aligns closely with Knight‘s.  

However, different from Knight, Veblen proposed that economics should change 

its  theoretical  perspective.    Veblen,  as  well  as  Knight,  criticized  the  static  feature  of 

utilitarianism. We may affirm that Knight‘s and Veblen‘s comments are similar, but the 

first  was  more  rigorous  in  his  criticism  and  the  latter  introduces  his  critics  in  order  to 

offer another theoretical approach. For Veblen (1909), utilitarianism does not introduce 

any kind of change or movement in the economic system, hence growth, sequence, and 

process are not taking into consideration. As stated by Veblen, ―natural rights‖, ―natural 

 

9 

order‖ and ―natural laws‖ give to the utilitarianism perspective a definitive normality in 

economics (Veblen 1898 and 1908).  

Differences  in  Knight‘s  and  Veblen‘s  perspectives  rely  on  how  limits  of 

utilitarianism should be removed. As previously discussed, Knight saw utility theory as 

the introduction of a scientific approach in economics when the classical theory lacked a 

scientific  foundation.    While  Knight  took  issue  with  the  ill-defined  analogies  used  to 

connect  Newtonian  mechanics  to  economics,  Veblen  had  a  different  criticism: 

according to him, utilitarianism‘s hedonism and static approach were a result of taking 

for granted or even denying cultural and institutional elements (Veblen 1090: 233).  

Veblen (1909) offers his institutional approach as an alternative to the limits of 

utilitarianism,  suggesting  that  the  institutional  perspective  integrated  modern  science9. 

His criticism focuses on why  analysing society‘s pecuniary institutions and habits is  a 

better  approach  than  focusing  on  hedonistic  tendencies.  He  critiques  classical 

economics  and  utilitarianism,  then,  as  a  means  of  introducing  his  own  perspective:  an 

economic process involving institutions, habits, and cumulative changes.  

For  Veblen  (1898),  economics  was  stuck  in  preconceptions  of  the  past  and 

needed to become a modern science. According to him, a modern science would be an 

evolutionary  science,  meaning  that  it  would  involve  a  notion  of  cumulative  causation. 

                                                 
9 For example, about the role given to price and price system by the utilitarianism, Veblen wrote (1909: 
247): ―[i]t is the institution of property that gives rise to these habitual grounds of discrimination, and in 
modern times,  when  wealth is counted in terms of  money, it is in terms of  money value that these tests 
and  standards  of  pecuniary  excellence  are  applied.  This  much  will  be  admitted.  Pecuniary  institutions 
induce pecuniary habits of thought that affect men‘s discrimination outside of pecuniary matters; but the 
hedonistic interpretation alleges that such pecuniary habits of thought do not affect men‘s discrimination 
in pecuniary matters. Although the institution scheme of the price system visibly dominates the modern 
community‘s thinking in matters that lie outside the economic interest, the hedonistic economists insist, in 
effect, that this institutional scheme must be accounted of no effect within that range of activity to which 
it  owes  its  genesis,  growth,  and  persistence.  The  phenomena  of  business,  which  are  peculiarly  and 
uniformly  phenomena  of  price,  are  in  the  scheme  of  the  hedonistic  theory  reduced  to  non-pecuniary 
hedonistic  terms  and  the  theoretical  formulation  is  carried  out  as  if  pecuniary  conceptions  had  no  force 
within the traffic in which such conceptions originate. It is admitted that preoccupation with commercial 
interests had ‗commercialised‘ the resto of modern life, but the ―commercialization‖ of commerce is not 
admitted.‖  

 

10 

Veblen  (1898)  relates  his  notion  of  modern  science  with  a  framework  of  a  sequential 

analysis of cause and effect, by virtue of their cumulative character. 

In  short,  while  Knight  and  Veblen  both  critiqued  utilitarianism,  they  did  so  to 

different  ends. Knight  saw in  utilitarianism the inauguration of a scientific economics. 

On the contrary, Veblen saw the opposite: preconceptions of the scientific approach in 

economics.  While  Knight‘s  and  Veblen‘s  criticism  on  hedonism  and  mechanics  in  the 

utilitarianism are similar, Knight was more rigorous in his analysis than Veblen. Knight 

suggested that utilitarianism should evolve in order to deal with laws of motion, while 

Veblen  wanted  economics  to  break  with  the  mechanics  approach  altogether  and  move 

toward an evolutionary approach, which he understood as a modern science. Given this 

analysis, it is clear that there were significantly more differences in Veblen and Knight‘s 

respective criticisms than there were similarities. This goes against Hodgson‘s assertion 

that Knight was an institutionalist. Moreover, Knight did not reject mechanics analogies 

in  economics  as  a  scientific  principle,  as  Veblen  did.  Knight  rejected  the  analogies 

economics as dealing with10.  

 

                                                 
10 Among the essays of ―The Place of Science in Modern Civilization‖ (Veblen 1919) which was part Sub 
item  1.2  of  Knight‘s  Economics  305,  we  can  find  ―Gustav  Schmoller‘s  Economics‖  (Veblen  1901). 
Veblen (1901: 255) characterized Schmoller as  ―the best accepted and  most authoritative spokesman of 
that branch of historical economics which professes to cultivate theoretical inquiry.‖ For Veblen (1901), 
Schmoller  is  the  exponent  of  the  modern  version  of  the  school.  For  Veblen  (1901),  Schmoller  did  not 
refuse the importance of empirical generalization, common procedure in  the early historical economists‘ 
writings,  indeed  he  adopted  this  generalization  a  plenty  of  times.  Preliminary  to  offering  a  theoretical 
explanation, Schmoller relied on ―exhaustive historical scrutiny‖ in order to formulate laws of causation 
(Veblen 1901: 263-264). For Veblen (1901), Schmoller‘s point was to discover laws of causation instead 
of  observable  historical  uniformities  of  an  economic  phenomenon.  According  to  Veblen  (1901:  264), 
Schmoller‘s methodology was ―Darwinian rather than Hegelian […]‖  The fact that Knight‘s Economics 
305 relied on Veblen‘s perspective on Schmoller could be quite interesting for this paper proposal. As it 
is  known  by  historiography  that  German  historical  school—mainly  Max  Weber—was  an  influence  on 
Knight (see Brouwer 2002, Emmett 2009: Chapter 9, and  Noppeney 1997). However, Knight relied little 
on  Schmoller‘s  writings  to  allow  a  comparison  with  Veblen‘s  perspective.  Furthermore,  according  to 
Noppeney  (1997),  Knight‘s  reading  of  members  of  the  German  historical  school,  even  considering  the 
new, or second, generation, is not consistent or unambiguous. The key Knight‘s comments on Schmoller 
regards a defence from Lionel Robbins‘s attack on German historical school associating Schmoller with 
―degrading  mystique  of  historicism‖.  Knight  criticized  the  generalization  of  historical  facts  in  universal 
laws,  however  he  mentioned  Karl  Bücher—another  member  of  the  new,  or  generation  of  German 
historicists—and not Schmoller in his comments (Noppeney 1997: 324).  

 

11 

More issues on Hodgson’s “Tastes and Technology as variable”  

Hodgson  continued  his  attempts  to  position  Knight  as  an  institutionalist  in  a 

section  entitled  ―Tastes  and  Technology  as  Variable‖  in  the  chapter  ―The  Maverick 

Institutionalism of Frank Knight‖ in his 2004 book. While Hodgson tries to demonstrate 

how  Knight  was  influenced  by  American  Institutionalists  on  the  topics  of  malleability 

of wants and the institutional approach to cumulative causation, our paper highlights the 

flaws in his assertions.11    

To  this  end,  we  will  offer  insights  based  on  Ayres‘s  reaction  to  Knight‘s 

Economics  305,  1937  version.  Ayres‘s  reaction  fell  into  three  categories:  (1)  the 

meaning  of  the  Institutionalism  movement;  (2)  the  lack  of  Veblen‘s  propositional 

writings;  and  (3)  a  discussion  about  technology.  Because  this  paper  is  not  about  the 

meaning  of  the  movement,  we  will  focus  more  on  the  latter  two  points12.  Regarding 

Veblen‘s writing, Ayres  suggested Knight  to  insert  Veblen‘s ―The Theory of Business 

Enterprise‖ (Veblen 1906) and parts of ―The Instinct of Workmanship and the State of 

the  Industrial  arts‖  (Veblen  1914)  and  ―The  Theory  of  the  Leisure  Class‖  (Veblen 

1899c).  

It  is  evident  from  Veblen‘s  writings  (1899c,  1906  and  1914)  that  he  believed 

that  consumer  thoughts  and  behaviour  is  a  markedly  interdisciplinary  topic,  dealing 

with  psychological,  philosophical,  and  socio-economic  issues.  In  this  regard,  it  is 

similar to Knight‘s perspective, as he understood that ―[w]ants are in the providence of 

                                                 
11 In Hodgson‘s words: ―Knight regarded the neoclassical assumption of given preferences functions and 
technological  possibilities  inadequate.  Concerning  the  malleability  of  wants,  Knight  (1922,  pp.  457-8) 
accepted the influence of John Maurice Clark, Walton Hamilton and Thorstein Veblen‖ (Hodgson 2004: 
328)  and  ―[i]n  analyzing,  long-period  change,  Knight  (1924,  pp.  264)  saw  the  role  of  ‗institutional‘ 
economics, [as] studying  ‗the cumulative changes of institutions‘. He saw the  value of  this approach as 
lying  in  its  capacity  ‗to  predict  long-period  changes  in  the  factors  that  applied  economics  accepts  as 
data‘‖ (Hodgson 2004: 329). 
12  About  the  meaning  of  Institutionalism  movement,  Ayres‘s  perspective  is  the  same  as  the 
historiographical: American institutionalism was not associated with a clear paradigm and was based on 
loosely related research programmes among its members (see Fiorito 2012 and Rutherford 2011).  
 

 

12 

psychology, sociology, and ethics […]‖ (Knight 1935b: 33). Veblen‘s (1899c) approach 

to  a  culturally  grounded  consumer‘s  behaviour  is  derived  from  a  historical  process 

based on the dynamics offered by instincts, habits, and institutions that culminate in an 

emulative  conduct.  Veblen‘s  instinct-habit  approach  was  influenced  by  the  American 

Pragmatic  School  of  Philosophy,  mainly  by  John  Dewey  (see  Hodgson  1998,  Tilman 

2007, and Twomey 1998).  

Yet,  despite  the  immediate  similarities,  once  again,  there  is  evidence  that 

indicates  that  Veblen‘s  perspective  did  not  influence  Knight‘s  too  significantly.  There 

are two pieces of evidence that specifically stand out. First, ―The Theory of the Leisure 

Class‖ (Veblen 1899c) was not a reading of Knight‘s Economics 305—as Ayres pointed 

out. As F. Taylor Ostrander‘s notes of Knight‘s course pointed out, Knight did mention 

―The Theory of the Leisure Class‖ in the classroom, but he chose not to include it as a 

reading for his course (Samuels 2005).13 If Veblen‘s perspective of wants had a strong 

influence  on  Knight,  he  would  have  positioned  it  more  prominently  in  his  course. 

Second,  the  relationship  between  Knight  and  the  American  Pragmatic  School  of 

Philosophy is controversial; Knight was critical of Dewey (see Hands 2006 and Emmett 

1999).  Hence,  we  can  affirm  that  both  Knight  and  Veblen  stand  for  dealing  with  how 

wants  are  constituted.  Despite  this,  there  is  insufficient  evidence  to  agree  with 

Hodgson‘s position that Knight what influenced by Veblen‘s perspective on how wants 

are culturally developed.  

On the matter of technology, there are further flaws in Hodgson‘s assertion that 

Knight  aligned  with  the  Institutionalist  perspective.  Despite  the  fact  that  Hodgson 

(2004) uses the term ―technology‖ in the title of the section, it contains little mention of 

                                                 
13  F.  Taylor  Ostrander  receive  a  British-endowed  Henry  Fellowship  for  graduate  study  of  economics  at 
Oxford University, 1932–1933. Thereafter, Taylor Ostrander took his doctoral study in economics at the 
University of Chicago, 1933–1934 (Taylor Ostrander 2009). Hence, Taylor Ostrander‘s notes mentioned 
above are from a previous version of Knight‘s course than the one in Ayres‘s archives.  

 

13 

technology.  A  possible  explanation  is  that  American  institutionalists—especially 

Veblenians—usually  associated  technology  with  the  institutional  and  cumulative 

chances  (see  Rutherford  1984).  Hence,  Hodgson  (2004)  may  have  assumed  that 

discussion about cumulative change cover discussion about technology—which may be 

the  case  for  American  institutionalists.  In  his  reaction,  Ayres  wrote:  ―[…]  the 

technological  theory  of  economic  progress  seems  to  me  somewhere  near  to  the  initial 

postulate of ‗Institutionalism‘ as Veblen developed it […] Consequently, I should open 

the  exposition  of  ‗Institutionalism‘  principles  with  the  theory  of  technology.  But  I 

should  certainly  not  rest  the  whole  burden  of  the  argument  on  Veblen‖  (Ayres  to 

Knight, 23 February 1937, Clarence Ayres Papers, Box 3F290).     

In Knight‘s Economics 305, in ―IV. The Institutional View of Economic Life‖, 

there is a sub item ―3. Technology‖. The readings of this sub item were authored by a 

range  of  individuals—the  economic  historian  Abbott  Payson  Usher,  the  electrical 

engineer  Arthur  Percy  Morris  Fleming,  the  politician  Baron  Ernle,  the  historian  Paul 

Mantoux,  the  historian  and  philosopher  Lewis  Mumford,  the  historian  of  economic 

thought  and  economic  historian  Leo  Rogin,  and  sociologist  Seabury  Colum  Gilfillan. 

None of those thinkers had an association with American Institutionalism. This marked 

omission  indicates  that  Knight  was  not  attempting  to  espouse  an  Institutionalist 

perspective on technology, suggesting that it did not align with his own perspective.  

 Knight  (1935d)  introduces  direct  criticism  to  the  American  Institutionalist 

approach to cumulative causation. For Knight, the institutionalist cumulative change is 

associated  with  ―successive  changes  represent[ing]  ‗more‘  of  something  (which  is  the 

literal  meaning  of  the  word)  or,  more  generally,  that  changes  have  a  common 

‗direction‘‖  (Knight  1935d:  210). For Knight  (1935d), the term  ―cumulative‖ does not 

 

14 

refer to the direction of the social change, but rather to a series of changes14. Hence, we 

can find evidence that Knight was not influenced by  Institutionalists in his perspective 

on technology. 

 

Final Comments 

By evaluating the studies on Frank Knight‘s Economics 305—Economics from 

an  Institutionalist  Standpoint,  1937  version  (mailed  to  Clarence  Ayres—16  February 

1937, Clarence Ayres Papers, Box 3F290) with Knight‘s own writings on utility, wants, 

and  technology,  we  conclude  that  the  connection  between  Knight  and  American 

Institutionalism  is  weak  at  best.  While  Hodgson  correctly  states  that  there  are  some 

similarities in their thinking, by at large, these similarities are superficial.  

Knight  and  Veblen  have  divergent  perspectives  on  where  the  concept  of 

utilitarianism  originated  in  economics.  While  Knight  asserts  that  Smith  offers  a 

utilitarian  perspective,  Veblen  believed  that  Smith  and  Malthus  were  not  strong 

believers  in  the  utilitarian  philosophy.    This  indicates  that  these  men  interpreted 

utilitarianism differently, as they ascribed it to different early economics.  

Knight asserts that with utilitarianism was the start of the rise of ―pure science‖ 

as a force in economics—a notion that both he and Veblen argue makes human interests 

weaker. Knight criticized the role of utility in costs adjustment and the confused general 

principle  of  distributions  approach.  Additionally,  Knight  felt  that  the  contribution  of 

utilitarianism  to  the  analysis  of  demand  was  overestimated.  However,  Veblen 

considered utilitarianism just a matter of distribution, and that other approaches would 

be  the  logic  of  distribution  being  applied.  Given  this  divergent  interpretation,  we  may 

                                                 
14 Knight (1935d) can be more focused on Ayres‘s interpretation of Veblen‘s writings as it is a 
reply to Ayres (1935). 

 

15 

affirm that Knight was more rigorous in his reading of utilitarianism in economics than 

Veblen.   

In  another  point  of  agreement,  both  Knight  and  Veblen  believe  that 

utilitarianism  puts  economics  close  to  Newton‘s  mechanics.  For  Knight,  the  analogies 

among economics and Newtonianism are weak; there are no clear definitions for terms 

like ―static‖, ―dynamics‖, ―equilibrium‖ and ―forces‖ in the economics context. Knight 

also  affirmed  that  the  laws  of  economic  change  were  neglected;  hence,  economics 

should evolve in such directions and develop laws of motion. Veblen, however, took a 

different  perspective.  For  him,  Newtonianism  would  be  an  ancestral  form  of  science, 

and economics should rely on evolutionary science, a more modern field. While Knight 

did  not  reject  mechanics  analogies  in  economics  as  a  scientific  principle,  Veblen  did. 

Thus,  although  both  men  had  criticisms  of  utilitarianism,  and  although  some  of  those 

criticisms  were  shared,  there  was  too  much  disagreement  between  them  to  assert  that 

Knight was an institutionalist.  

Hodgson (2004) also claims that Knight was influenced by Veblen on the topic 

of  wants.  Yet  our  paper  shows  that  Ayres  specifically  flagged  that  Knight  did  not 

include Veblen‘s seminal work on this matter, ―The Theory of Leisure Class‖, as part of 

his  coursework.  While  he  mentioned  it  in  passing  in  his  class,  he  did  not  choose  to 

include  that  text  as  part  of  the  essential  reading  on  wants,  indicating  that  it  was  not  a 

significant  influence  for  him.  In  addition,  Knight  rejected  John  Dewey,  a  major 

influence  on  Veblen‘s  approach  to  consumption.  Therefore,  we  do  not  agree  with 

Hodgson‘s assertion that Knight was influenced by Veblen‘s perspective on how wants 

are culturally built.  

Hodgson  does  not  mention  much  about  technology  in  his  chapter  on  Knight 

(2004). To investigate whether  Knight  took an  Institutionalist  approach to technology, 

 

16 

we reviewed the readings in Economics 305 to determine which perspective was most 

prominent.  We  found  that  none  of  them  relied  on  American  Institutionalists‘  studies. 

Further, Ayres suggested that technology take a more central place in Knight‘s course. 

Regarding  the  association  of  technology  and  cumulative  causation,  we  discussed  the 

Institutional  approach‘s  suggestion  of  following  the  direction  of  social  change.  This 

stands in  opposition to Knight‘s perspective. Therefore, we  found that Knight  was not 

significantly  influenced  by  institutionalists  in  his  perspective  on  technology.  To 

conclude,  our  findings  are  consistent  with  that  of  Asso  and  Fiorito  (2008)—despite 

Hodgson‘s  arguments,  Knight  cannot  in  fact  be  characterized  as  an  American 

Institutionalist.   

 

 Archive Collections Consulted 

 
Clarence  Ayres  Papers,  Briscoe  Center  of  American  History,  University  of  Texas  at 
Austin, Austin, Texas. 
 
 
 
References 
 
Asso, Pier Francesco, and  Luca Fiorito.  2008.  ―Was Frank Knight  an  institutionalist?‖ 

Review of Political Economy 20 (1): 59–77.  

 
Asso, Pier Francesco, and Luca Fiorito. 2003. ―Waging War Against Mechanical Man: 

The  Knight–Copeland  Controversy  over  Behaviorism  in  Economics.‖  In 

Research  in  the  History  of  Economic  Thought  and  Methodology,  edited  by 

Warren J. Samuels and Jeff E. Biddle, Vol. 21-A, 65–96. Bingley, UK: Emerald 

Group Publishing Limited. 

 
Ayres,  C.  1935.  ―Moral  confusion  in  economics.‖  International  Journal  of  Ethics  45 

(2): 170–199.  

 
Brouwer,  Maria.  2002.  ―Weber,  Schumpeter,  and  Knight  on  Entrepreneurship  and 
Economic development.‖ In Change, Transformation, and Development, edited 
by J. Metcalfe and U. Cantner, 145–168. New York, NY: Physica–Verlag. 

 

 

17 

Emmett,  Ross.  1999.  ―The  Economist  and  the  Entrepreneur:  Modernist  Impulses  in 

Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit.‖ History of Political Economy 31 (1): 29–52. 

 
Emmett,  Ross.  2009.  Frank  Knight  and  the  Chicago  School  in  American  Economics. 

New York, NY: Routledge. 

 
Emmett,  Ross.  2013.  ―Frank  H.  Knight  on  Institutionalism  and  Economics.‖  In 

Research in the History of Economic Thought and Methodology, edited by Ross 

B.  Emmett,  Vol.  31-B,  117–124.  Bingley,  UK:  Emerald  Group  Publishing 

Limited. 

Fiorito,  Luca.  2012.  ―American  Institutionalism  at  Chicago:  A  Documentary  Note.‖ 

European Journal of History of Economic Thought 19 (5): 829–836.  

 
Hands, D. Wade. 2006. ―Frank Knight and Pragmatism.‖ European Journal of History 

of Economic Thought 13 (4): 571–605.  

 
Hodgson,  Geoffrey  M.  1998.  ―On  the  Evolution  of  Thorstein  Veblen‘s  Evolutionary 

Economics.‖ Cambridge Journal of Economics 22 (4): 15–431.  

 
Hodgson,  Geoffrey  M.  2001.  ―Frank  Knight  as  an  Institutional  Economist.‖  In 
Economics Broadly Considered: Essays in Honor of Warren J. Samuels, edited 
by  Jeff  Biddle,  John  Davis  and  Steven  G.  Medema,  64–93.  London  and  New 
York: Routledge. 

 
Hodgson,  Geoffrey  M.  2004.  The  Evolution  of  Institutional  Economics:  Agency, 

Structure and Darwinism in American Institutionalism. London: Routledge 

 
Kern,  William  S.  1997.  ―The  Heterodox  Economics  of  ‗The  Most  Orthodox  of 
Orthodox Economists‘.‖ American Journal of Economics and Sociology 56 (3): 
319–330.  

 
Knight,  Frank  H.  1935a.  ―Marginal  Utility  Economics.‖  Chap.  5  in  The  Ethics  of 

Competition. New York, NY: Harper. 

 
Knight,  Frank H.   1935b/1999. ―The  Limitations  of Scientific Method in  Economics.‖ 
In  Selected  Essays  by  Frank  H.  Knight,  edited  by  Ross  Emmett,  Vol.  1,  1–39. 
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 

 
Knight,  Frank  H.    1935c/1999.  ―Statics  and  Dynamics:  Some  Queries  Regarding  the 
Mechanical  Analogy  in  Economics.‖  In  Selected  Essays  by  Frank  H.  Knight, 
edited  by  Ross  Emmett,  Vol.  1,  149–171.  Chicago,  IL:  University  of  Chicago 
Press. 

 
Knight,  Frank  H.  1935d.  ―Intellectual  Confusion  on  Morals  and  Economics.‖ 

International Journal of Ethics 45 (2): 200–220. 

 
Knight,  Frank  H.    2013.  ―Institutional  History  and  the  Classical  Economics.‖  In 
Research in the History of Economic Thought and Methodology, edited by Ross 

 

18 

B.  Emmett,  Vol.  31-B,  125–150.  Bingley,  UK:  Emerald  Group  Publishing 
Limited. 

 
Noppeney, Claus. 1997. ―Frank Knight and the Historical School.‖ In Methodology 
of  the  Social  Sciences,  Ethics,  and  Economics  in  the  Newer  Historical 
School: From Max Weber and Rickert to Sambart and Rothacker, edited by 
P. Koslowski, 319–338. Berlin and New York: Springer. 

 
Rutherford,  Malcolm.  1984.  ―Thorstein  Veblen  and  the  Processes  of  Institutional 

Change.‖ History of Political Economy 16 (3): 331–348. 

 
Rutherford,  Malcolm.  2011.  The  Institutionalist  Movement  in  American  Economics, 
1918–1947: Science and Social Control. New York, NY: Cambridge University 
Press. 

 
Samuels,  W.  2005,  ―Notes  and  Other  Materials  from  Frank  H.  Knight‘s  Course, 
Economics  from  Institutional  Standpoint,  Economics  305,  University  Of 
Chicago,  1933–1934.‖  In  Research  in  the  History  of  Economic  Thought  and 
Methodology, edited by Warren J. Samuels, Vol. 23-B, 141–192.  Bingley, UK: 
Emerald Group Publishing Limited.  

 
Schweitzer,  Arthur.  1975.  ―Frank  Knight‘s  Social  Economics.‖  History  of  Political 

Economy 7 (3): 279–292. 

 
Taylor Ostrander, F. 2009. ―F. Taylor Ostrander: His Long and Wide-Ranging Career.‖ 
In  Research  in  the  History  of  Economic  Thought  and  Methodology,  edited  by 
Marianne  Johnson  and  Warren  J.  Samuels,  Vol.  27-C,  89–107.  Bingley,  UK: 
Emerald Group Publishing Limited. 

 
Tilman, Rick. 2007. Thorstein Veblen and the Enrichment of Evolutionary Naturalism. 

London: University of Missouri Press.  

 
Twomey, Paul. 1998. ―Reviving Veblenian Economic Psychology.‖ Cambridge Journal 

of Economics 22: 433–448. 

 
Veblen,  Thorstein.  1898/1919.  ―Why  is  Economics  not  an  Evolutionary  Science?‖ 
Chap.  5  in  The  Place  of  Science  in  the  Modern  Civilisation  and  Other  Essays. 
New York, NY: B. W. Huebsch. 

 
Veblen,  Thorstein.  (1899a/1919).  ―The  Preconceptions  of  Science  I.  Chap.  4  in  The 
Place of Science in the Modern Civilisation and Other Essays. New York, NY: 
B. W. Huebsch. 

 
Veblen,  Thorstein.  (1899b/1919).  The  Preconceptions  of  Science  II.  In  Veblen,  T. 
(1919)  In  The  Place  of  Science  in  the  Modern  Civilisation  and  Other  Essays. 
New York: B. W. Huebsch, p. 114–147. 

 
Veblen,  Thorstein.  (2007)  [1899c].  The  Theory  of  the  Leisure  Class.  Oxford:  Oxford 

University Press. 

 

 

19 

Veblen, Thorstein. (1901). Gustav Schmoller‘s Economics. In Veblen, T. (1919) In The 
Place of Science in the Modern Civilisation and Other Essays. New York: B. W. 
Huebsch, p. 252–278. 

 
Veblen,  Thorstein.    (2009)  [1906].  The  Theory  of  Business  Enterprise.  Gloucester: 

Dodo Press. 

 
Veblen, Thorstein. (1908). Professor Clark‘s Economics. T.  In Veblen, T. (1919). The 
Place of Science in the Modern Civilisation and Other Essays. New York: B. W. 
Huebsch, p 180–230. 

 
Veblen, Thorstein. (1909). The Limitations of Marginal Utility. In Veblen, T. (1919). In 
The Place of Science in  the Modern Civilisation and Other Essays. New York: 
B. W. Huebsch, p. 231–251. 

 
Veblen,  Thorstein.  (2006).  [1914].  The  Instinct  of  Workmanship  and  the  State  of  the 

Industrial arts. New York: Cosimo. 

 
Veblen,  Thorstein.  (1919).  In  The  Place  of  Science  in  the  Modern  Civilisation  and 

Other Essays. New York: B. W. Huebsch, p. 231–251. 

 
Veblen,  Thorstein.  (1925).  Economic  Theory  in  the  Calculable  Future.  American 

Economic Review, 15(1): 48–55 

 
Weber, M. (1927) General Economic History. New York; Greenberg. 
 

 

 

20 

