Determinants of Environmental Innovation in Brazilian Manufacturing 

Industries 

 

Andrea Lucchesi*; Matthew A. Cole**; Robert, J. R. Elliot**; Naercio A. Menezes-Filho***. 

Resumo:  Os  impactos  econômicos  da  degradação  ambiental  tornaram-se  foco  de  maior  atenção  nas 
últimas  décadas.  O  agravamento  dos  problemas  ambientais  associados  às  mudanças  climáticas  e  a 
possibilidade  de  esgotamento  de  recursos  naturais  básicos  fez,  tanto  países  desenvolvidos  quanto  em 
desenvolvimento,  procurarem  (voluntariamente  ou  não)  novas  formas  de  produzir  e  consumir.  Neste 
cenário, a substituição ou adaptação de padrões tecnológicos atuais, visando inovações ambientais (EI), 
tornou-se  uma  alternativa  para  promover  o  crescimento  sustentável.  Este  artigo  tem  como  objetivo 
contribuir  para  a  análise  dos  determinantes  da  inovação  ambiental  na  indústria  brasileira.  Utilizando 
dados de painel entre 1998 e 2008, os resultados obtidos corroboram a evidência internacional sobre os 
determinantes da adoção de inovações ambientais. A hipótese de viés ambiental é verificada, o que indica 
que a regulação ambiental apresenta um papel importante para influenciar as firmas brasileiras a adotar 
tanto  inovações  ambientais  tecnológicas  quanto  inovações  ambientais  organizacionais.  Em  relação 
especificamente ao processo inovativo em países em desenvolvimento, nossos resultados confirmam que 
empresas  de  capital  estrangeiro  têm  maior  probabilidade  de  adotar  inovações  “verdes”,  geralmente 
através de transferência tecnológica e acordos de licenciamento. O tamanho da firma, o fator da empresa 
ser  exportadora  e  a  intensidade  de  capital  físico  também  são  importantes  determinantes  da  inovação 
ambiental nas indústrias de transformação brasileiras.  

 
Abstract:  The  economic  impacts  of  environmental  degradation  have  become  the  focus  of  greater 
attention in recent decades. The aggravation of environmental problems associated with climate change 
and  the  possibility  of  depletion  of  basic  natural  resources  has  made  both  developed  and  developing 
countries seek (voluntarily or not) new ways to produce and consume. In this scenario, the substitution or 
adaptation  of  current  technological  standards,  towards  environmental  innovations  (EI),  becomes  an 
alternative  to  promote  sustainable  growth.  This  paper  aims  to  contribute  to  the  analysis  of  the 
determinants of environmental innovation adoption in Brazilian manufacturing industries. Based on panel 
data between 1998 and 2008, the results obtained corroborate international evidence on the determinants 
of environmental innovation in the international literature. The environmental inducement hypothesis is 
verified, indicating that environmental regulation has an important role to influence the Brazilian firms in 
order  to  adopt  both  technical  and  organizational  environmental  innovations.  Specifically  related  to 
developing countries innovative processes, our results confirm that foreign owned firms are significantly 
more  likely  to  adopt  “green”  innovation,  usually  through  capital  embodied  technology  transfer  and 
licensing agreements. The size of the firm, being an exporting firm and physical capital intensity are also 
important determinants of environmental innovation in Brazilian manufacturing firms.  
 
Keyword(s):  environmental 
regulation, econometrics. 
 
Palavras chave: inovação ambiental, hipótese de viés ambiental, legislação ambiental, econometria. 
 
JEL Classifications: L50, Q50, O30, O44 
 
Área da ANPEC: Área 9 – Economia Industrial e da Tecnologia 
 
* Corresponding author: Andrea Lucchesi, University of São Paulo, email: a.lucchesi.2107@gmail.com. 
** University of Birmingham, UK. 
*** University of São Paulo and Insper. 

inducement  hypothesis,  environmental 

innovation,  environmental 

in  2009.  This  definition  emphasizes 

1 Introduction 
The economic impacts of environmental degradation have become the focus of greater attention in recent 
decades. The aggravation of environmental problems associated with climate change and the possibility 
of  depletion  of  basic  natural  resources  has  made  both  developed  and  developing  countries  seek 
(voluntarily or not) new ways to produce and consume. In this scenario, the substitution or adaptation of 
current technological standards, towards environmental innovations, becomes an alternative to promote 
sustainable growth and contribute to improve the quality of life of future generations1.  
We  define  environmental  innovation  according  to  the  definition  proposed  by  the  Organization  for 
Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  (OECD) 
that 
environmental  innovations  not  necessarily  have  to  be  developed  intentionally  to  preserve  the 
environment.  Rather,  it includes all  innovations that  produce  some  kind of environmental  gain.  In this 
paper, we will consider: a) technical (product and process) environmental innovations2 - including the EI 
that reduces resources consumption and the EI that reduces environmental negative externalities; and, b) 
organizational environmental innovations3. 
The  economic  literature  on  innovation  has  extensively  discussed  the  determinants  of  general  (or  non-
environmental) innovations usually based on one of the three broad modeling approaches: Schumpeterian, 
induced  innovation  and  evolutionary  approach.  When  studying  the  determinants  of  environmental 
innovations,  we  must  also  consider  the  relationship  between  innovation  and  the  characteristics  of 
environmental regulation. 
This paper aims to contribute to this topic by investigating the determinants of technical environmental 
innovations and organizational environmental innovations adopted by Brazilian manufacturing firms. We 
use  a  panel  data  approach  based  on  PINTEC4  and  PIA5  data  between  1998  and  2008.  While  the  few 
existing studies on environmental innovation in Brazilian firms are based on cross section data, we use 
panel data, considering the existence of unobserved specific effects that may influence the firms’ decision 
to adopt EI. This paper is organized in five sections (in addition to this one): section 2 presents a brief 
literature  review  of  empirical  studies  on  the  determinants  of  environmental  innovation,  section  3 
discusses the methodological approach used (Schumpeterian and induced innovation approaches), section 
4 explains the data sources and data description, section 5 presents the econometric results and section 6 
contains our final considerations. 
 
2 Literature Review 

                                                 
1 There is a branch of the literature that studies possible rebound effects arising from environmental innovation adoption, for 
instance when the new “green” technology reduces the consumption of energy. Briefly explaining, as energy becomes more 
productive, its effective price decreases and the aggregate use of energy may increase. This increased consumption of energy 
can potentially offset any reduction in emissions resulting from the technique effect. For more details see Turner and Hanley 
(2011), Sorrell and Dimitropoulos (2008) or Greening et al (2000), among others. 
2 According to the Oslo Manual (OECD and Eurostat, 2005), environmental innovations (or eco-innovations) can be classified 
in:  a)  technical  environmental  innovations;  and,  b)  organizational  environmental  innovations.  Technical  environmental 
innovations can be distinguished between process and product (or services) EIs. Specifically related to process environmental 
innovation,  we  have  clean  technologies  and  end-of-pipe  technologies.  End-of-pipe  technologies  reduce  the  emission  of 
pollutants by adding supplementary measures to production processes, while clean technologies reduce the use of resources 
and/or reduce pollution generation through the use of cleaner inputs and cleaner production methods. We can understand 
end-of  pipe  technologies  as  additive  solutions  and  clean  technologies  as  integrated  and  precautionary  solutions.  In  turn, 
product EIs are products or services that give rise to low levels of environmental impact through its use and disposal, such as 
eco-houses,  eco-buildings,  phosphate-free  detergents,  water-based  paints,  environmental  consulting,  testing  and 
engineering, etc.  
3 Organizational EI refers to new management practices focusing on environmental issues (e.g. environmental management 
systems). 
4 Technological Innovation Survey, conducted by IBGE (Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics). 
5 Annual Industrial Companies Survey, also conducted by IBGE. 

There is a vast empirical literature on the firm-level determinants of environmental innovation adoption. 
In order to organize a brief literature review on this topic, it is interesting to distinguish these empirical 
studies according to the following criteria: a) how they measure the adoption (or not) of environmental 
innovations;  b)  how  they  measure  the  stringency  of  environmental  legislation;  c)  how  they  measure 
voluntary motivations to adopt environmental innovation, usually related to organizational environmental 
innovations (with or without formal certification); d) if they analyze the relation between organizational 
environmental and technical environmental innovations adoption; and, e) specifically related to process 
environmental innovations, if they are able to distinguish between end-of-pipe and clean technologies. As 
mentioned  in  Section  1,  clean  technologies  are  seen  as  superior  when  compared  to  end-of-pipe 
technologies, both in terms of reducing environmental impacts and also in economic terms. 
Environmental innovation (EI) – either process, or product or organizational EI - is usually represented by 
a dummy variable (that equals to one when the firm has adopted EI or zero otherwise) or by the number 
of  “green”  patents  granted  by  the  firm.  EI  can  be  also  measured  by  the  R&D  investment  directed  to 
environmental innovations. 
Related  to  the  stringency  of  environmental  policy,  we  can  point  out  two  common  proxies  used  in  the 
literature:  a)  pollution  abatement  costs  –  related  directly  to  environmental  compliance,  since  pollution 
abatement  cost  are  expected  to  increase  when  regulations  are  tightened;  and,  b)  number  of  visits  of 
government  monitoring  activities.  Other  alternatives  can  be:  c)  number  and  amount  of  environmental 
assessments  (notifications)  received  by  the  firm;  and,  d)  surveys  on  the  environmental  policy  design, 
where respondents are asked about the stringency, flexibility and stability of environmental legislation, 
and also about the importance of economic instruments versus command and control policies6 (e.g World 
Economic Forum’s Executive Opinion Survey). 
We can distinguish two ways of considering voluntary motivation. The first manner consists in including 
different measures of voluntary motivations as explanatory variables to explain the adoption of technical 
–  process  or  product  -  environmental  innovations.  In  this  case,  a  possible  way  to  measure  voluntary 
motivations  is  through  the  use  of  surveys  on  the  general  motivations  to  adopt  EI,  such  as  image 
improvement,  cost  saving,  reduction  of  environmental  incidents,  social  pressures,  customer  demand, 
voluntary or negotiated agreements between the firm and the government, where respondents are asked 
directly if they adopted EI voluntarily or not. It is important to notice that this kind of survey is not very 
common. 
The second manner is to analyze the relevant incentives for a firm to adopt environmental organizational 
innovations, which usually consist in voluntary measures to reduce environmental damage due to the firm 
activities.  In this  case,  the  most common  measures of  organizational environmental innovation  are  the 
ISO  14001  certification7  and  the  European  Union  Environmental  Management  and  Auditing  Scheme 
(EMAS), both related to international Environmental Management Systems (EMS) norms. The literature 
also considers managerial activities not related to EMS standards. 
EMS  are  organizational  changes  towards  environmental  self-regulation  that  include  environmental 
reports,  monitoring  of  environmental  performance  based  in  “management  practices  that  integrate  the 
environment into production decisions, identifying opportunities for pollution and waste reductions, and 
implementing  plans  to  make  continuous  improvements  in  production  methods  and  environmental 
performance”. (KHANNA and ATON, 2002). The ISO 14001 certification, in turn, is one of the most 
diffused forms of EMS and constitutes a voluntary organizational framework that details the procedures 

                                                 
6  A  relevant  factor  for  environmental  innovation  adoption  refers  to  the  characteristics  of  environmental  policy. 
Environmental policy measures can be classified in two main groups: a) command and control; and b) economic instruments. 
Command  and  control  refer  to  the  imposition  of  measures  that  alter  the  behavior  of  pollutants  by  means  of  specific 
legislation,  usually  imposing  technological  or  strict  emission  standards.  On  the  other  hand,  economic  instruments  allow 
greater flexibility in terms of adequacy  technology, time  and  production processes, in order to reduce the  environmental 
impact. 
7 Sponsored by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). 

to manage the impacts of the firm activities on the environment and has an attempt to get ahead from the 
existing  government  regulations.  The  ISO  14001  certification  requires  third  party  certification  and 
investigation. 
Finally,  there  is  another  branch  of  the  literature  that  investigates  if  the  adoption  of  EMS  or  other 
environmental management techniques improves the firms technical environmental performance. We are 
not going to explore this approach in this paper. For more details see Khanna et al (2009), Ziegler and 
Nogareda (2009), Wagner (2009), Rennings et al (2006) and Anton et al (2004), among others. 
Based  on  the  concepts  aforementioned,  we  present  below  a  brief  literature  review  on  the  firm-level 
determinants of EI. Frondel et al (2007) use a multinomial logit model applying a categorical variable to 
reflect three distinct unordered choices of EI: a) end-of-pipe technologies, b) clean technologies; and c) 
no  implementation  of  EI.  They  use  dummy  variables  to  measure  both  the  environmental  regulation 
stringency and the impact of regulatory measures. The “policy stringency” variable equals to one if the 
respondent  considers  the  environmental  police  stringent  and  equals  to  zero  if  he  considers  the  policy 
moderately or not stringent. The “regulatory measures” variable equals to one if the firm declares that 
input bans, technology or performance standards were very important motives to adopt EI. 
Based on 2003 data for seven OECD countries (Canada, France, Germany, Hungary, Japan, Norway and 
the US - totaling 4,186 observations), the authors indicate a positive and significant correlation between 
stringent environmental regulation and end-of-pipe technologies, while the correlation between stringent 
policy and clean technologies was not significant. They argue that this particular result can be explained 
by the  fact that command and control  was still the  dominant environmental  policy  at that  time, which 
usually “impose technology standards that can only be met through end-of-pipe abatement measures”. 
The study also attempted to analyze voluntary motivations to adopt the aforementioned EIs. However the 
“voluntary  or negotiated  agreements”  dummy  variable  was  not  significant  in  any  of  the  cases.  On  the 
other hand, the “prevention of environmental incidents” (dummy variable) was significant and positively 
related with both end-of-pipe and clean technologies. Clean technologies, in turn, were favored by cost 
saving motivations (dummy variable) tending to be market-driven instead of regulation-driven. 
Brunnermeier  and  Cohen  (2003)  studied  the  determinants  of  environmental  innovation  in  the  US 
manufacturing  industries  between  1983  and  1992.  The  authors  used  the  number  of  successful 
environmental patent applications granted to the industry as a proxy to environmental innovation. They 
were interested in understanding how the adoption of EI by the US industries responded to changes in 
pollution abatement expenditure (US$ million) and to changes in the number of air and water pollution 
related  inspections,  proxies  to  environmental  policy  stringency.  They  estimated  four  different  models 
(fixed  effects,  poisson,  negative  binomial  fixed  effects  and  negative  binomial  random  effects)  and 
obtained robust results across them, concluding that there is a positive and significant relation between 
pollution abatement expenditures and the number of “green” patents granted by the firm. The coefficients 
on the number of inspections are insignificant and the explanation proposed by the authors is that this 
occurs because the number of inspections might be highly correlated to the pollution abatement variable. 
They also reported positive and highly significant coefficient in the value of industry shipments control 
variable (US$ million), indicating a positive relation between industry output and patenting activity. 
Horbach et al (2012) tested whether different types of environmental innovation are driven by different 
determinants. Based on the German 2009 Community Innovation Survey (CIS) covering 7,061 firms in 
mining and quarrying, manufacturing, energy and water supply and service sectors, the authors defined 
twelve different types of EI according to the environmental impact caused by the EI. The first nine types 
are related to process EI: 1) reduction on the consumption of materials; 2) reduction on the consumption 
of energy; 3) reduction on the emission of CO2; 4) reduction on the emission of other air pollutants; 5) 
reduction  on  water  pollution;  6)  reduction  on  soil  pollution;  7)  reduction  on  noise  pollution;  8) 
replacement of hazardous substances; 9) recycling of waste, water or materials. The other three types are 
product EIs related to the after sale use of the product. All the different EIs were measured by dummy 
variables and the authors estimated a probit model. According to the results obtained, except for the EIs 
that  impact  on  the  reduction  of  material  and  energy  consumption,  present  and  future  environmental 

regulation registered positive and significant correlation with the adoption of the other ten different types 
of EI. “Present regulations” and “future regulations” variables were measured as dummy variables related 
respectively  to:  a)  the  relevance  of  the  fulfillment  of  laws  and  regulations;  and,  b)  the  anticipation  of 
future regulations. The adoption of EMS (dummy variable) presented positive and significant correlation 
with all the different types of EI considered. Related to voluntary motivations, cost savings turned out to 
be  an  important  determinant  in  the    adoption  of  energy  and  material  saving  EI;  also,  the  customer 
requirements  coefficient  was  significant  and  positively  correlated  to  product  EI.  Cost  savings  were 
measured  by  a  dummy  variable  that  equals  to  one  when  the  cost  reduction  was  highly  relevant  to 
innovate.  Customer  requirements  were  also  represented  by  a  dummy  variable  that  equals  to  one, 
according to the firm's perception of customer demand for EI. 
Demirel and Kesidou (2011) used a dataset on 289 UK firms that responded the DEFRA8 Government 
Survey of Environmental Protection Expenditure in 2005 and 2006. The study considers three different 
types  of  environmental  innovation  (all  of  them  measured  as  dummy  variables):  a)  end-of-pipe 
technologies, b) integrated cleaner production technologies, and, c) environmental R&D – defined as the 
“use  of  R&D  to  generate  new  or  improved  products  and  processes  with  environmental  benefits”.  The 
authors estimated a Tobit model and investigated the impact of environmental regulation (command and 
control  policy),  environmental  taxes  (economic  instrument),  ISO  14001  certification  and  efficiency 
improvement  on  the  firms’  probability  to  innovate  in  order  to  preserve  the  environment.  Both 
environmental  regulation  and  environmental taxes  variables  are  binary variables that  assume  the  value 
one if each of them has been effective to the firms’ decision to innovate. Efficiency improvement was 
measured  as  equipment  upgrades  (dummy  variable  that  equals  to  one  if  the  firm  invested  in 
environmental  protection  because  of equipment  upgrade)  or  cost  savings  (equals  to  total  costs  savings 
resulting  from  environmental  improvements,  measured  in  pounds  sterling).  The  results  of  the  study 
confirm that different types of EI have different determinants. End-of-pipe technologies are stimulated by 
environmental regulations (usually characterized by command and control measures), equipment upgrade 
motives and ISO 14001 certification. Clean technologies are mainly driven by efficiency improvement 
motive  (equipment  upgrade)  and  Environmental  R&D  is  positively  correlated  with  environmental 
regulations,  cost  saving  motives  and  ISO  14001  certification.  The  study  indicates  that  ISO  14001 
certification  is  important  to  stimulate  firms  to  invest  in  Environmental  R&D.  Environmental  taxes,  in 
turn, was not significant to any of the three types of EI considered. According to the authors, in the UK 
“environmental  taxes  have  not  been  frequently  used  as  means  of  regulating  pollution  levels  since 
environmental laws have historically been the preferred policy tool in this field”. 
Using  OLS fixed and  random effects  models,  the panel  study  conducted  by  Del  Rio  et al (2011) with 
Spanish manufacturing industries in the period 2000-2006, confirmed the relevance of the stringency of 
environmental  regulation  and  physical  capital  intensity  to  explain  the  investment  in  environmental 
technologies. The authors also stated that the determinants of EI are likely to differ between end-of-pipe 
and  clean  technologies  adoption.  In  the  study,  EI  is  measured  as  the  investment  in  environmental 
technologies to value added ratio and environmental regulation stringency is represented by the intensity 
of  environmental  protection  expenditures  to  value  added  ratio.  Physical  capital  intensity  equals  the 
investments in material assets to turnover ratio. Furthermore, export intensity (exports to turnover ratio) 
was negatively correlated with EI, indicating, according to the authors, that “environmental protection is 
often done in sectors that are (or have been in the past) protected and highly regulated, such as energy.”  
Concerning the determinants of organizational environmental innovations adoption, Frondel et al (2008) 
estimated a probit model based on an OECD survey performed in 2003 with 899 firms in Germany. Their 
results indicate that EMS adoption (dummy variable) was positively correlated with the enhancement of 
corporate  image  (dummy  variable),  firms’  size  (number  of  employees)  and  internal  forces  such  as 
corporate  headquarters  employees  and  shareholders  pressure  (dummy  variable).  It  was  also  negatively 

                                                 
8 Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA). 

correlated with cost savings motivations (dummy variable) “probably because survey respondents expect 
EMS adoption to be costly”. 
Cole et al (2006), using data from 400 Japanese firms in 1999 and OLS regression, identified the factors 
that influence the adoption of 13 different aspects of a firms’ environmental management process. These 
aspects  are  related  to  two  broad  groups:  a)  the  management  and  control  of  specific  environmental 
problems (such as management of total CO2, treatment of industrial waste, water pollution control, among 
others); and, b) the quality of the general structure and systems that firms employ to handle environmental 
issues (ISO 14001 certification, environmental accounting, among others). The 13 different aspects are 
scored  and  based  on  those  scores  the  authors  constructed  an  “overall  environmental  management 
performance”  index  which  ranges  between  48  and  70  (the  higher  the  more  sophisticated).  The  results 
obtained indicate that foreign direct investment (dummy variable), firms that export (dummy variable), 
physical capital intensity (capital stock per worker) and size of the firm (total employment) are significant 
and positively correlated with the overall management performance of the firm. The interpretation given 
by the authors is that Japanese firms that embark on FDI in more regulated countries will raise standards 
in  Japan,  or  other  possibility  is  that  multinationals  owned  firms  are  subject  to  closer  national  and 
international  monitoring  when  compared  to  domestically  owned.  The  exports  variable  indicates  that  a 
firm  that  exports  receives  more  influence  of  international  competition  and  monitoring  encouraging,  to 
have  better  environmental  management  practices.  Firms  intensive  in  capital  tend  to  be  more  pollution 
intensive, and hence, are expected to adopt more stringent environmental management. And, finally, the 
structure  and  resources  necessary  to  implement  environmental  management  are  more  likely  to  be 
encountered in larger firms. 
Similarly, Anton et al (2004) constructed an overall environmental management variable that counts the 
different environmental management practices (among 13 options) adopted by the firm. The authors use 
Poisson and quantile regression methods, to assess the comprehensiveness of environmental management 
for S&P 500 US firms, between 1994-95. Across all the different models estimated, the results indicate a 
positive correlation between “potentially responsible parties (PRPs)” and the adoption of comprehensive 
EMS.  Firms are  listed as PRPs  if  they had already been  held  liable for contamination caused  by  their 
hazardous waste streams. Also firms classified as “final goods” producers (dummy variable that equals to 
one  when  the  firm  is  primarily  selling  products  or  services  to  the  consumers)  are  in  closer  contact  to 
consumers and hence fell greater pressure or benefit more from improving their environmental awareness. 
Therefore, the “final good” variable registered a positive and significant impact on comprehensive EMS. 
In the same direction, toxic releases (defined as the sum of on-site toxic releases and off-site transfers) are 
positively correlated to EMS since firms that register larger volumes of toxic releases are more likely to 
face  social  pressures  from  stakeholders  or  communities,  in  order  to  improve  their  environmental 
management practices. 
Focusing on the determinants of EI in developing countries, Albornoz et al (2009)9 suggested that foreign 
owned firms are highly and positively correlated with EMS adoption (dummy variable equal to one if the 
firm  has  adopted  EMS)  in  Argentinian  manufacturing  industries.  This  highlights  the  importance  of 
technology  and  management  practices  transfer  from  developed  to  developing  countries.  This  result  is 
consistent  across  all  specifications  adopted  and,  particularly,  the  baseline  regression  indicates  that 
foreign-owned firms are nearly twice as likely as domestic firms to have implemented EMS. The authors 
used a logistic regression model based on 1,187 Argentinian firms, between 1998-2001 (INDEC10 data). 
Specifically  related  to  studies  on  Brazilian  manufacturing  firms,  Marta  et  al  (2011)  analyzed  the 
determinants of pollution abatement investment (measured as log of total investment directed to reduce or 
prevent environmental damage) in 2007. The study uses OLS regressions on 8,218 Brazilian firms and 
concludes that  the  main  determinants  of  pollution abatement  investment  are  the  size  of  the  firm  (total 
employees) and the firms’ productivity (measured as industrial transformation value to employees ratio), 
                                                 
9 The authors are especially interested in verifying the presence of environmental spillovers in the sense that foreign firms 
have been known to directly encourage the dissemination of environmental related knowledge and technologies. 
10 Institute of Statistics and Censuses in Argentina. 

both variables with positive signs. On the other hand, the coefficients that correspond to age of the firm 
(years of operation) and export (measured as a dummy variable) are significant and negative. 
Queiroz (2011) used a probit model based on 2008 PINTEC data and analyzed the determinants of EI 
with  high  or  medium  impact  on  the  reduction  of  environmental  damage  (dummy  variable).  The  study 
suggests  that  cost  saving  impacts,  market  share  expansion  and  adjustment  to  internal  and/or  external 
general market norms are positively correlated to the adoption of this particular type of EI. 
Seroa da Motta (2006) used data from a research conducted by CNI (National Industry Confederation) in 
1997 on "Environmental  Management  in Brazilian  Industry",  along  with  325  medium and  large  firms. 
The author constructed an index of environmental practices adoption and used OLS regression to analyze 
its determinants. The results obtained indicate that the main determinants of environmental practices are 
the size of the firm (total employees), cost reduction motivation (dummy variable) and social pressures of 
NGOs and local communities (dummy variable). 
Finally, Ferraz and Seroa da Motta (2001), based on a 1996 PAEP11 database on 10,070 firms located in 
São Paulo State, concluded that size, foreign ownership, export intensity and environmental notification 
increase the firm's probability to realize environmental investment (dummy variable). The authors utilized 
probit, probit instrumental variable and Heckman Probit regression models, and the results are consistent 
across  the  different  models.  Environmental  investment  is  a  dummy  variable  equal  to  one  if  the  firm 
realizes either investment in cleaner inputs, investment in cleaner production processes or investment in 
waste treatment. Foreign ownership is a dummy variable, export intensity is measured as exports to total 
sales  ratio,  and  environmental  notification  is  the  number  of  fees  or  notifications  received  by  the  firm 
between 1993-95, issued by CETESB12, and also the number of CETESB agencies in the city where the 
company is located.  
 
3 Schumpeterian and Induced Innovation Approach 
Our  modeling  strategy  is  based  on  the  traditional  Schumpeterian  approach  complemented  with  the 
induced  innovation  hypothesis.  The  literature  on  the  economics  of  innovation  was  originated  with 
Schumpeter  (1942)  writings,  which  pointed  out  the  central  role  of  technological  progress  to  economic 
growth. In determining firms’ innovative activities, Schumpeter focused on the importance of firm size 
and  market  structure.  In  his  argument,  large  firms  with  market  power  (concentrated  markets  or 
monopolist firms) would have advantages in innovating. Large firms usually deal in a lesser extent with 
financing problems since usually generate more stable internal funds.  
Furthermore, large firms have greater ability to deal with risky R&D activities, counts on economies of 
scale in maintaining R&D laboratories, and in some circumstances, provide economies of scope because 
of their diversified nature. In the modeling strategy adopted in this paper we used the number of total 
employees as a proxy to the firm’s size. We also introduced physical capital intensity since usually those 
industries that are more intensive in capital generate greater volumes of pollution – and consequently face 
larger abatement costs - than those intensive on labor. According to Cole et al (2005) this fact occurs in 
part  due  to  the  positive  relation  between  physical  capital  intensity  and  energy  use,  intensive  in  the 
combustion of fossil fuels (largely pollutants).   
Market power, in turn, stimulates the firm to invest in innovative activities because it reduces rivalry and 
uncertainty  associated  with  innovation  process.  Additionally,  some  form  of  market  power  (even 
temporary), deriving from innovations (e.g. patents) incentives firms to invent. Patents and other forms of 
intellectual property are possible solutions to appropriability problems. (COHEN, 2010) 
Schumpeter also distinguished between three stages in the process of technological change: a) invention - 
the first step in developing a new technological process or product; b) innovation - when the invention is 

                                                 
11 Economic Activity Survey of São Paulo (PAEP) held by SEADE (State System for Data Analysis). 
12 Company of Environmental Sanitation Technology (CETESB) of São Paulo State. 

commercialized; it includes organizational innovation besides technological innovations; and, c) diffusion 
– corresponds to wider application of innovations.  
Concerning innovation processes in developing countries - focus of analysis in this study, it is important 
to reinforce that in many situations it is difficult to differentiate between the effects of innovation and the 
diffusion stages. Conventionally, innovation and invention are assumed to be activities concentrated in 
developed countries, while developing countries concentrate the diffusion of new technologies embodied 
in capital goods purchased from more advanced economies. Indeed, technology transfer from developed 
to developing countries can occur through several channels such as multinational parents, international 
trade  and  licensing  agreements.  Multinational  parents  often  transfer  technology  to  their  subsidiaries, 
although  in  many  situations  the  technology  transferred  is  mature  or,  in  other  words,  is  not  the  most 
updated. Concerning international trade, firms can import frontier technology embodied in capital goods 
or inputs and/or can export to buyers endowed with more advanced technologies and hence be in contact 
with new technologies. International trade also enhances international monitoring in relation to the firms’ 
environmental practices (ALMEIDA and FERNANDES, 2008).  
In  this  scenario,  developing  countries  are  seen  simply  as  “borrowers”  of  technology  from  developed 
countries.  However  we  understand  that  this  interpretation  of  technology  diffusion  is  misplaced. 
According to Bell and Pavitt (1997) the diffusion stage “involves more than the acquisition of machinery 
or  product  designs  and  the  assimilation  of  related  operating  know-how”.  In  fact,  innovation  usually 
continues  in  the  diffusion  process,  through  adaptation  to  particular  uses  and  conditions  in  developing 
countries’ firms. Besides adaptation, the new technologies can be improved in the post-adoption phase by 
incorporating incremental developments and modifications in accordance to continuing learning curves in 
industrial production. Thus technology diffusion leads to creative and complex incremental technological 
change. 
Trying  to  address  the  importance  of  transferred  technology  by  multinational  parents  we  included  the 
“foreign owned” variable in the model tested in this paper. We also added “export intensity” intending to 
measure the impact of international trade on the firms’ probability to adopt environmental innovations. 
More  recently,  in  addition  to  Schumpeterian  traditional  approach,  the  determinants  of  technological 
change and innovation adoption have been studied according to the induced innovation hypothesis13. The 
induced innovation approach (originated from Hicks (1932) ideas) states that economic motives influence 
the rate and direction in which the innovations are developed14.  
According to Acemoglu15 (2002), the direction of technical change is determined endogenously by the 
interaction between relative prices, market size, the elasticity of substitution between the input factors, 
and  innovation  costs  (relatively  to  current  or  “state”  composition  of  R&D).  The  relative  prices  favor 
innovations directed at scarce factors; the market size favors innovations directed at abundant factors. In 
the case of the elasticity of substitution between the input factors, whenever the elasticity of substitution 
is low, the relative price effect is more powerful, and technological changes will be biased towards the 
scarce  factor.  On  the  contrary,  when  the  elasticity  of  substitution  is  high,  market  size  effect  is  more 
powerful and technological innovation will be directed at abundant factors.  
Focusing on environmental innovations, both scarcity of natural resources and environmental regulation 
(implicitly or explicitly) lead to more expensive environmental inputs, changing relative prices, and thus, 
they  can  be  understood  as  a  possible  explanation  to  technological  change  directed  towards  “green” 
technologies.  In  this  sense,  Newell  et  al  (1999)  proposed  the  environmental  inducement  concept, 
including  inducement  by  regulatory  standards  in  the  induced  innovation  hypothesis,  suggesting  an 
                                                 
13 There is also the evolutionary approach, which views technological progress as an evolutionary process. In this approach 
firms  engage  in  satisficing  behavior,  without  requiring  its  optimization.  We  are  not  going  to  base  our  analysis  on  this 
approach. For more details on the evolutionary theory see Dosi and Nelson (2010) and Cohen (2010). 
14 For more details on biased technological change theories, see Lucchesi et al (2014b). 
15  Acemoglu’s model is based  in  a CES production function and considers  a  scale  effect (the growth rate of the  economy 
increases as the population increases) and treats factor supplies as given (not considering their response to relative prices). 
For more details see Acemoglu (2002). 

important relation between environmental policy and technology change. According to Jaffe et al (2003) 
it is very difficult to test the environmental inducement hypothesis because it is not easy to measure the 
extent  of  inducement  across  firms:  “more  generally,  non-price  regulatory  constraints  can  fit  with  the 
inducement framework if they can be modeled as changing the shadow or implicit price that firms face 
emitting pollutants”. Since shadow price of pollution or environmental inputs are not easily observed, we 
must use proxies for them. Such proxies are generally related to environmental regulations characteristics, 
trying to measure its stringency, expenditures on pollution abatement or prices of polluting inputs (e.g. 
energy,  carbon  fuels).  In  this  paper  we  are  going  to  use  the  Brazilian  environmental  legislation  count 
variable as a proxy to the stringency of environmental regulation. The Brazilian environmental legislation 
variable  considers  the  number  of  laws,  decrees,  resolutions,  etc.,  per  Brazilian  State,  in  a  three  years 
interval period. 
Porter and Van der Linde (1995) also stressed the role played by stringent environmental legislation on 
firms decision to adopt environmental innovations. The controversial Porter Hypothesis16 (PH) suggests 
that well designed environmental regulation may spur innovation that, in turn, will partially, or more than 
fully, offset its initial compliance cost.  
In order to facilitate PH analysis, we can disaggregate it into two component parts: a) the first component 
part refers to the relation between the stringency of environmental regulation and innovation adoption; 
and, b) the second part deals with the proposition that environmental innovation can more than offset its 
initial cost and subsequently increase the firm’s business performance. In this paper we are going to deal 
with the first part of PH.  
There are many critiques to PH, especially related to its second part. However, turning the attention to its 
first component part, we can mention as the main critique the difficulty to design well fitted, stringent and 
at  the same time efficient  environmental  regulations.  In particular, PH  indicates  that  what  it means  by 
“properly designed regulations” favors the utilization of economic instruments in place of command and 
control  policies.  Unfortunately,  the  Brazilian  environmental  legislation  presents  few  economic 
instruments,  favoring  command  and  control  policies,  so  in  this  case,  we  are  not  going  to  discriminate 
between them. Therefore we are going to use the Brazilian environmental legislation variable as a proxy 
to test the stringency of environmental regulation in the PH sense. 
In  Brazil,  the  control  of  pollution  is  decentralized  to  states,  occurring  through  environmental  state 
agencies  subordinated  to  federal  legislation.  Specifically  related  to  industrial  pollutant  activities  –  the 
focus of this thesis - , Seroa da Motta (2006) indicates that each state is responsible for its own territorial 
monitoring  and  usually  firms  can  “face  two  different  types  of  legal  sanctions:  (i)  administrative  fines 
imposed by the Environmental State agencies; and, (ii) remediation and clean-up legal sanctions imposed 
by the judiciary. Also, according to the environmental criminal law17 established in 1998, manufacturing 
firms  which:    a)  launch  solid,  liquid,  gaseous,  waste,  oil  or  oily  substances,  in  violation  of  the 
requirements  established  in  laws  or  regulations;  or  b)  fail  to  adopt,  when  required  by  the  competent 
authority, precautionary measures in case of risk of serious or irreversible environmental damage, can be 
penalized with imprisonment of their legal representatives between one to five years.  
Given the complexity of Brazilian environmental legislation, particularly at the state level, we conducted 
a detailed survey18 (until 2008) on the laws, decrees, resolutions, ordinances and regulatory instructions 
specifically related to the industrial activity, of special interest in this thesis. The survey was conducted 
according  to  five  relevant  topics:  1)  industrial  activities;  2)  inspections,  monitoring  and  sanctions;  3) 
industrial effluents and waste;  4) economic  instruments; and,  5) specific industries.  As a result of this 

                                                 
16 Jaffe and Palmer (1997) suggest three different interpretations to the Porter Hypothesis: 1) the narrow version (concerning 
more flexible regulation): “certain types of environmental regulation stimulate innovation”, 2) the weak version: ”regulation 
will stimulate certain kinds of innovation”, and 3) the strong version: “environmental regulation is a free lunch (or even a paid 
lunch), that is, regulation induces innovation whose benefits exceeds its costs, making the regulation socially desirable, even 
ignoring the environmental problems it was designed to solve”. 
17 Federal Law No 9605. 
18 To the best of our knowledge this kind of survey is not yet existent in the Brazilian literature. 

survey, we constructed a count variable that counts the number of laws, decrees, resolutions, ordinances 
and  normative  instructions  at  the  state  level  concerning  the  five  topics mentioned  across the  Brazilian 
states, in a three year basis between 1998 and 200619 (Table A.1). 
So,  the  modeling  strategy  utilized  in  this  paper  is  based  in  the  Schumpeterian  and  environmental 
inducement approaches presented along this section. Therefore, we estimated pooled OLS, fixed effects 
and logit regressions according to equation (1): 

EIit = β1(EnvRegit-1) + β2(Sizeit) + β3(Exportit) + β4(Foreignit) + β5(Capitalit)  + δt + µit         (1) 

 
where: 
i = 1, 2, …, N – cross section firms units (CNAE20 3 digit); 
t =1, 2, …, T – time period (years); 
EIit  –  set  of environmental innovation dummies  (at least  one,  all,  environmental impact reduction and 
safety improvement, biological effluent treatment and environmental management techniques); 
EnvRegit-1 – lagged Brazilian environmental regulation count variable; 
Sizeit – Size of the firm - proxied by total number of employees; 
Exportit – Exporting firm - measured as a dummy variable that equals to one when the firm exports or 
zero otherwise; 
Foreignit – Foreign ownership - measured as a dummy variable that equals to one when the firm is owned 
by foreigners (more than 51% of capital) or zero otherwise; 
Capitalit – Physical capital intensity – measured as capital stock to total employees ratio; 
δt - time effects 
β1, β2, β3, β4, β5 - parameters to be estimated 
µit – error term 
It is important to notice that Brazilian environmental regulation is lagged in one period, since there is an 
interval between the law publication and the effective adoption of environmental innovations by the firm.  
As  a  robustness  test,  we  also  tested  the  determinants  of  pollution  abatement  investment  (in  place  of 
environmental  innovation),  using  pooled  OLS  and  fixed  effects  estimation  methods.  In  this  sense,  we 
estimated equation (2) considering pollution abatement investment: 

PAIit = β1(EnvRegit-1) + β2(Sizeit-1) + β3(Exportit-1) + β4(Foreignit) + β5(Capitalit-1) + δt + µit           (2) 

 
where, 
PAIit – pollution abatement investment – measured as a percentage of total investment. 
 
In equation (2) all the explanatory variables are lagged (except foreign ownership) because, once again, 
there  is  a  lag  of  time  between  the  aforementioned  variables  and  the  decision  to  invest  in  pollution 
abatement. The foreign ownership is not lagged because the firms’ capital origin does not change very 
frequently and thus we suppose that it is fixed along all the period considered (1997-2008). 
In the  pooled OLS and  pooled  logit regressions we also considered industry sector dummies and  state 
dummies. In the OLS and logit fixed effects estimations it is not possible to control by industry and state 
characteristics because they are already included in the fixed effects. 

                                                 
19 More details about the environmental legislation variable constructed can be obtained under request. 
20 National Classification of Economic Activities. 

4 Data sources and description 
The data used in this paper combine two different databases, both calculated by IBGE (Brazilian Institute 
of  Geography  and  Statistics):  a)  PIA  -  Annual  Survey  of  Industrial  Companies,  and,  b)  PINTEC  -
Technological  Innovation  Survey.  PIA  and  PINTEC  data  are  classified  according  to  the  Brazilian 
government’s National Classification of Economic Activities – CNAE version 2.0.  These microdata are 
confidential and the access to them is possible only at IBGE´s secrecy room with previous authorization. 
All monetary values were corrected by IPA_OG21 (wholesale price index) sectoral price index and are 
expressed in terms of 2008 values. 
It is important to notice that, while PIA survey  is conducted every  year, PINTEC survey is conducted 
every three years, following the Oslo Manual (OECD document establishing guidelines for collecting and 
interpreting data on industrial innovation) and Community Innovation Survey (CIS) recommendation. 
Unfortunately,  according  to  the  available  data  in  Brazil,  it  is  not  possible  to  distinguish  process  EI 
between end-of-pipe technologies and clean technologies. Either, it is not possible to distinguish between 
EI adopted to comply with command and control measures or motivated by economic instruments. 
In order to construct a panel data, we used the four PINTECs conducted until now: PINTEC 2000 (refers 
to the period between 1998 and 2000), PINTEC 2003 (between 2001 and 2003), PINTEC 2005 (between 
2003  and  2005)  and  PINTEC  2008  (between  2006  and  2008)  and  merged  the  PINTEC’s  variables 
(environmental innovations and capital origin variables) with PIA’s variables in the first year of PINTEC 
three year interval period corresponding to: 2006, 2003, 2001 and 1998.  
The panel database covers 20 industrial sectors in 27 states. The sectors of pulp and paper (3% of total 
industrial  firms  in  2008  according  to  PINTEC  data),  nonmetallic  minerals  (4%),  oil  and  oil  products 
(3%),  metallurgy  (8%),  and  chemicals  (4%)  are  among  the  most  polluting  sectors  considered  in 
accordance with international literature22 and the Brazilian Federal Law No 10.165. The southeast region 
concentrates 62% of total industrial firms in 2008 (according PINTEC data), followed by the south regian 
(23%) and northeast region (11%). 
We considered as technical environmental innovation those product or process innovations that had high 
our medium impact in a) reducing the resources consumption; and b) reducing the environmental negative 
externalities, both a) and b) are defined as protecting the environment. As organizational environmental 
innovation we considered the adoption of environmental management techniques23.  
Based on PINTEC’s data, we constructed two grouped dummy variables in each 3-year period covered by 
the  survey.  The  first  grouped  dummy  variable  (named  “EI  at  least  one”)  was  constructed  in  order  to 
represent those firms that had adopted at least one of the following four different types of technical EIs: a) 
EI with high or medium impact in reducing raw material consumption, b) EI with high or medium impact 
in reducing energy consumption, c) EI with high or medium impact in reducing water consumption and d) 
EI with high or medium impact in reducing environmental impact and improving safety requirements24. 
The second grouped dummy variable (named “EI all”) was constructed to measure those firms that have 
adopted all the four different EIs aforementioned. Therefore, in the constructed panel database we have 
three technical environmental innovations - “EI - at least one” (41% of total firms adopted at least one 
type of EI in PINTEC 2008), “EI – all” (10% of total firms adopted all EI in 2008) and “Environmental 
impact  reduction  and/or  safety  improvement”  (30%  of  total  firms  in  2008)  -  and  one  organizational 
environmental innovation - adoption of “Environmental management techniques” (50% of total firms in 
2008). 

                                                 
21 Calculated by FGV - Getúlio Vargas Foundation. 

22 e.g. Albornoz et al (2009) 
23 The adoption of environmental management techniques variable was not available in PINTEC 2000. 
24 It is not possible to distinguish between environmental and safety effects before PINTEC 2005. The question regarding this 
impact  includes  both  effects  in  PINTEC’s  2000,  2003  and  2005  questionnaires.  Only  in  PINTEC  2008  questionnaire  the 
environmental and safety effects were separated in two different questions. 

Concerning the independent variables, we used: a) firm’s size variable - measured as log number of total 
employees;  b)  exporting  firm  variable  –  a  dummy  variable  equal  to  one  if  the  firm  exports,  zero 
otherwise; c) foreign ownership variable - a dummy variable equal to one in case of foreign ownership, 
zero  otherwise;  and,  d)  physical  capital  intensity  variable  –  equals  to  log  of  capital  stock  to  total 
employees ratio. We also used an environmental regulation variable, which is a variable that counts the 
number of environmental laws, decrees, etc, per Brazilian state, and intends to be a proxy to regulation 
stringency: the greater the number of laws, the greater the stringency of environmental regulation. The 
environmental  regulation  variable  was  measured  in  the  preceding  three  year  interval  to  each  PINTEC 
survey (1995-1997; 1998-2000; 2000-2002 and 2003-2005 respectively). Table 1 presents the descriptive 
statistics25 for the panel database (1998-2008) constructed.  
Finally,  a  second  panel  database  was  created  to  analyze  the  determinants  of  pollution  abatement 
investment effect,  available  in  PIA 1997,  2002  and  2007  surveys. The  pollution  abatement  investment 
variable is equal to the percentage of investments spent in reducing or controlling emissions of pollutants 
that result from production process, or to attend environmental regulations (totaling 4,6%, 6,2% and 5,8% 
1997,  2003  and  2007,  respectively).  The  measurement  of  this  variable  includes  the  acquisition  of 
industrial machines that incorporate the design of clean technology, acquisition of other equipment and 
construction of treatment stations. 
In this second panel database we considered lagged firm size, export intensity, physical capital intensity 
and  environmental  regulation.  Pollution  abatement  investment  was  measured  in  level  and  foreign 
ownership (assuming that capital origin does not change frequently) is measured in level, on a three year 
basis  interval,  according  to  PINTEC’s  methodology.  As  mentioned  in  Section  3,  all  the  explanatory 
variables  are  lagged  (except  foreign  ownership),  assuming  that  there  is  a  lag  of  time  between  the 
aforementioned variables and the decision to invest in pollution abatement.  
 
5 Empirical Results  
Tables 2 to 5 present the estimation results, related to the determinants of technical and organizational 
environmental  innovations  in  Brazilian  manufacturing  firms,  between  1998-2008.  Table  6  presents  the 
results for the determinants of pollution abatement investment between 1997-2007.  
Related to the determinants of EI adoption, we estimate four different models, which can be verified in 
Tables 2,  3,  4 and  5:  a)  pooled  OLS  (columns  1  and  2),  b)  linear  fixed  effects  (columns  3  and  4), c) 
pooled  logit  (columns  5  and  6)  and  d)  logit  fixed  effects  (columns  7  and  8).  All  the  regressions  are 
weighted by sampling frequency and establishment size26  
The advantage of  using  fixed effects  models (linear or logit) is  that they  control unobservable effects, 
avoiding possible omitted variable bias. In particular, logit and logit fixed effects models were utilized 
because  of  the  binary  characteristic  of  the  dependent  variable,  as  the  logistic  function  is  restrained  to 
range between 0 and 1. Besides that, the main difference between linear OLS and nonlinear logit models 
is  that  the  linear  model  assumes  that  the  regressors  present  constant  marginal  effects,  while  the  logit 
model assumes diminishing partial effects. The marginal effects of the logit estimates (columns 5 and 6) 
and  logit  fixed  effects  estimates  (columns  7  and  8)  were  calculated  at  the  means  of  the  independent 
variables, and are comparable with the OLS estimates. 
In Tables 2, 3, 4 and 5, column (1) differs from column (2) - and analogously column (3) from (4) and 
column (5) from (6) – due to specification purposes. The first column of each model (columns 1, 3 and 5) 
                                                 
25 Maximum and minimum values of the variables presented in the table were not shown because it is forbidden to calculate 
such statistics when using IBGE’s confidential data in secrecy room. 

26 The rationale for weighting by size (standard in skill biased technological change) is to give larger firms a bigger weight, just 
as we would do if aggregating to macro economy. Besides that, measurement error is worse for smaller firms, so this also 
helps  in  this  dimension  (CAROLI  and  VAN  REENEN,  2001).  In  the  logit  and  logit  fixed  effects  models  the  weights  were 
calculated as average weights per firm. 

includes  only  the  environmental  legislation  count  variable,  while  the  second  column  of  each  model 
(columns 1, 4 and 6) includes the control variables. Additionally, dummy year variables (2003, 2005 and 
2008) were included in all regressions. Besides that, 19 industry-specific dummies and 26 state dummies 
were included in the pooled OLS (columns 1 and 2) and logit models (columns 5 e 6).  Table 2 shows the 
results of the estimation of the influence of each explanatory variable on the firms’ probability to adopt at 
least  one  type  of  technical  environmental  innovation27  (equation  1)  -  approximately  43%  of  the  firms 
(mean of dependent variable). Taking Table 2 as a whole, we can observe that the estimates are consistent 
across the four different models. The same explanatory variables are significant in each model (with the 
same level of significance in most of the times) and also they have the same signal across the different 
models.  
The environmental regulation variable is highly significant and has a positive coefficient in all models, 
despite its small magnitude, ranging from 0.002 to 0.009. This means that one additional environmental 
law increases the firm’s average probability to adopt at least one type of technical EI between 0.2 p.p. 
(percentage point) and  0.9  p.p.  This  result  confirms  the  importance  of the  environmental regulation in 
influencing firms’ probability to innovate in order to reduce environmental impact, in line with Horbach 
(2012), Demirel and Kesidou (2011), Del Rio (2011), Brunnermeier and Cohen (2003) and Frondel et al 
(2007) findings. 
As expected, the size of the firm seems to be an important issue to innovate “green”. This variable is also 
highly significant across the models and indicates that 1% increase in the number of employees would 
increase the average probability to innovate between 0.011 p.p. and 0.107 p.p.. This result is consistent 
with Brunnermeier and Cohen (2003), Marta et al (2011) and Ferraz and Seroa da Motta (2001). 
In  the  same  way,  foreign  ownership  and  physical  capital  intensity  have  a  positive  and  significant 
influence  in  the  firms’  probability  to  adopt  EI.  As  mentioned  in  Section  3,  in  developing  countries, 
foreign ownership is frequently highlighted as of particular importance to technology convergence to that 
of high-income countries, especially due to capital embodied technology transfer. Being a foreign owned 
firm, instead of domestically owned, increases the average probability of innovating green between 1.9 
p.p. and 3.4 p.p. (columns 2 and 6 respectively). This result confirms Albarnoz et al (2009) and Ferraz 
and  Seroa  da  Motta (2001) findings.  In fact,  in our analysis, foreign  ownership variable  registered  the 
greater coefficient magnitude indicating the importance of technology transfer in increasing the average 
probability to adopt EI. 
In  turn,  physical  capital  intensity  coefficient  is  positive  and  highly  significant,  which  suggests  that 
industrial firms with greater number of machinery and equipment per employee have greater probability 
of introducing environmental innovation in their production processes or products. The idea behind this 
argument is that capital-intensive firms are usually more pollutant and hence tend to invest more in new 
technologies in order to reduce environmental damage. If physical capital intensity increases in 1%, the 
average  probability  of  adopting  green  technologies  will  raise  between  0.006  p.p.  and  0.026  p.p., 
depending on the model analyzed. Cole et al (2006) and Del Rio (2011) also find positive coefficients on 
physical capital intensity. 
On the other hand, the exporting firm variable registered mixed results, ranging from -0.7 p.p. (column 8) 
to 2.4 p.p. (column 6). According to the literature, we expected that competition in international markets 
tends to spur environmental innovations (verified in columns 2 and 6). 
In order to verify the robustness of the estimates presented in Table 2, we realized the estimation of the 
determinants of other two technical EIs: a) “EI – all”: dummy variable that equals one when the firm has 
adopted all the four different types of technical EI – Table 3; and, b) “Environmental impact reduction 
and safety improvement” - we isolated one of the four types of technical environmental innovation, the 
“environmental impact reduction and safety improvement”, since it is directly related to environmental 

                                                 
27 As mentioned in Section 2.4, we utilized four different types of technical environmental innovations, defined as technical 
innovations  that  had  medium  or  high  impact  on:  a)  the  reduction  of  raw  material  consumption;  b)  reduction  of  energy 
consumption; c) reduction on water consumption; and, d) reduction of environmental impact and safety improvement. 

protection purposes – Table 4. As said before, the structure of Tables 3 and 4 are similar to that utilized in 
Table 2.  
Interestingly,  concerning  the  adoption  of  all  types  of  technical  EI  (approximately  10%  of  the  firms  – 
mean  of  dependent  variable),  in  Table  2,  we  observe  that  the  magnitudes  of  the  coefficients  on 
Environmental regulation are approximately the same when compared to Table 2 results (adoption of at 
least one type  of  EI),  ranging  from 0,002  to  0,008.   One  possible  interpretation  to  this  fact is that  the 
influence  of  regulation  enforcement  is  related  to  meet  the  requirements  of  environmental  protection, 
independent of the number of different types of EI adopted.  
The  firms’  size  variable  registers  mixed  results.  On  pooled  OLS  regression  (column  2)  and  Logit 
regression (column 6) the coefficient on Firm Size was positive, while on OLS fixed effects (column 4) 
and logit fixed effects (column 8) it was negative. Once again, exporting firms registered mixed results, 
being significant and positively correlated to the adoption of all EIs (columns 4, 6 and 8) and negatively 
correlated  to  the  adoption  of  all  EIs  in  column  2.  In  opposition,  the  partial  effects  of  being  a  foreign 
owned firm (4.4 p.p. - column 2 and 1.1 p.p. - column 6) and of physical capital intensity (ranging form 
0.010  p.p.  - column 2  to  0.044  p.p.  - column 8) are highly  significant  and  positively  correlated  to  the 
adoption of all EIs.  
Table  4  presents  the  estimations  results  on  the  determinants  of  the  adoption  of  a  specific  type  of  EI, 
focused  on the  reduction  of  environmental  negative  externalities,  the “Environmental  impact  reduction 
and  safety  improvement”.    The  influence  of  environmental  regulation  to  adopt  environmental  impact 
reduction  and  improvement  safety  innovation  (approximately  34%  of  the  firms  –  mean  of  dependent 
variable) are highly significant and positive, ranging between 0.2 p.p. and 0.8 p.p.. The interpretations of 
the control variables estimates are similar to those in Table 3, except for the Exporting firm variable that 
turned  to  be  significantly  and  positively  correlated  to  Environmental  Impact  reduction  and  Safety 
improvement innovation adoption (columns 2, 6 and 8). 
The  consistency  of  environmental  regulation  positive  coefficients  across  the  different  types  of  EI  and 
different  models  utilized  is  an  important  finding,  and  can  be  interpreted  as  reinforcement  to  the 
environmental inducement hypothesis. To a minor extent it also reinforces Porter’s weak version (Porter 
and  Van  der  Linde  1995).  According  to  Porters’  first  component  part,  properly  designed  stringent 
environmental regulation would spur innovations28. 
Organizational environmental innovations regression results can be observed in Table 5. Once again the 
coefficients  of  explanatory  variables  are  consistent  across  the  four  models  estimated.  Observing  the 
results, it is clear that environmental regulation is less important to influence the average probability of 
adopting organizational environmental innovations, ranging from 0.002 p.p. to 0.5 p.p.. This finding is in 
line with the expected, since organizational innovations generally are voluntary measures adopted by the 
firm in order to complement technical EIs adopted.  
The  size  of  the  firm  and  physical  capital  intensity  coefficients  are  highly  significant  and  positively 
correlated to organizational environmental innovation (as in Cole et al 2006). It is interesting to note that 
being a foreign owned firm increases the average probability of introducing organizational environmental 
innovations between 5.6 p.p.(column 6) and 6.1 p.p. (column 2), confirming that foreign owned firms are 
more likely to adopt organizational EI as pointed out by Albarnoz et al (2009). Being an Exporting firm 
also favours in average between 0.04 p.p. (column 8) to 5.3 p.p. (column 6) the adoption of organizational 
EI by the firm. 
Table  6  presents  results  from  the  estimation  of  the  determinants  of  pollution  abatement  expenditures. 
Since  the  pollution  abatement  investment  is  available  only  in  three  years  (1997,  2002  and  2007),  we 
constructed  a  three-year  panel.  We  decided  to  use  the  pollution  abatement  investment  variable  as  a 
dependent  variable,  instead  of  an  explanatory  variable  (proxy  to  the  stringency  of  environmental 
regulation) because we assumed pollution abatement investment as a proxy to environmental innovation.   
                                                 
28 For an analysis of the second component part of Porter hypothesis see Lucchesi et al (2014c). 

The  results  in  Table  6  show  that  environmental  regulation  is  also  important  to  invest  in  pollution 
abatement,  registering  highly  significant  and  positive  coefficients.  Physical  capital  intensity  and 
Exporting  firm  is  positively  correlated  to  pollution  abatement  investment.  Interestingly,  foreign 
ownership  is  negatively  correlated  to  pollution  abatement  investment,  suggesting  that  foreign  owned 
firms tend to invest in more comprehensive solutions, in order to mitigate environmental damages, such 
as EIs. 
 
6 Final Considerations  
The  determinants  to  environmental  innovation  in  Brazilian  manufacturing  firms  were  shown  to  be 
consistent with the empirical literature on the topic. Environmental regulation registered an important role 
to  influence  the  firms  to  adopt  both  technical  and  organizational  EIs,  although  organizational  EI  are 
usually introduced voluntarily. Usually organizational EI are complement to technical EI and hence they 
often occur together. Thus, the results obtained in relation to the environmental regulation role confirm 
the environmental inducement hypothesis (also, these results reinforce the Porters’ weak version). 
However, environmental regulation is only part of the story. It is important to emphasize that, according 
to  industrial  economics  literature  (based  in  a  Schumpeterian  approach),  there  are  other  important 
determinants  which  influence  the  firm’s  innovative  activities.  In  line  with  this  approach,  our  results 
indicate  that  firms’  size  and  physical  capital  intensity  are  also  important  variables.    Large  firms  have 
numerous  advantages  to  develop  innovations such  as stable financing  funds  and  greater  ability  to  deal 
with risky R&D activities. In turn, high physical capital intensity is associated with greater volumes of 
pollution and hence large abatement pressure, stimulating EIs. 
Specifically related to developing countries innovative processes, our results confirm that foreign owned 
firms are significantly more likely to innovate “green” through capital embodied technology transfer and 
licensing  agreements.  On  the  other  hand,  export  intensity  registered  highly  significant  and  negative 
coefficients, contradicting international trade role in enhancing international monitoring and promoting 
domestic firms contact with more advanced technologies. Despite that, this result is in line with Marta et 
al (2001) and Del Rio et al (2011). 
Future  research  should  test  the  complementary  effect  of  organizational  EI  as  a  determinant  of 
technological EI. Unfortunately the data available does not permit to distinguish between end-of-pipe and 
clean  technologies.  It  would  also  be  interesting  to  investigate  how  technology  sourcing  affects 
environmental  innovation  adoption,  since  international  licensing  agreements  play  an  important  role  in 
total patents granted in Brazil.  
Finally, future research should consider the challenge to merge “green” patents INPI29 data with PIA and 
PINTEC data. There are numerous difficulties concerning the utilization of the three databases. To cite a 
few, green patents classification is usually too embracing and it is very difficult to properly identify the 
patent depositor. 
 

REFERENCES 

Acemoglu, D. (2002). Directed Technical Change. Review of Economic Studies, 69, 781-810. 
Albornoz, F.; Cole, M.; Elliot, R. and Ercolani, M. In search of environmental spillovers. The world economy, 2009. 
Almeida,  R.  and  Fernandes,  A.  M.  (2008)  Openness  and  technological  innovations  in  developing  countries: 
evidence from firm-level surveys. Journal of Development Studies, vol 44, No. 5: 701-727. 

                                                 
29 Brazilian industrial property institute (INPI). Marta et al (2011) suggest a methodology to merge patents data to PIA and 
PINTEC data. 

Anton, W. R. Q.; Deltas, G. and Khanna, M. (2004). Incentives for environmental self regulation and implications 
for environmental performance. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 48(1), 632-654. 
Basant, R.; Commander, S.; Harrison, R. and Menezes-Filho, N. (2006) ICT Adoption and Productivity in Developing 
Countries: New Firm Level Evidence from Brazil and India. IZA Discussion Paper, No. 2294. 
Bell, M. and Pavitt, K. (1997) Technological accumulation and industrial growth: contrasts between developed and 
developing countries. In: Archibugi, D. and Michie, J. (eds) Technology, globalization and economic performance. 
Cambridge University Press. 
Brunnermeier,  S.  B.  ans  Cohen,  M.  A.  (2003).  Determinants  of  environmental  innovation  in  US  manufacturing 
industries. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, vol 45, 278-293. 
Caroli,  E.  and  Van  Reenen,  J.  (2001).  Skill  biased  organizational  change?  Evidence  from  a  panel  of  British  and 
French establishments. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116: 1449-92. 
Cohen,  W.  M.  (2010).  Fifty  years  of  empirical  studies  of  innovative  activity  and  performance.  In:  Hall,  B.  H., 
Rosenberg, N. (eds), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, vol 1, Elsevier Press: Amsterdam, 129-213. 
Cole,  M;  Elliot,  R.  and  Shimamoto,  K.  (2006).  Globalization,  firm-level  characteristics  and  environmental 
management: a study of Japan. Ecological Economics n. 59. 
Cole, M. A.; Elliot, R. J. R. and Shimamoto, K. (2005). Industrial characteristics, environmental regulations and air 
pollution: an analysis of the UK manufacturing sector. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, vol 
50, 121-143. 
Del Rio, P.; Morán, M. A. T. and Albiñana, F. C. (2011). Analysing the determinants of environmental technology 
investments. A panel-data study of Spanish industrial sectors. Journal of Cleaner Production, 19, 1170-1179. 
Demirel, P. and Kesidou, E. (2011) Stimulating different types of eco-innovation in the UK: Government policies 
and firm motivations. Ecological Economics, vol 70, 1546-1557. 
Dosi, G. and Nelson, R. R. (2010) Technical change and industrial dynamics as evolutionary processes. In: Hall, B. 
H., Rosenberg, N. (eds), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, vol 1, Elsevier Press: Amsterdam, 51-127. 
Ferraz, C.; Seroa da Motta, R. (2001). Regulação, Mercado ou Pressão Social? Os Determinantes do Investimento 
Ambiental na Indústria.  Anais XXIX Encontro Nacional de Economia, ANPEC. 
Frondel, M.; Horbach, J.; Rennings, K. (2008) What triggers environmental management and innovation? Empirical 
evidence for Germany. Ecological Economics, vol 66, 153-160. 
Frondel,  M.;  Horbach,  J.;  Rennings,  K.  (2007)  End-of-pipe  or  cleaner  production?  An  empirical  comparison  of 
environmental decisions across OECD countries. Business Strategy and the Environment, vol 16(8), 571-584. 
Greening,  L.A.,  Greene,  D.L.,  Difiglio,  C.,  (2000).  Energy  Efficiency  and  Consumption  –  the  Rebound  Effect:  A 
Survey. Energy Policy, 28, 389– 401. 
Hicks, J. (1932). Theory of Wages. Macmillan, London. 
Horbach,  J.;  Rammer,  C.  and  Rennings,  K.  (2012)  Determinants  of  eco-innovations  by  type  of  environmental 
impact – The role of regulatory push pull, technology push and market pull. Ecological Economics, vol 78, 112-
122. 
Horbach, J. and Rennings, K. (2012). Environmental innovation and employment dynamics in different technology 
fields – an analysis based on the German Community Innovation Survey 2009. ZEW Discussion Paper No. 12-006, 
Centre for European Economic Research, Mannheim, Germany. 
Jaffe, A. B.; Newell, R. G. and Stavins, R. N. (2003). Technology change and the environment. In: Mäler, K. G. and 
Vincent, J. R. (eds.), Handbook of Environmental Economics, vol 1, Elsevier Press: Amsterdam. 
Jaffe, A. B. and Palmer, K. (1997). Environmental regulation and innovation: A  panel data study. The review of 
economics and Statistics, vol 79, n.4: 610-619. 
Khanna,  M.;  Deltas,  G  and  Harrington,  D.  R.  (2009)  Adoption  of  pollution  prevention  techniques:  the  role  of 
management systems and regulatory pressures. Environmental Resource Economics. 

Khanna,  M.  and  Anton,  W.  R.  Q.  (2002)  Corporate  environmental  management:  regulatory  and  market  based 
pressures. Land Economics, 78 (4), 539-558. 
Lucchesi, A.; Cole, M. A.; Elliot, R.J.R; Menezes-Filho, N. A.; (2014b) Environmental Innovation, skill demand and 
relative wages Brazilian manufacturing industry. Mimeo. 
Lucchesi, A.; Cole, M. A.; Elliot, R.J.R; Menezes-Filho, N. A.; (2014c) Environmental Innovation and performance in 
Brazilian Firms. Mimeo. 
Marta, F. S.; Carvalho, P. G. M., Silva, D. B. N. and Barcellos, F. C. (2011). Determinantes do valor do investimento 
em controle ambiental das indústrias brasileiras. IV Encontro da Sociedade Brasileira de Economia Ecológica.  
Newell,  R.G,  Jaffe,  A.  B.  and  Stavins,  R.  N.  (1999).  The  Induced  Innovation  Hypothesis  and  Energy-Saving 
Technological Change, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114: 941-975. 
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) (2005) OSLO Manual: proposed guidelines for 
collecting  and  interpreting  technological  innovation  data.  Paris:  OECD:  Statistical  Office  of  the  European 
Communities – Eurostat. 
Porter,  M.  and  Van  der  Linde,  C.  (1995).  Toward  a  new  conception  of  the  Environment-Competitiveness 
relationship. Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol 9, n.4: 97-118. 
Queiroz, J. M. (2011). Determinantes da Inovação Ambiental: uma análise das estratégias das firmas da indústria 
de transformação brasileira. Dissertação de mestrado, Rio de Janeiro: IE / UFRJ.  
Rennings, K.; Ziegler, A.; Ankele, K. and Hoffmann, E. (2006). The influence of different characteristics of the EU 
environmental  management  and  auditing  scheme  on  technical  environmental  innovations  and  economic 
performance. Ecological Economics, 57, 45-59. 
Seroa da Motta, R. (2006). Analyzing the Environmental Performance of the Brazilian Industrial Sector. Ecological 
Economics, 57, 269-281. 
Schumpeter, J. (1942). Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. New York: Harper. 
Sorrell,  S.  and  Dimitropoulos,  J.  (2008)  The  Rebound  Effect:  Microeconomic  Definitions,  Limitations  and 
Extensions. Ecological Economics, 65, 636-649. 
Turner, K. and Hanley, N. (2011). Energy Efficiency, Rebound Effects and the Environmental Kuznets Curve. Energy 
Economics, 33, 709-720. 
Wagner,  M.  (2009).  Empirical  influence  of  environmental  management  on  innovation:  Evidence  from  Europe. 
Ecological Economics, 66, 392-402. 
Ziegler,  A.  and  Nogareda,  J.  S.  (2009).  Environmental  management  systems  and  technological  environmental 
innovations: Exploring the causal relationship. Research Policy, 38, 885-893. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXES: 

Table 1 - Descriptive Statistics - Panel database

Variable

Measurament

Number 
of obs.

Mean

Standard 
Deviation

Dependent Variables:
Environmental Innovation - at 
least one

dummy variable

Environmental Innovation - all dummy variable

Environmental impact 
reduction and safety 
improvement
Environmental Management 
Techniques
Explanatory Variables:

dummy variable

dummy variable

Environmental Regulation

number of laws per state

Size of the Firm

Exporting Firm

Foreign Ownership

Physical Capital Intensity

log (total employees)

dummy variable

dummy variable
log (capital stock/total 
employees)

level

level

level

level

3 year 
lagged
level

level

level

level

32,894

32,894

0.43

0.10

32,894

0.34

25,813

0.41

32,894

32,894

32,894

32,894

32,894

5.3

6.4

0.36

0.22

10.8

Notes: Panel database considers PINTECs 2000, 2003, 2005 and 2008 merged to PIAs 1998, 2001, 2003 and 2006

Table 2: Determinants of Technical Environmental Innovation (at least one)
Dependent Variable: Environmental Innovation - at least one

0.49

0.29

0.48

0.49

4.2

1.8

0.45

0.42

1.8

 

Pooled OLS

OLS Fixed Effects

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Pooled Logit

marginal effects

Logit Fixed Effects
marginal effects

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Environmental Regulation

Size of the Firm

Exporting Firm

Foreign Ownership

Physical Capital Intensity

(0.001)
0.093***
(0.002)
0.018***
(0.007)
0.034***
(0.007)
0.018***
(0.002)

Year Dummies
Industrial Sector Dummies
State Dummies
Observations
32,894
Standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

yes
no
no

32,894

32,894

(0.001)

0.002* 0.004*** 0.006*** 0.006*** 0.002*** 0.002*** 0.009*** 0.009***
(0.00004)(0.00004) (0.00001) (0.0001)
(0.001)
0.011***
(0.001)
-0.007***
(0.001)

(0.001)
0.023**
(0.012)
-0.016
(0.015)

0.107***
(0.0001)
0.024***
(0.0004)
0.019***
(0.0004)
0.026***
(0.0001)

0.007
(0.008)

yes
no
no

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

yes
no
no

0.006***
(0.0004)

yes
no
no

32,894

32,894

32,894

11,866

11,866

Table 3: Determinants of Technical Environmental Innovation (all)
Dependent Variable: Environmental Innovation - all

(1)
0.001
(0.001)

Environmental Regulation

Size of the Firm

Exporting Firm

Foreign Ownership

Physical Capital Intensity

Pooled OLS

OLS Fixed Effects

(2)

(3)

(4)

Pooled Logit
marginal effects
(6)

(5)

Logit Fixed Effects
marginal effects
(7)
(8)

(0.001)

(0.00002) (0.00001) (0.0001)

(0.001)
-0.021***
(0.008)
0.017*
(0.010)

0.002** 0.002*** 0.002*** 0.001*** 0.001*** 0.008*** 0.004***
(0.0001)
(0.001)
0.039***
-0.082***
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.097***
-0.0075*
(0.004)
(0.003)
0.044***
(0.004)
0.010***
(0.001)

0.026***
(0.00004)
0.018***
(0.0001)
0.011***
(0.0001)
0.011***
(0.00004)

0.044***
(0.002)

0.004
(0.005)

Year Dummies
Industrial Sector Dummies
State Dummies
Observations
32,894
Standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

yes
yes
yes
32,894

yes
no
no

yes
yes
yes

32,894

yes
no
no

32,894

yes
yes
yes
32,894

yes
yes
yes
32,894

yes
no
no
2,678

yes
no
no
2,678

 

 

Table 4: Determinants of Technical Environmental Innovation (env. impact reduction and safety)
Dependent Variable: Environmental Impact reduction and Safety improvement
Pooled Logit

OLS Fixed Effects

Pooled OLS

Logit Fixed Effects

(1)

0.002*
(0.001)

Environmental Regulation

Size of the Firm

Exporting Firm

Foreign Ownership

Physical Capital Intensity

(2)

(3)

(4)

marginal effects marginal effects

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(0.001)

(0.00004)(0.00004) (0.0001)

(0.001)
-0.0001
(0.011)
0.002
(0.015)

0.003*** 0.004*** 0.004*** 0.002*** 0.002*** 0.008*** 0.008***
(0.001)
(0.0001)
-0.016***
0.079***
(0.0005)
(0.002)
0.020***
0.013**
(0.006)
(0.001)
0.036***
(0.007)
0.018***
(0.002)

0.085***
(0.0001)
0.027***
(0.0003)
0.019***
(0.0004)
0.028***
(0.0001)

0.010***
(0.0004)

0.007
(0.008)

Year Dummies
Industrial Sector Dummies
State Dummies
Observations
32,894
Standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

yes
yes
yes
32,894

yes
yes
yes
32,894

yes
no
no

yes
no
no

32,894

yes
yes
yes
32,894

yes
yes
yes
32,894

yes
no
no

yes
no
no

10,631

10,631

 

Table 5: Determinants of Organizational Environmental Innovation
Dependent Variable: Environmental Management Techniques
OLS Fixed Effects

Pooled OLS

Environmental Regulation

Size of the Firm

Exporting Firm

Foreign Ownership

Physical Capital Intensity

(1)
0.001
(0.001)

(3)

0.004**
(0.002)

(2)
0.002
(0.001)
0.091***
(0.002)
0.047***
(0.007)
0.061***
(0.008)
0.014***
(0.002)

Year Dummies
Industrial Sector Dummies
State Dummies
Observations
Standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

yes
no
no

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

25,813

25,813

25,813

(4)

0.004**
(0.002)
0.065***
(0.016)
0.003
(0.020)

0.031***
(0.010)

yes
no
no

Pooled Logit

marginal effects

(5)

(6)
-0.0001 -0.0001
(0.0001) (0.0001)
0.106***
(0.0001)
0.053***
(0.0004)
0.056***
(0.0004)
0.026***
(0.0001)

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

Logit Fixed Effects
marginal effects
(7)
(8)

0.005*** 0.0002***
(0.0001) (0.00001)
0.002***
(0.0001)
0.0004***
(0.00004)

yes
no
no
7,449

0.002***
(0.0001)

yes
no
no
7,449

 

25,813

25,813

25,813

Table 6: Determinants of Pollution abatement investment
Dependent Variable: Pollution abatement investment (%)

Pooled OLS

OLS Fixed Effects

Environmental Regulation

Size of the Firm

Exporting Firm

Foreign Ownership

Physical Capital Intensity

(1)

0.002**
(0.001)

(2)

0.002**
(0.001)
0.005***
(0.001)
0.006**
(0.003)
-0.014***
(0.003)
0.007***
(0.001)

Year Dummies
Industrial Sector Dummies
State Dummies
Observations
Standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

23,290

23,290

(3)

0.003***
(0.001)

yes
no
no

23,290

(4)

0.003***
(0.001)
-0.009*
(0.005)
-0.010
(0.007)

0.002
(0.003)

yes
no
no

23,290

 

Table A.1 - State environmental legislation: selected laws, decrees, resolutions, ordinances e regulatory instructions by year of publication

Industrial Activities

Sanction

Inspection / Monitoring / 

Industrial effluents / 

Economic Instruments

Specific Industries

Total

1995 -
1997

1998 - 
2000

2000 - 
2002

2003 - 
2005

1995 -
1997

1998 - 
2000

2000 - 
2002

2003 - 
2005

1995 -
1997

2003 - 
2005

1995 -
1997

1998 - 
2000

2000 - 
2002

2003 - 
2005

1995 -
1997

1998 - 
2000

2000 - 
2002

2003 - 
2005

1995 -
1997

1998 - 
2000

2000 - 
2002

2003 - 
2005

industrial waste
2000 - 
2002

1998 - 
2000

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

0

1

0

0

0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

2

1

0

0

0

0
0
0

0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1

0

0

1

0

0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0

0

0

1

1

0

0
1
2

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1

0

1

0

0

0

0
0
0

1
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

1

0

1

0

0
1
1

0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0

0

0

0

1

0

0
1
2

0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1

0

1

0

0

0

0
0
1

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

0

0

0

0

0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

1

0

0

0

0
1
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

1

0

0

0

0
1
1

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

0

0

0

0

0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

0

0

0

0

0
1
0

0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0

0

0

0

0

0

0
1
0

0
0
0
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0

0

0

0

0

0

0
1
0

0
0
0
2
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
0

1

0

0

0

0

0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

0

0

0

1

0
1
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0

1

1

2

0

0

0
0
0

0
1
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

1

1

1

1

0
0
1

1
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0

0

1

0

0

0

0
4
3

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
1

0

1

1

0

1

0
2
0

1
0
0
1
0
2
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0

3

4

2

1

0

0
3
1

0
4
0
4
1
0
0
1
0
0
3
0
0
0

1

2

1

3

1

0
3
4

1
0
0
2
2
2
1
1
0
0
3
0
0
1

1

2

1

1

0

0
5
6

State

DF (b)
GO (e)
MT (b)
MS  (e)
TO (g)
AL   (b) 
BA   (f)
CE (g)
MA  (c) 
PB  (b)
PE  (f)
PI  (d) 
RN  (d) 
SE   (d) 

AC   (d)

AP (d)

AM (f)

PA (e)

RO (c) 

RR  (b)

ES  (g)
MG  (f)

t
s
e
w
d
M

i

t
s
a
e
h
t
r
o
N

h
t
r
o
N

t
s
a
e
h

t

t

u
o
S

RJ (e)

SP  (g)
PR  (g)

1
4
5
1
0
NOTES: (b) includes only laws and decrees; (c) includes laws, decrees and ordinances; (d) includes laws, decrees and resolutions; (e) includes laws, decrees, resolutions and ordinances; (f) includes laws, decress, resolutions and 
normative instructions; (

RS  (d) 
SC  (d) 

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

0
1
0
0
0

0
2
0
0
0

0
1
0
0
0

1
0
0
0
0

1
0
0
1
0

0
0
0
0
0

0
1
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

0
2
0
0
0

0
1
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

0
1
3
1
0

2
0
1
0
0

3
0
2
1
0

2
2
2
0
0

1
0
2
0
0

2
2
1
0
0

4
0
2
1
0

3
5
2
1
0

h
u
o
S

 

