Identiﬁcation of Employment Subcenters in

Brazilian Metropolitan Regions

Flavio A. da C. Rodrigues
†
Department of Economics - Universidade Federal de Pernambuco (UFPE)

, Raul da M. Silveira Neto

†

†
and Filipe Miranda

†

Resumo

Resultado de um forte processo de migrac¸ ˜ao rural-urbana iniciado no ﬁnal do s´eculo
XX, o Brasil ´e atualmente um pa´ıs majoritariamente urbano, com aproximadamente
85% da populac¸ ˜ao morando nas cidades. Nessa perspectiva, um conjunto de evidˆencias
mostram que a qualidade de vida e o bem-estar da populac¸ ˜ao est´a diretamente associada
a distribuic¸ ˜ao espacial das atividades econˆomicas dentro das cidades. Enquanto os fatores
associados `a r´apida expans˜ao urbana brasileira s˜ao hoje razoavelmente bem conhecidos e
explorados na literatura econˆomica, ´e muito menor o conhecimento existente a respeito da
estrutura dos centros urbanos brasileiros, uma lacuna cujo este trabalho prop˜oe preencher.
Nesse sentido, o presente trabalho tem como objetivo prim´ario identiﬁcar os centros
de empregos para algumas das mais importantes regi˜oes metropolitanas brasileiras. Os
resultados indicam que, apesar de uma grande concentrac¸ ˜ao de emprego perto dos centros
principais, as regi˜oes metropolitanas brasileiras comec¸am a apresentar um padr˜ao de
descentralizac¸ ˜ao das atividades econˆomicas, principalmente na regi˜ao Sudeste, evidˆencias
que podem ser explicadas, em parte, pelas caracter´ısticas dos centros urbanos brasileiros.

Palavras-Chaves: Densidade de Emprego, Subcentros, Regi˜oes Metropolitanas, Brasil.

Abstract

At the end of the 20th century, Brazil has experienced a strong urbanization process,
a consequence of intense rural-urban migration, resulting in approximately 85% of the
population living in urban areas. Hence, a set of evidence shows that the populations’
quality of life is directly associated with the spatial distribution of the economic activities
within the cities. While the factors related to the urban expansion in Brazil are nowadays
reasonably well established and exploited in the economic literature, there is a lack of
knowledge concerning the structure of Brazilian urban centers, a gap that this article
proposes to ﬁll. In this perspective, the main goal of this paper is to identify employment
subcenters for some of the most important Brazilian metropolitan regions. Our results
suggest that despite a great concentration of employment closer to the CBD, Brazilian
metropolitan regions presents a decentralization pattern of economic activities, mainly in
the Southeast, evidence that can be partly explained by the characteristics of Brazilian
urban centers.

Keywords: Employment Density, Subcenters, Metropolitan Regions, Brazil.
JEL: R10, R12, R30
´Area 10: Economia Regional e Urbana.

1

1 Introduction

At the end of the 20th century, Brazil has experienced a strong urbanization process, as
a consequence of intense rural-urban migration, resulting in approximately 85% of the
population living in urban areas, which corresponds to only about 1% of the entire national
territory, according to the 2010 Demographic Census (IBGE). In this context, Brazilians
quality of life is fundamentally linked to the organization and structure of the urban centers.
As stated by Da Mata et al. (2007), and more recently by Silva et al. (2017), this process was
directly associated with the low productivity of agricultural activity, a rapid industrialization
process, the expansion of schooling in urban areas and an improvement in the infrastructure
of the cities.

It is important to note that, if, on the one hand, such an urbanization process is related to
the factors described above, on the other hand, the employment centers and the spatial dis-
tribution of occupations in urban regions is directly linked to beneﬁts associated with higher
productivity, as a result of urban agglomerations (Moretti, 2004; Duranton e Puga, 2004;
Glaeser, 2010; Baruﬃ et al.2016). As already well established in the literature, commuting
costs and rental prices of housing increases signiﬁcantly in regions with a higher population
concentration. Hence, a necessary condition for the formation of an employment center is
that the returns associated with the spatial agglomeration of agents must imply in higher
productivity and wages. According to Duranton and Puga (2004), such increasing returns
reﬂect better matching between occupations and workers, the possibility of a greater sharing
of services and, ultimately, the knowledge spillover among workers.

In this context, the tradeoﬀ between agglomeration gains and commuting costs is funda-
mental to analyze the spatial distribution of employment within urban centers. While the
beneﬁts associated with better matching, sharing, and learning are favorable forces to the
agglomeration of occupations, the negative externalities resulting from greater commuting
and the congestion of public goods act in the opposite direction. Hence, the spatial structure
of cities and their conﬁguration as monocentric or polycentric results from the performance
of these forces. As shown by Fujita and Thisse (2013), for example, when costs arising from
negative externalities become suﬃciently high, certain activities tend to relocate outside the
central business district (CBD). If the agglomeration forces corresponding to these activities
are relatively strong, these activities will relocate into secondary centers, called subcenters
(Fujita and Ogawa, 1982; Ahlfeldt et al., 2016). Thus, monocentric cities tend to settle in
regions that have strong gains from agglomeration and low commuting costs.

There is plenty of evidence in the economic literature about the inﬂuence of urban city
structures on an important set of factors associated with the quality of life within cities
and the social outcomes of individuals in urban centers. Basically, among the inﬂuences
highlighted, the results indicate the importance of urban structures on the distribution of the
population, the possibility of spatial mismatch, the inﬂuence on the prices of the urban space
(land and urban constructions) and the commuting cost. The evidence available indicates that
the spatial distribution of economic activities within cities substantially aﬀects population
distribution and density (McDonald and McMillen, 1997, McMillen and McDonald, 1998),
real estate prices (Bender e Hang, 1985; Richardson et al. 1990; Edlund et al. 2015), the
build proﬁle and land-use intensity (McMillen, 2008; Barr and Cohen, 2010; Ahlfeldt and
McMillen, 2015), and the labor market outcomes of its inhabitants, especially through spatial
mismatch (Gobilon et al., 2007; Ihlanfeldt, 2008). Moreover, it is possible to emphasize the
inﬂuence of the urban structure on the commuting. For American cities, Gordon, Kumar and
Richardson (1989) show that metropolitan areas with polycentric orientation provide less
commuting cost for their residents. Likewise, Giuliano and Small (1991) ﬁnd evidence that
workers located in denser subcenters near the CBD have greater commuting compared to

2

workers located in more distant subcenters. In other words, the urban proﬁle of the city is
largely deﬁned by its employment distribution.

Notice that, while the factors associated with fast urban expansion in Brazil are nowadays
reasonably well established and exploited in the economic literature, there is a lack of knowl-
edge concerning the structure of Brazilian urban centers, that is, about the characteristics of
the spatial distribution of economic activities and people in these urban centers. In this sense,
evaluations concerning the monocentric or polycentric structure of Brazilian urban centers
or about what kinds of economic activities are clustered (or dispersed) in Brazilian cities
remains almost unchartered in the economic literature. Actually, among the few papers that
address this theme, we stress out Ingram and Carroll (1981), in which the authors make a
comparative analysis of Latin American urban structures. Ohers papers treated speciﬁc urban
centers; Fernandez-Maldonado et al. (2015) provide an analysis for the case of Metropolitan
of Fortaleza, Ramos (2014) considered the case of S˜ao Paulo, and, more recently, Belmiro et
al. (2018) analysed the case of the city of Recife. Besides using diﬀerent methodologies for
indentifying emplyment subcenters, notice that these few existing studies dealed separetly
with speciﬁc cases, making it hard to elaborate a more representative proﬁle of the spatial dis-
tribution of occupations in the main Brazilian metropolitan regions. Such scarcity of studies
in Brazil is, given the experience of the evidence for developed countries, noteworthy when
considering the recent costs associated with the Brazilian intra-urban dynamics, whether in
terms of rising urban land prices or the commuting time of its residents.

This paper seeks to ﬁll this gap in the literature when analyzing the spatial distribution
of economic activities in Brazilian urban centers. Therefore, the main objective of our study
is to identify employments subcenters for some of the most important Brazilian metropolitan
regions (henceforth MR). To this end, we use georeferenced formal employment information
provided by the Institute of Applied Economic Research (IPEA) and apply a two-stage
procedure proposed by McMillen (2001) to identify the subcenters. The ﬁrst stage uses a
nonparametric estimation to identify potential subcenters of employment, that is, locations
where employment density is exceptionally high even after all spatial trends, are taken into
account. The second stage uses a semi-parametric regression to determine if the employment
subcenter candidates have signiﬁcant eﬀects on the employment density function of the
study region.

More speciﬁcally, the procedure is used to identify employments subcenters for the
metropolitan areas of Recife, Salvador, Porto Alegre, Rio de Janeiro, and S˜ao Paulo. Recife
and Salvador are the two largest and oldest MR in the Northeast of Brazil. Despite having a
high GDP, they both have signiﬁcant heterogeneity in terms of human development, income
inequality, and residents living in extreme poverty. Rio de Janeiro and S˜ao Paulo are the two
largest and most economically important metropolitan regions of Brazil. Both are located in
the Southeast, the most developed region of the country, accounting for more than 50% of the
national GDP, as well as being the most densely populated. Finally, Porto Alegre represents
the largest and most traditional MR in the southern region of the country, characterized by
European colonization, strong industrial development and social index above the Brazilian
average. Moreover, the Northeast, Southeast, and South of Brazil are the most urbanized and
populous regions of the country1.

Despite having a signiﬁcant employment concentration around the CBD, the Brazilian
metropolitan regions present a decentralization pattern of their economic activities, especially
to those in the Southeast. We identify a total of 15 subcenters in the Recife metropolitan
region, 13 in Salvador, 55 in Porto Alegre, 52 in Rio de Janeiro, and 84 in S˜ao Paulo. We show

1RMR denotes the Recife Metropolitan Region, RMSA denotes the Salvador Metropolitan Region, RMPA
denotes the Porto Alegre Metropolitan Region, RMRJ denotes the Rio de Janeiro Metropolitan Region and RMSP
denotes the S˜ao Paulo Metropolitan Region.

3

that these numbers are bigger than correspondent numbers of subcenters obtained using
the traditional strategy proposed by Guiliano and Small (1991). Furthermore, we ﬁnd that
subcenters present heterogeneity regarding their degree of inﬂuence over the employment
density surface in the study regions. While subcenters located closer the CBD presents
greater magnitude and global eﬀect, subcenters situated in peripheral regions presents lower
employment density and local inﬂuence. Based on the results, we found evidence that the
non-parametric approach is more suitable for the identiﬁcation of subcenters in the Brazilian
metropolitan regions since it presents the greatest explanatory power when compared to
other standard models in the economic literature.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the procedure
used to identify the employment subcenters. Section 3 presents the data and summary
statistics. Section 4 presents the main results. Section 5 brieﬂy discusses the results, compare
them with the evidence obtained in other studies and discusses how we can understand the
results in light of the characteristics of Brazilian urban centers. Finally, Section 6 presents
the ﬁnal considerations and suggestions for future research.

2 Empirical Strategy

Most of studies in theliterature on emplyoment subcenters identiﬁcation refers to the begin-
ning of the 90s and focuses on American cities. While there is still no established consensus
on the most appropriate method for identifying the urban subcenters, we can highlight four
identiﬁcation strategies. The ﬁrst is based on thresholds for the employment density values
and/or total employment of the geographical units (Giuliano and Small, 1991; Song, 1994;
Cervero and Wu 1997; McMillen and McDonald 1998; Shearmur and Coﬀey 2001). Second,
spatial data-based methods are used, such as exploratory spatial data analysis (Baumont et al.,
2004; Guillain et al., 2004). A third alternative is an identiﬁcation of peaks in the estimated
employment density function or the employment/population relationship (Gordon et al.,
1986; McDonald, 1987). Finally, parametric, semiparametric, and noparametric methods can
be used (Craig and Ng, 2001; McMillen, 2001; Krehl, 2018).

Due to the simplicity of its application to diﬀerent regions, the methodology proposed by
Giuliano and Small (1991), i.e., cutoﬀ limits for employment density, is commonly used in
the literature to identify employment subcenters. Nevertheless, there are some weaknesses
with regard to such a procedure. The ﬁrst is in the fact that the thresholds are deﬁned
arbitrarily, being guided by the previous knowledge of the locality. Second, the methodology
is sensitive to diﬀerent geographic units. Finally, strategies based on cutoﬀ limits only identify
potential subcenters since they can not infer the statistical signiﬁcance of each subcenter
over the city’s employment density function. Furthermore, methods based on exploratory
spatial data analysis and peak inspection on the employment density function suﬀer from
the same problem described above, after all, the existence of signiﬁcant spatial correlations
or deviations in the employment density gradient does not guarantee relevance to the locality
in the analysis (in terms of inﬂuence on the urban structure).

In this research, we use thus a two-stage procedure, as proposed by McMillen (2001), for
identifying urban employment subcenters. Among the advantages of using this methodology,
we can highlight: i) rule out the need of using thresholds to determine density limits,
proposing a more rigorous criterion applicable to diﬀerent types of urban centers, ii) is less
sensible to diﬀerent geographic units of analysis (e.g. districts, census tracts), iii) explicitly
considers the relationship with the CBD (eliminating proximity to this as a factor aﬀecting
identiﬁcation), iv) allows for local variation in the eﬀect of distance from the CBD, which
means recognizing variations in urban land patterns, and v) identiﬁes statistically signiﬁcant
local rises in employment density. Moreover, as McMillen (2001) argues, such a procedure

4

allows us to study diﬀerent urban centers without necessarily having a thorough prior
knowledge of the study region under analysis.

In the ﬁrst stage, we use a non-parametric estimation in order to smooth the natural
logarithm of employment density, y, over the distance to CBD. The estimation is performed
through locally weighted regressions (LWR), where speciﬁc estimates of the employment
density with respect to the distance to the employment center are obtained for each ge-
ographical unit. This estimation uses a weight matrix of each observation in relation to
others. More precisely, we use a geographically weighted regression, where the weights are
based on the geographical distance among observations. Let yi be the natural logarithm of
employment density in grid i and DCBDi the distance of each grid i from the CBD. The
estimated regression is

yi = g(DCBDi)

(1)
The main idea is to give a higher weight to closer observations when estimating the
predicted value of y in a grid i. To obtain a smoother employment density surface, a
relatively high window size should be chosen. We choose a window size, which deﬁnes the
share of geographically closer observations to receive some weight in the estimation, of 50%.
To perform the estimation of equation 1, we must deﬁne a kernel function κi, which
determines the weight given to observation i based on the geographical distance. Diﬀerent
functions can be used. We will follow McMillen (2001) and use a tricube Kernel. Let di(x)
deﬁne the distance between a grid i and a target point x. Ordering the observations such that
d1(x) < d2(x) < . . . < dn(x), we can represent the tricube Kernel in the following equation

(cid:32)

1−

di(x)
dq(x)

(cid:33)33

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

κi =

I

di(x) < dq(x)

(2)

Where I(di(x) < dq(x)) is an indicator function that equals 1 when the condition is satisﬁed.
Hence, all observations beyond the window of the q closest observations are given zero weight
in the estimation. In addition, within the window, closer observations are given a higher
weight than more distant observations.
The list of subcenter candidates comprises those locations where the residuals are positive
and statistically signiﬁcant at 5% signiﬁcance level, i.e., yi− ˆyi
> 1.96, where ˆyi is the predicted
log-employment density estimate at grid i and ˆσi is the estimated standard error for the
prediction. To prevent including many near grids with signiﬁcant residuals as potential
subcenters when they cluster together, we restrict the list of subcenter candidates to those
grids where the predicted log-employment densities are the greatest among all grids with
signiﬁcant residuals in a 3-miles radius.

ˆσi

The ﬁrst stage only identiﬁes potential subcenters because, despite detecting local in-
creases in the employment density function trough the residuals, it does not determine
whether the location has a statistically signiﬁcant eﬀect on the overall shape of the employ-
ment density function of the region. On the other hand, the second stage is based on a
semi-parametric procedure to verify the relevance of each subcenter candidate found in
the previous stage. In this step, we verify how the employment density gradient varies
when considering the distance to the identiﬁed locations as potential subcenters, once also
controlled for the distance eﬀect to the CBD.

Let Dij denote the distance between grid i and candidate subcenter j. Deﬁne DCBDi
the distance from the grid i to the central business district (CBD). Let S be the number of
potential subcenters, where j = 0,1, . . . , S, thus, we estimate the parameters of the following
semi-parametric regression

5

(cid:16)

δ1jD

S(cid:88)

j=1

(cid:17)

+ ui

−1
ij + δ2jDij

yi = g(DCBDi) +

(3)

Where g(DCBDi) enters in the equation non-parametrically expressing the relation be-
tween the logarithm of the employment density and the distance to the CBD in each grid.
The parameters δ1j and δ2j captures the possible inﬂuence of the distance to the potential
subcenters on the overall employment density function. The variable Dij enter both in
level and inverse form. The level form is more desirable when the subcenter inﬂuence the
entire study region. On the other hand, inverse form is better for capture local eﬀect on the
employment density function.

A variety of alternatives can be used to estimate g(DCBDi) such as locally weighted
regressions, ﬂexible Fourier forms or cubic splines. McMillen (2001) asserts that the choice
of g(·) makes little diﬀerence. The central idea is to allow ﬂexibility and variability in the
employment density gradient in relation to the distance among diﬀerent locations in the
urban region.

In this sense, a very attractive form is using cubic splines, as proposed by Anderson (1982).
Traditional methods of estimating urban density functions, such as negative exponential
functions, consider density patterns to be monotonic, i.e., with density decreasing as distance
to CBD increases. However, the employment density patterns in several cities does not follow
this pattern. Thus, the estimation of the employment density-distance relationship through
cubic splines allows a greater ﬂexibility to the gradient. Furthermore, as McMillen (2008)
argues, other alternatives like non-parametric estimator are more diﬃcult to apply and have
few advantages when the nonlinearity is restricted to a single variable.

Let x denote the distance variable, which is separated in equal intervals and a cubic
function is applied to each region. Deﬁne as knots the boundaries between the intervals. Let
x0 be the minimum value, x1,x2 and x3 the knots, and x4 the maximum value. Therefore,
the distance between each knot is deﬁned as (x4 − x0)/4. We can represent the splines cubic
function as

g(DCBDi) ≈ α + β1(xi − x0) + β2(xi − x0)2 + β3(xi − x0)3+
γ1D1(xi − x1)3 + γ2D2(xi − x2)3 + γ3D3(xi − x3)3 + i

(4)

Where Dk are dummy variables that equals one when xi > xk for k = 1,2,3. After obtaining

g(DCBDi) from equation 4, the equation 3 is estimated by ordinary least squares (OLS).

To avoid multicollinearity problems due to many subcenter candidates, the ﬁnal list of
subcenters is obtained from a reverse stepwise regression procedure. Initially, the equation 3
is estimated with all potential subcenters and the variable whose coeﬃcient has the smallest
t value is then eliminated. The reduced equation is estimated again, and this routine is
repeated until all distance variables are positive and signiﬁcant at the 20% level. Therefore,
the ﬁnal list of subcenters includes the locations with positive coeﬃcients on either δ1j or δ2j
at the end of the procedure.

Notice that, for comparison purposes, we also estimate two more benchmark models in the
literature on urban economics (McMillen, 2008; Krehl, 2018). The idea is to evaluate whether
the two-stage procedure improves outcomes and the ability to explain the spatial distribution
of activities. The ﬁrst model consists of a linear relationship between the employment density
and the distance to the CBD, as described in the following equation

yi = β0 + β1DCBDi + ui

(5)

6

The second model is a linearized version of the negative exponential model, which is

given by

ln(yi) = β0 + β1DCBDi + ui

(6)
Both equations 5 and 6 are estimated by OLS. Furthermore, we also consider the cubic
splines model described by equation 4 and the second stage without the nonparametric part.
Finally, we also compare our results with those obtained when applying the simpler
and traditional strategy proposed by Guiliano and Small (1991). Brieﬂy, these authors
proposed identiﬁcation of subcenters through thresholds limits for total emplyoment and
density. Speciﬁcally, after buiding spatial grids of 1 squared km in the metropolitan phisical
areas, we adopt their values of a total of minimum of 10,000 emplyoments and of 2,500
emplyoments/squared, respectively, for total emplyoment of a subcenter and for the grid
density belonging to a subcenter.

3 Data

Our main data source for identifying employment subcenters is the Relac¸˜ao Anual de Informac¸˜oes
Sociais (RAIS) for the year of 2015. This is an administrative dataset maintained by the Brazil-
ian Ministry of Labor. The RAIS consists of a high-quality panel with information about
the characteristics of contracts between ﬁrms and employee, for all individuals formally
employed, disaggregated at the municipality level. It is determined by law that ﬁrms and
workers to ﬁll in the report annually, with some penalties in case of non-compliance, such
as loss of beneﬁts granted to the ﬁrms. Thus, agents have incentive to provide accurate
information.

More precisely, we use the georeferenced microdata from RAIS, which contains infor-
mation about the address of each establishment registered. The georeferenced dataset was
obtained from the Institute of Applied Economic Research (IPEA). Using the location of each
ﬁrm, we obtain information regarding the employment location. It is worth emphasizing that
one limitation of RAIS is the lack of information on workers who are not formally employed.
This is an important feature in the Brazilian context, where informality rates exceed 40% of
all workers. However, there are two factors that reduce such adversity in our study. First, and
more importantly, the rate of formal jobs in metropolitan regions is higher than the national
average. According to the Pesquisa Nacional de Amostra por Domic´ılio (PNAD) from 2015, the
percentage of formal employees in the metropolitan region of Recife is 62,78%, 62,71% in
Salvador, 68,25% in Rio de Janeiro, 73,50% in Porto Alegre, and 72,84% in S˜ao Paulo, while
the national average is 57%. Second, the spatial distribution of the informal workers is like
the formal workers, therefore, there is not considerable loss of information when we identify
the employment subcenters.

We choose the metropolitan regions of Recife, Salvador, Porto Alegre, Rio de Janeiro,
and S˜ao Paulo in order to obtain a comprehensive proﬁle of the Brazilian Metropolitan
Regions. Opreationally, we divide the metropolitan regions into grid cells of 1km2 to avoid
possible endogeneity problems between choosing diﬀerent geographic units (for example,
political administrative disctricts). Consequently, the number of employees in each grid
equals employment density. Table 1 provides some summary data on the study regions.

Metropolitan regions area ranges from 2,770 square kilometers in Recife to 10,346 square
kilometers in Porto Alegre. The metropolitan region of S˜ao Paulo has both the largest number
of formal workers with approximately 6.3 million, as well as the largest population, with 21.5
million inhabitants. Moreover, the metropolitan regions of Recife and Salvador have similar
patterns of both employment and population. Finally, one characteristic of the metropolitan

7

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics of Study Regions

Area (km2)
Number of Cities
Employees
Residents (millions)
Number of grids with employment
Average employment density
Median employment density
Share of core city employment in total employment (%)

Recife
2770
14
809,414
4.044
684
1183
197.5
60.45

Salvador
4375
13
771,647
3.899
555
1390
250
75.24

P. Alegre
10346
34
1,039,716
4.317
1640
633
106
53.30

R. de Janeiro
6744
21
2,778,799
12.699
2406
1165
153
74.37

S. Paulo
7946
39
6,280,832
21.571
3610
1739
306.6
67.23

Source: Elaborated by the authors.

regions is that formal employment is highly concentrated in the core cities of each region.
This aspect is also evidenced by Fern´andez-Maldonado et al. (2014) and Ingram and Carroll
(1981), who showed that Latin American cities have a higher concentration of employment
around the CBD.

4 Results

4.1 General results
Table 2 presents the main results obtained from the estimation of the two-stage procedure
proposed by McMillen (2001). The ﬁrst row presents the results of the ﬁrst stage, where
a locally weighted regression is estimated. We identify 37 potential subcenters in Recife
metropolitan region, 38 in Salvador, 81 in Porto Alegre, 96 in Rio de Janeiro, and 125 in S˜ao
Paulo. The second of row of Table 2 reveals a total of 15 subcenters in Recife, 13 in Salvador,
55 in Porto Alegre, 52 in Rio de Janeiro, and 84 in S˜ao Paulo metropolitan region remain
statistically signiﬁcant at the end of the second stage.

Furthermore, the descriptive evidence shown in Table1 suggests a high employment
concentration in the core cities of the metropolitan regions. Indeed, rows 4-5 of Table 2
suggest that subcenters located in the core cities, and thus close to the CBD, have much
higher employment density than subcenters located in peripheral municipalities. These
ﬁndings indicate that subcenters located farthest from the CBD have only local inﬂuence
on the employment density surface, while subcenters near the CBD have global inﬂuence.
Note, also, that numbers of subcenters identiﬁed in this research are much higher than the
ones obtained by apllying the strategy of Guiliano and Small (1991) (presented in the lat line
of Table 2), This result suggests that this last approach is not able to identify emplyoment
agglomerations that importantly aﬀect the urban centers structures. Actually, we note that
this common approach appear able to identify only emplyoment subcenters closeer to the
core city.

Table 2: Identifying subcenters - Two-stage procedure estimation results

Potential subcenters (ﬁrst stage)
Subcenters (second stage)
Number of subcenters in the core city
Average employment density in the core city
Average employment density out the core city
Subcenters - Guiliano and Small (1991)

Recife
37
15
5
3678.2
971.5
6

Salvador P. Alegre R. de Janeiro
38
13
6
3081.2
934.4
7

96
52
18
5064.1
1557.2
16

81
55
13
2069.8
619.7
3

S. Paulo
125
84
25
2441.2
1980.4
21

Source: Elaborated by the authors.

8

Moreover, Table 3 provides an overview of the estimated models and their respective
goodness-of-ﬁt measures. Rows 1-2 consists of R2 adjusted obtained from estimating equa-
tions 5 and 6, respectively, which compare the two benchmark models on literature. Row 3
shows the adjusted R2 from estimating the cubic spline model, as described by equation 4.
Finally, rows 4-5 provides the R2 adjusted obtained from estimating the two-stage model,
without g(DCBDi) and complete, respectively.

Table 3: Comparing goodness-of-ﬁt among diﬀerent models - R2 adjusted

OLS
Negative exponential model
Cubic splines
Second stage without g(DCBDi)
Second stage complete
Subcenters - Guiliano and Small (1991)

Recife
0.008
0.030
0.215
0.413
0.426
0.214

Salvador P. Alegre R. de Janeiro
0.088
0.194
0.331
0.444
0.505
0.407

0.076
0.161
0.194
0.386
0.417
0.326

0.052
0.067
0.140
0.405
0.460
0.314

S. Paulo
0.144
0.401
0.464
0.637
0.663
0.214

Source: Elaborated by the authors.

The ﬁrst evidence that emerges when analyzing Table 3 is that the ﬁt of the model is much
smaller when considering the urban structure as purely monocentric, for all metropolitan
regions, i.e., the linear relationship between the density and the distance to CBD is insuﬃcient
to explain the pattern of employment density of urban centers. When considering a non-linear
relationship, such as cubic splines, the explanatory power of the model increases compared
to linear models. However, when considering the distance to the employment subcenters
identiﬁed in this study, the adjusted R2 increases considerably, indicating the importance of
considering these secondary centers when modeling the employment density surface. For
all study regions, the results obtained using the two-stage procedure proposed by McMillen
(2001) presented the highest goodness-of-ﬁt measure among all models evaluated. Note that
this comparasion includes the regressions using the emplyoment subcenters identiﬁed by
apllying Guiliano and Small (1991) aproach (last line of Table 3).

Based on these results, we ﬁnd evidence that the nonparametric approach is more suitable
for subcenter identiﬁcation in the Brazilian metropolitan regions. We identify statistically
signiﬁcant subcenters for all metropolitan regions under study (row 2 in Table 2). Considering
the model ﬁt of the second stage without the CBD variable g(·) we obtain considerable
explanatory power regarding the employment density surface in each study region (row 4 in
Table 3). In addition, we also highlight the heterogeneity of the inﬂuence of theses subcenters.
While subcenters located near the CBD presents higher employment density and global
inﬂuence, subcenters situated in peripheral regions presents lower employment density
and local inﬂuence. These diﬀerences can be associated as peculiarities of the Brazilian
metropolitan regions, that we brieﬂy discussed later.

Finally, despite the importance of the employment subcenters, we can not neglect the
CBD relevance, since it concentrates a signiﬁcant fraction of the total employment in the
metropolitan regions. The metropolitan areas of Recife and Salvador, both in the Northeast,
have about 26% of total employment concentrated in the CBD. In turn, the metropolitan
region of Porto Alegre has approximately 20%, while the regions of Rio de Janeiro and S˜ao
Paulo have 16.09% and 13.47%, respectively. Besides suggesting some regional diﬀerences
(that we discuss in the next section), these numbers are quite expressive if we consider that
the CBD corresponds to less than 1% of the total area of the metropolitan regions.

9

4.2 Subcenters in Brazilian Metropolitan Regions
The set of Figures 1-5 presents the locations of the subcenters (together with the CBD) of the
ﬁve Brazilian metropolitan regions analysed in this research. We describe each of the results
in the following paragraphs.

Figure 1 presents the 15 subcenters identiﬁed for the Recife Metropolitan Region. Notice
that most secondary employment centers are located in the contiguous region of Olinda (two
subcenters), Recife (ﬁve subcenters) and Jaboat˜ao dos Guararapes (one subcenter), the most
economically important municipalities of the RMR. We also identify smaller sub-centers in
the cities of Ipojuca and Cabo de Santo Agostinho (in the south), which are associated with
the presence of the Suape harbor complex. Furthermore, the ﬁve subcenters located near to
the CBD of Recife (e.g. close the neighborhoods of Casa Forte and Boa Viagem, in Recife)
have higher employment density, while subcenters located in the more peripheral regions
have lower employment density, in accordance with the results found in our semiparametric
estimation.

Figure 1: Subcenters in Recife Metropolitan Region

Figure 2 shows the locations of the 13 subcenters of Salvador Metropolitan Region. Like
the RMR, most of the identiﬁed subcenters are located in the main economic areas, being
these the municipalities of Salvador (6 subcenters), Lauro de Freitas (2 subcenters), and
Camac¸ari (one subcenter). Due to the large employment concentration in the city of Salvador,
10 of the 13 subcenters are located near the CBD in the Southeast of RMSA. We also identify
smaller subcenters in the municipalities of Candeias, Sim˜oes Filho, and Dias D’Avila.

Figure 3 displays the 55 subcenters identiﬁed for the Porto Alegre Metropolitan Region.
Most subcenters are located in a center-north region relative to the CBD. As we argued
before, the spatial distribution of emplyoment of here is quite diﬀerent from those of the
two northern regions, being the municpaility of Porto Alegre (the capital) relatively less
important. Actually, it is possible to highlight the formation of two groups of subcenters.
The ﬁrst are those subcenters situated in the municipalities of Porto Alegre, Canoas and
Gravata´ı, again, the economic center of the RMPA. These cities have a total of 20 subcenters
in the center-south region. The second group is located in the northern region of the RMPA,
composed by the municipalities of Novo Hamburgo, Ivoti, Campo Bom, Dois Irm˜aos, and

10

Figure 2: Subcenters in Salvador Metropolitan Region

Estˆancia Velha, with a total of 10 subcenters. Other subcenters near the CBD are located in
Viam˜ao and Gua´ıba.

Figure 3: Subcenters in Porto Alegre Metropolitan Region

Figure 4 presents the 52 subcenters identiﬁed for the Rio de Janeiro Metropolitan Region.
Like the other Metropolitan Regions, a considerable number of subcenters are located in the
core city of the metropolitan region, i.e., in Rio de Janeiro, which has a total of 21 subcenters.
Furthermore, our results also show a high number of subcenters situated in the eastern
region, composed by the municipalities of Niter´oi, S˜ao Gonc¸alo, and Itabora´ı, with a total of
10 subcenters. Finally, we also have an agglomeration of subcenters in the north of Rio de
Janeiro, with emphasis on the cities of Nova Iguacu, Duque de Caxias and S˜ao Jo˜ao de Meriti,
which together have 13 subcenters.

11

Figure 4: Subcenters in Rio de Janeiro Metropolitan Region

Finally, for the S˜ao Paulo Metropolitan Region, we identify a total of 84 subcenters, which
are distributed heterogeneously among the ﬁve sub-regions, as displayed in Figure 5. Again,
a large number of subcenters are located in the central region of S˜ao Paulo, close to the
Consolac¸ ˜ao and S´e districts. However, unlike the other study regions, the RMSP does not
present a large discrepancy between the employment density of the subcenters inside and
outside the core city. This fact is due to the existence of large industrial centers located in the
municipalities neighboring S˜ao Paulo. We can highlight, for example, the industrial complex
of Paulista ABC, located in the southeast and composed by the municipalities of Santo Andr´e,
S˜ao Bernardo do Campo, and S˜ao Caetano do Sul. The RMSP has also important industrial
complexes in the municipality of Osasco, in the west, and in Guarulhos, in the east, which
are regions that have a high number of subcenters with high employment density.

Figure 5: Subcenters in S˜ao Paulo Metropolitan Region

12

5 Discussion

As previously described, Brazilian cities present a set of peculiarities that resembles those
of Latin America urban centers. These characteristics distinguish them from American and
European cities, which are the focus in most of the literature dealing with the identiﬁcation
of employment subcenters (Guiliano and Small, 1991; McMillen, 2001; Krel, 2018). Hence,
it is natural to ask whether and to what extent the results that we found for the pattern of
the employment distribution in Brazilian metropolitan regions diﬀer from those found for
developed countries and correspond to the evidence available for other Latin American cities.
Considering the number of subcenters recently identiﬁed for large cities in Germany
by Krehl (2018) apllying the same methodology, in general, we found a larger number of
subcenters in Brazilian urban agglomerations. Thus, our results is more similar to those
obtained by MacMillen (2001) for US metropolitan regions. More speﬁcially, while Krehl
(2018) identiﬁes a total of 15 subcenters in Munich, 10 in Cologne, 8 in Stuttgart and 16
in Frankfurt, McMillen (2001) ﬁnds a total of 33 subcenters in Chicago, 28 in Dallas, 25 in
Houston, 19 in Los Angeles, 2 in New Orleans and 22 in San Francisco. Note also that, despite
using diﬀerent approaches, we found a number of subcenters for the Recife and Salvador
Metropolitan Region that is similar to the number of subcenters identiﬁed by Fernandez-
Maldonado et al. (2015) for Fortaleza (where 11 subcenters were identiﬁed by the authors),
another important metropolitan region of the Northeast of Brazil.

These Brazilian diﬀerence relative to Germanian evidence and similarity with respect to
US pattern are consistent with the relation bewteen employment and population sprawls in
the respective enviroments. As argued by Krehl (2018), diﬀerent from US urbanization, in
German, the more restrict urban land regulation implied a less heterogeneous population
distribution within the cities and contributed for more emplyoment sprawl. This has gener-
ated a smaller diﬀerence bewteen spatial emplyoment and population distributions within
cities and, thus, lower number of emplyoment subcenters. Following more the US pattern of
land regulation, Brazilian metropolis present more salient diference between population and
emplyoment distributions and, thus, a higher number of emplyoment subcenters.

Actually, Figures 6-10, which show the number of employees per number of residents in
each grid (the ratio increases as the grid colors changes from orange to red), make clear the
above mentioned diﬀerence between population and emplyoment distributions for Brazilian
metroplitan regions. These ﬁgures show the presence of regions with the greater relative
concentration of employment, mainly in the central regions. The Brazilian situation is thus
quite diﬀerent from the strong employment sprawl found by Krehl (2018), wherein only in a
few areas the number of workers exceeds the resident population.

More speciﬁcally, Figures 6 and 7 reveals that, in the Recife and Salvador metropolitan
regions, respectively, there is a very large concentration of employment in relation to the
number of residents in the regions closer to the CBD. Figures 8 and 9 show the employment
rate per resident population for the metropolitan areas of Porto Alegre and Rio de Janeiro,
respectively. Besides the large concentration of employment in the central areas, the RMRJ
has a great share of employment per residents in the south, while the RMPA has a high
concentration of employment in the north. Finally, Figure 10 indicates that S˜ao Paulo
metropolitan region presents several centers with high employment density, being these
situated in the central area, and in the regions of ABC Paulista (southeast), Osasco and
Barueri (west), and in Guarulhos (east). Therefore, we can conclude that, in Brazil, when
considering the population distribution, employment is clearly concentrated. This structure
is much closer to that found for the United States cities and quite diﬀerent from the more
decentralized pattern in the German cities.

13

Figure 6: Employees per number of residents - RMR

Figure 7: Employees per number of residents - RMSA

Although some similarities of emplyoment distribution when compared to US experience,
there are also important particular characteristics of the Brazilian urbanization that certaintly
contribute for the identiﬁed patterns. These characteristics, in essence, are associated with
Brazilian lower economc development and higher level regional disparities. Regarding to last
this point, note, for example, that the above set of evidence also indicates that there are also
important regional diﬀerences among the observed patterns of emplyomet distribution across
Brazilian metropolitan regions. First, notice that there is great similarity in such standards
for the MR of the Northeast of Brazil (Recife and Salvador). Such patterns of emplyoment
distribution clearly diﬀers, on the other hand, from the situation found for Porto Alegre,
despite their similar population sizes. In addition, it easy to observe that the largest and
economically strongest Brazilian MR (S˜ao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro) also have the highest

14

Figure 8: Employees per number of residents - RMPA

Figure 9: Employees per number of residents - RMRJ

number of subcenters, as somehow expected. Even though not corroboratory (a task beyond
the purposes of this research), we argue that these results are also in clear agreement with
the general and regional speciﬁcities of Brazilian urbanization.

We initially underline the precarious conditions of urban mobility that aﬄicts the great
cities of Brazil, which is a consequence of the low investment in roads and collective trans-
portation and the still relatively low-income levels that prevents the widespread use of
individual vehicles (Pero and Stefaneli, 2015). The commuting problems in the Brazilian
urban centers seem extremely relevant for the understanding of the spatial distribution of
occupations.

The last two decades presents a fast increase of the automotive ﬂeet, when the number of
vehicles increases from 19.9 million in 2000 to 40 million in 2012, according to Martine et al

15

Figure 10: Employees per number of residents - RMSP

(2012). This scenario, encouraged by a greater credit supply, tax reductions on industrialized
products, and fuel price freezes, generated a signiﬁcant increase in the commuting time
to work. Pero and Stefanelli (2015) showed that workers situated in S˜ao Paulo and Rio de
Janeiro metropolitan region have the highest commuting time in Brazil. Apart from that,
Recife and Salvador are among the metropolitan regions with the greatest growth rate of the
commuting time, being 17.8% and 27.1%, respectively. On the other hand, the Porto Alegre
metropolitan region presents the shortest commuting time among Brazilian MR. According
to Pereira and Schwanen (2013), a possible explanation is the better distribution of economic
activities, controlled urban expansion, and more eﬃcient public transport systems.

Notice that, consistent with Fujita and Oghawa (1982) and Fujita and Thisse (2013), in
such a scenario of increasing diﬃculties of urban mobility, the rise in the daily commuting
cost for workers and expensive interaction among ﬁrms lead to a trend towards the decentral-
ization of economic activities and weakening of the initial monocentric conﬁguration in the
urban centers. This implication is entirely consistent with the presence of a large number of
subcenters in the Brazilian metropolitan regions. In other words, the deﬁciencies regarding
the transportation infrastructure present in the Brazilian urban centers, which reﬂects the
low investment in public transport, potentially exert a pressure on the urban roads as the
income expansion tends to be accompanied by a fast expansion of the ﬂeet, resulting in
higher mobility costs. Such movements, therefore, hinder the employment concentration in
few localities.

But notice that this potential push for employment decentralization is also attenuated
by the action of urban centripetal forces. In the last half of the 20th century, Brazilian
urban centers experienced an intense migrant ﬂow from rural areas. The fast growth of the
metropolitan population in a few decades prevented the cities from providing the necessary
infrastructure to accommodate the new residents. As a consequence, migrants with fewer
resources settled in the periphery or in empty central areas, such as hills and steep slopes.
These subnormal clusters, later called favelas (Nadalin, 2018), are inadequate for formal
urban occupation because they do not follow urban planning guidelines. Hence, they end up
lacking the provision of essential services such as sanitation, education, and security. The
expansion of these regions reﬂects the main socio-economic problems of the country, such as

16

high levels of income inequality and high rates of urban violence.

Recently, Nadalin (2018) showed the existence of a high heterogeneity concerning the
favelas spatial distribution among Brazilian metropolitan regions. In Recife and Salvador,
favelas are situated in the central regions, with 23.9 % and 26.9 % of the population of these
MR, respectively, living in subnormal clusters. The metropolitan regions of Rio de Janeiro and
S˜ao Paulo have spatially dispersed favelas, with 14.4 % and 10.8 % of the residents located
in these areas, respectively. Finally, the Porto Alegre metropolitan region, characterized
by above-average social indices, presents only 7.4 % of the population living in informal
housing.

Actually, it is worth mentioning a chronic problem of many Brazilian urban centers: the
lack of infrastructure and the precarious provision of essential basic services. Table 4 presents
the percentage of households with access to basic sanitation or garbage collected daily for
the metropolitan areas under study. The results indicate important regional diﬀerences in
the endowments for these services.

Table 4: Urban enviroment quality - Share of households with access to basic sanitation, daily
garbage collected, and living in slums (%)

Basic Sanitation Daily Garbage Collected Presence of Slums
57.1
Recife
91.6
Salvador
Porto Alegre
89.2
Rio de Janeiro 93.6
S˜ao Paulo
95.1
Source: Elaborated by the authors based on the PNAD 2015 and Demographic Census of 2010

23.9
26.9
7.4
14.4
10.8

85.8
54.3
95.5
90.0
93.4

As can be seen in Table 4, the metropolitan areas of Recife and Salvador, both in the
Northeast, present a serious problem of home service infrastructure deﬁcit, with only 57.1%
of RMR households with access to basic sanitation and 54.3% of RMSA households with
garbage collected daily. Such deﬁciencies certainly represent resistance to the decentraliza-
tion of economic activities and employment since they limit the qualiﬁed urban space with
the necessary infrastructure to productive activities.

To sum up, the lack of adequated infrastructure put pressure on urban roads which, in
turn, can not accommodate the large ﬂeet of vehicles. Aligned to the low investment in
public transport, this generates a high commuting cost. These facts appear to encourage the
decentralization of economic activities and, consequently, the formation of new employment
subcenters. In this perspective, the high number of subcenters found in the S˜ao Paulo and
Rio de Janeiro metropolitan regions is consistent with the costly commuting. Concerning
the Northeast metropolitan regions, note that both Recife and Salvador metropolitan area
were primarily monocentric, since their economies were established around the port of their
respective cities. In addition, as evidenced by Table 4, both MR present deﬁciencies in the
provision of home service infrastructure, which acts as a counterforce to the employment
decentralization. Thus, in spite of the growth of commuting in these regions, which stimulates
the decentralization and the emergence of subcenters, the presence of restraining forces ends
up slowing this process. Such movement can be evidenced by the large share of employments
situated in the CBD.

These general characteristics of Brazilian urban centers do not seem to easily explain,
however, the formation of subcenters in the Porto Alegre metropolitan region. The stability of
commuting time aligned to a lower presence of informal dwellings suggest a more balanced
expansion of the urban center. Therefore, the high number of subcenters found for the RMPA
may reﬂect other more particular issues, such as the historical process of colonization of

17

the region characterized by stronger presence of more autonomous foreign communities in
diﬀerent municipalities.

6 Concluding Remarks

Result of a strong rural-urban migration process, Brazil is currently a remarkably urban
country, with a great share of the population living in the cities. This fact implies that the
quality of life of his residents is directly related to the urban infrastructure and its services.
In this sense, there is a robust set of evidence that exposes the inﬂuence of the employment
centers and subcenters on the factors associated with the quality of life in the cities. Despite
this, there are few studies that analyze the spatial distribution of occupations in Brazilian
urban centers.

The main goal of this paper was to identify urban employment subcenters for some of
the most important metropolitan regions in Brazil. Based on the georeferenced employment
information provided by the Institute of Applied Economic Research (IPEA), we use a two-
stage procedure proposed by McMillen (2001) and we identify a total of 15 subcenters in the
Recife Metropolitan Region, 13 in Salvador, 55 in Porto Alegre, 52 in Rio de Janeiro and 84
in S˜ao Paulo. Moreover, our results suggest that the semiparametric approach is the most
adequate to identify the employment subcenters in the Brazilian metropolitan regions since
it generates the highest explanatory power when compared to other standard models.

In spite of the great employment concentration near the CBD, the Brazilian metropolitan
regions present a decentralization trend of the economic activities. Signiﬁcant diﬀerences
in the R2 adjusted when including distance variables to subcenters in the model indicate
the presence of multiple employment subcenters and their importance to characterize the
pattern of employment density in the study regions. Diﬀerent from the developed country
cities previously studied in the literature, Brazilian urban centers have a strong presence of
informal housing, disparities in urban infrastructure among cities and high commuting costs,
mainly in the Northeast region of Brazil. Thus, these peculiarities generate an incentive to
the decentralization of occupations and it is consistent with the high number of subcenters
identiﬁed and their relative importance. However, the higher infrastructure deﬁcit of the
domiciliary services in the metropolitan areas of Recife and Salvador appears to act as
deterrent force avoiding greater employment decentralization.

Future research related to this topic involves the expansion of the identiﬁcation of em-
ployment subcenters for the other Brazilian metropolitan regions, such as Belo Horizonte,
Curitiba, and Fortaleza. In addition, the investigations may characterize subcenters regarding
the type of sectoral activity predominant in each locality and verify how these subcenters
may inﬂuence commuting costs, verticalization, land use patterns, spatial mismatch, and
population distribution in Brazilian cities.

References

Ahlfeldt, G. M., & McMillen, D. P. (2015). The vertical city: the price of land and the height
of buildings in Chicago, 1870-2010.
Anderson, J. E. (1982). Cubic-spline urban-density functions. Journal of Urban Economics,
12(2), 155-167.
Baumont, C., Ertur, C., & Le Gallo, J. (2004). Spatial analysis of employment and population
density: the case of the agglomeration of Dijon 1999. Geographical analysis, 36(2), 146-176.

18

Barr, J., & Cohen, J. P. (2014). The ﬂoor area ratio gradient: New York City, 1890–2009.
Regional Science and Urban Economics, 48, 110-119.
Cervero, R., & Wu, K. L. (1997). Polycentrism, commuting, and residential location in the
San Francisco Bay area. Environment and Planning A, 29(5), 865-886.
Craig, S. G., & Ng, P. T. (2001). Using quantile smoothing splines to identify employment
subcenters in a multicentric urban area. Journal of Urban Economics, 49(1), 100-120.
Da Mata, D., Deichmann, U., Henderson, V. J., Lall, S. V., & Wang, H. G. (2005). Determinants
of city growth in Brazil. The World Bank.
Duranton, G., & Puga, D. (2004). Micro-foundations of urban agglomeration economies. In
Handbook of regional and urban economics (Vol. 4, pp. 2063-2117). Elsevier.
Edlund, L., Machado, C., & Sviatschi, M. M. (2015). Bright minds, big rent: gentriﬁcation
and the rising returns to skill (No. w21729). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Fern´andez-Maldonado, A. M., Romein, A., Verkoren, O., & Parente Paula Pessoa, R. (2014).
Polycentric structures in Latin American metropolitan areas: Identifying employment sub-
centres. Regional Studies, 48(12), 1954-1971.
Fujita, M., & Thisse, J., Economics of agglomeration: cities, industrial location, and globaliza-
tion. Cambridge university press, 2013.
Fujita, M., & Ogawa, H. (1982). Multiple equilibria and structural transition of non-
monocentric urban conﬁgurations. Regional science and urban economics, 12(2), 161-196.

Giuliano, G., & Small, K. A. (1991). Subcenters in the Los Angeles region. Regional science
and urban economics, 21(2), 163-182.
Glaeser, E. & Mar´e, D. (2001). Cities and Skills. Journal of Labor Economics, 19(2), 316-342.
Gobillon, L., Selod, H., & Zenou, Y. (2007). The mechanisms of spatial mismatch. Urban
studies, 44(12), 2401-2427.
Ingram, G. K., & Carroll, A. (1981). The spatial structure of Latin American cities. Journal of
urban Economics, 9(2), 257-273.
Krehl, A. (2018). Urban subcenters in German city regions: Identiﬁcation, understanding,
comparison. Papers in Regional Science, 97, S79-S104.
Lopes Pereira da Silva, R. & Silveira-Neto, R. & Rocha, R. (2019). Localization patterns within
urban areas: evidence from Brazil. Area Development and Policy. 4. 1-20.
McDonald, J. F. (1987). The identiﬁcation of urban employment subcenters, Journal of Urban
Economics 21,242-258.
McMillen, D. P., & McDonald, J. F. (1997). A nonparametric analysis of employment density
in a polycentric city. Journal of Regional Science, 37(4), 591-612.
McMillen, D. P., & McDonald, J. F. (1998). Suburban subcenters and employment density in
metropolitan Chicago. Journal of Urban Economics, 43(2), 157-180.
McMillen, D. P. (2001). Nonparametric employment subcenter identiﬁcation. Journal of
Urban economics, 50(3), 448-473.
McMillen, D. P. (2006). Testing for monocentricity. A Companion to Urban Economics.
Oxford: Blackwell, 128-140.

19

Moretti, E. (2004). Workers’ education, spillovers, and productivity: evidence from plant-
level production functions. American Economic Review, 94(3), 656-690.
Moretti, E. (2004). Estimating the social return to higher education: evidence from lon-
gitudinal and repeated cross-sectional data. Journal of econometrics, 121(1-2), 175-212.

Nadalin, V. G., & Mation, L. F. (2018). Localizac¸ ˜ao intraurbana das favelas brasileiras: o papel
dos fatores geogr´aﬁcos. IPEA.
Pero, V., & Stefanelli, V. (2015). A quest˜ao da mobilidade urbana nas metr´opoles brasileiras.
Revista de Economia Contemporˆanea, 19(3).
Ramos, F. R. (2014). Trˆes Ensaios sobre a Estrutura Espacial Urbanas em Cidades do Brasil
Contemporˆaneo: economia urbana e geoinformac¸ ˜ao na construc¸ ˜ao de novos olhares. Tese de
Doutorado, S˜ao Paulo, Fundac¸ ˜ao Get ´ulio Vargas.
Firmino Costa da Silva, D., Elhorst, J. P., & Silveira Neto, R. D. M. (2017). Urban and rural
population growth in a spatial panel of municipalities. Regional Studies, 51(6), 894-908.
Song, S. (1994). Modelling worker residence distribution in the Los Angeles region. Urban
studies, 31(9), 1533-1544.

20

