Área 4 - Macroeconomia, Economia Monetária e Finança 

 

Endogeneity and nonlinearities in Central Bank of Brazil’s reaction functions: an 

inverse quantile regression approach 

 

Professora do Departamento de Economia da Universidade Federal da Paraíba, Brasil 

Gabriela Bezerra de Medeiros 

E-mail: gabriela.bm@hotmail.com 

 

Marcelo Savino Portugal 

Professor do Programa de Pós-Graduação em Economia da Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul 

(PPGE/UFRGS) e pesquisador CNPq, Brasil 

E-mail: msp@ufrgs.com 

 

Edilean Kleber da Silva Bejarano Aragón 

Professor do Departamento de Economia e do Programa de Pós-Graduação em 

Economia da Universidade Federal da Paraíba (PPGE/UFPB), Brasil 

E-mail:edilean@hotmail.com 

 

Resumo:  Neste  trabalho,  nós  procuramos  averiguar  não  linearidades  na  função  de  reação  do  Banco 
Central  do  Brasil  (BCB)  através  da  estimação  de  regressões  quantílicas.  Como  a  regra  de  política 
monetária  apresenta  regressores  endógenos,  nós  seguimos  os  procedimentos  sugeridos  por  Wolters  (J 
Macroecon  34:342-361,  2012)  e  um  estimador  de  regressão  quantílica  inversa  (RQIV),  proposto  por 
Chernozhukov  e  Hansen  (Econometrica  73:245–261,  2005).  Este  método  nos  possibilitou  detectar  não 
linearidades na função de reação do BCB  sem a necessidade de fazer suposições específicas acerca dos 
fatores que determinam essas não linearidades. Em específico, nós observamos que: i) a resposta da taxa 
de juros ao hiato da inflação corrente e esperada foi, em geral, mais forte na parte superior da distribuição 
condicional da taxa de juros Selic; ii) a resposta ao hiato do produto apresentou uma tendência crescente e 
significativa na parte inferior da distribuição condicional da taxa Selic; iii) a resposta do BCB à taxa de 
câmbio real foi positiva e mais elevada na cauda superior da distribuição condicional da taxa Selic. 
 
Palavras-chave:  Regras  de  política  monetária  ∙  Regressão  quantílica  ∙  Regressores  endógenos  ∙  Banco 
Central do Brasil. 

 

Abstract: In this work, we seek to investigate nonlinearities in the reaction function of the Central Bank 
of Brazil by estimating quantile regressions. As the monetary policy rule has endogenous regressors,  we 
followed  the  procedures  suggested  by  Wolters  (J  Macroecon  34:342-361,  2012)  and  the  method  of 
inverse  quantile  regression,  proposed  by  Chernozhukov  and  Hansen  (Econometrica  73:245–261,  2005). 
This method enabled us to detect nonlinearities in the Central Bank of Brazil’s reaction function without 
the need to make specific assumptions about the factors that determine these nonlinearities. In particular, 
we observed that: i) the response of the interest rate to the current and expected inflation was, in general, 
stronger  in  the  upper  tail  of  the  conditional  interest  rate  distribution;  ii)  the  response  to  the  output  gap 
showed a growing and significant trend in the lower tail of the conditional Selic rate distribution; iii) the 
response of the Central Bank of Brazil to the real exchange rate was positive and higher in the upper tail 
of the conditional Selic rate distribution. 
 
Keywords: Monetary policy rules ∙ Quantile regression ∙ Endogenous regressors ∙ Central Bank of Brazil.  
 
JEL Classification C32 ∙ E52 ∙ E58 
 
 

1 

 

1 Introduction 
 
The  inflation-targeting  regime  was  adopted  by  the  Central  Bank  of  Brazil  (CBB)  in  July  1999.  This 
decision was taken six months after the transition from an exchange rate band system to a floating system. 
Owing  to  exchange  rate  overshooting  and  to  the  rise  in  inflation  and  in  inflation  expectations,  the 
Brazilian  government  aimed  to  implement  a  policy  regime  that  was  institutionally  committed  to 
maintaining price stability and providing a new nominal exchange rate anchor for inflation. 
 
For the analysis of the CBB’s monetary policy decisions in the inflation-targeting regime, several 
papers  have  estimated  the  Taylor  (1993)  rule  or  the  forward-looking  reaction  function  proposed  by 
Clarida  et  al.  (2000).1  For  instance,  Minella  et  al.  (2003)  and  Minella  and  Souza-Sobrinho  (2013) 
estimated  a  forward-looking  reaction  function  and  observed  that  the  CBB  strongly  reacted  to  inflation 
expectations.  Mello  and  Moccero  (2009)  utilized  cointegration  analysis  and  M-GARCH  model 
estimations to check for the presence of long-term relationships between the monetary policy interest rate 
(Selic rate), inflation expectations, and inflation target, and to verify the presence of volatility spillovers 
between  inflation  expectations  and  monetary  policy.  For  Brazil,  the  results  gathered  by  these  authors 
revealed  there  exist  long-term  relationships  between  the  interest  rate,  expected  inflation,  and  inflation 
target,  and  that  higher  volatility  in  monetary  policy  increases  the  volatility  of  the  expected  inflation. 
Sanches-Fung  (2011)  estimated  reaction  functions  for  the  CBB  in  a  data-rich  environment.  Sanches-
Fung’s  (2011)  evidence  points  out that  the  CBB  adjusted  the  Selic interest  rate  according  to  the Taylor 
principle, but that it did not react systematically to the exchange rate behavior. 

An  important  assumption  of  the  papers  mentioned  above  is  that  interest  rate  rules  are  linear 
functions  relative  to  the  variables  describing  economic  conditions.  By  contrast,  the  economic  literature 
has come up with numerous reasons why the monetary authority responds nonlinearly to inflation and/or 
to the output gap. Nobay and Peel (2000), Schaling (2004) and Dolado et al. (2005) demonstrate that an 
optimal  nonlinear  monetary  rule  emerges  when  the  central  bank  has  a  quadratic  loss  function  and  the 
Phillips curve is nonlinear. Bec et al. (2002), Nobay and Peel (2003), Dolado et al. (2004), Surico (2007) 
and Cukierman and Muscatelli (2008)  show nonlinearities in the optimal monetary rule may arise if the 
monetary  authority’s  preferences  are  asymmetric  in  relation  to  inflation  and/or  to  the  output  gap.  By 
assessing an optimal monetary policy in an economy where the central bank is uncertain over the Phillips 
curve  slope,  Tillmann  (2011)  evidences  that  the  interest  rate  adjustment  is  nonlinear.  Lastly,  the  zero 
lower  bound  for  the  nominal  interest  rate  can  prompt  the  central  bank  to  respond  nonlinearly  to  the 
inflation rate (Kato and Nishiyama, 2005; Adam and Billi, 2006).2 

For  Brazil,  studies  on  nonlinearities  in  the  monetary  policy  rule  assess  specific  features  of  the 
CBB’s  asymmetric  reaction.  For  example,  Aragón  and  Portugal  (2010),  Sá  and  Portugal  (2011)  and 
Aragón and Medeiros (2013) reveal that the Brazilian monetary authority had an asymmetric preference 
for an above-target inflation in the inflation-targeting regime. Moura and Carvalho (2010) find empirical 
evidence  of  nonlinearities  in  the  reaction  function  that  corroborates  the  CBB’s  asymmetric  preference 
concerning  inflation.  Lopes  and  Aragón  (2014)  describe  that  the  nonlinearity  in  the  interest  rate  rule 
stems from time-varying asymmetric preferences rather than from possible nonlinearities in the Phillips 
curve. Schiffino et al. (2013) show that the nonnegativity constraint on the Selic interest rate may affect 
the  calibration  of  the  CBB’s  preferences,  implying  nonlinearities  in  the  optimal  monetary  rule.  Aragón 
and Medeiros (2014) estimate a reaction function whose parameters vary over time and conclude that the 
reaction  of  the  Selic  rate  to  inflation  varies  remarkably  throughout  the  period,  showing  a  downtrend 
during the inflation-targeting regime.          

Unlike the afore-mentioned studies, the present paper seeks to verify nonlinearities in  the CBB’s 
reaction  function  by  quantile  regression  estimation.  An  important  advantage  of  this  approach  over 

                                                             
1 According to the monetary rule proposed by Taylor (1993), the central bank changes the nominal interest rate in response to 
deviations of the current inflation from the inflation target and to the current output gap. In turn, the policy rule formulated by 
Clarida et al. (2000) assumes the monetary authority adjusts the interest rate based on expected future inflation rates and on the 
output gap. 
2 Kato and Nishiyama (2005) and Adam and Billi (2006) argue that, close to the zero bound, the central bank responds more 
strongly to a decrease in inflation rate in order to minimize the likelihood of deflation.  

2 

 

conventional methods (e.g., least ordinary squares (OLS) and instrumental variables (IV)) is that it allows 
estimating the Selic interest rate rule across different quantiles of the conditional interest rate distribution 
and not only in the conditional mean of this variable. This permits detecting nonlinearities in  the CBB’s 
reaction  function  without  having  to  make  specific  inferences  about  the  causal  factors  of  these 
nonlinearities.  Thus,  as  nonlinearity  is  determined  by  the  data,  the  quantile  regression  method  allows 
comparing  the  estimates  of  the  monetary  rule  parameters  obtained  for  the  quantiles  of  the  conditional 
interest rate distribution with the mean from the linear reaction function.   
 
Empirically, we used inverse quantile regression (IVQR), proposed by Chernozhukov and Hansen 
(2005, 2006), to estimate  the CBB’s quantile reaction function parameters during the inflation-targeting 
regime.  This  method  was  chosen  because  of  the  presence  of  endogenous  regressors  (inflation  rate  and 
output gap) in the interest rate rule. Some authors, such as Chevapatrakul et al. (2009), Wolters (2012), 
and Chevapatrakul and Paez-Farrell (2014), estimate the reaction function by quantile regression. To add 
the  presence  of  endogeneity,  Chevapatrakul  et  al.  (2009)  and  Chevapatrakul  and  Paez-Farrell  (2014) 
apply  the  two-stage  quantile  regression  (2SQR)  method,  while  Wolters  (2012)  uses  IVQR.3  Note  that 
IVQR is a good alternative to the 2SQR method because: i) it yields consistent and unbiased estimates of 
all parameters in the model; and ii) the estimates are consistent even when endogenous regressors change 
the distribution of the dependent variable (Wolters, 2012).4  

The  IVQR  estimation  results  for  the  CBB’s  reaction  function  can  be  summarized  as  follows. 
While  conditional  mean  estimations  showed  an  insignificant  response  of  the  Selic  rate  to  the  current 
inflation gap, quantile regression results indicated that the CBB’s short-term response to this variable was 
significant and increasing between quantiles 0.5 and 0.9. Conversely, the short-term response of the Selic 
rate to the output gap increased from quantile 0.2 to quantile 0.7 and was not statistically different from 
zero at the extreme quantiles of the conditional interest rate distribution. We also perceived that the short-
term  response  of  the  Selic  rate  to  expected  inflation  was  significant  from  quantile  0.4,  exhibiting  an 
uptrend.  Regarding  the  long-term  response,  results  suggest  the  Selic  rate  responded  strongly  to  current 
and  expected  inflation  when  the  interest  rate  was  above  the  median.  On  the  other  hand,  the  long-term 
response to the output gap was significant only at some quantiles on the [0.05, 0.7] interval. This suggests 
that the CBB does not react to demand pressures when the interest rate is too high. When we included the 
real exchange rate as an interest rate rule regressor, we noticed  the CBB responded positively to the real 
exchange  rate  both  in  the  conditional  mean  and  across  the  interest  rate  distribution.  Moreover,  results 
show  that  the  reaction  to  the  real  exchange  rate  was,  in  general,  stronger  in  the  upper  tail  of  the 
conditional Selic rate distribution.  
 
Aside  from  this  introduction,  this  paper  is  organized  into  four  sections.  Section  2  describes  the 
empirical  specifications  of  the  CBB’s  reaction  function  and  its  estimation  method  across  different 
quantiles of the conditional interest rate distribution. Section 3 interprets the results. Section 4 concludes.  
 
2 Empirical specifications  
 
In this section, we initially introduce the CBB’s reaction function to be estimated in the conditional mean 
of the interest rate. This specification of the policy rule can be derived from the optimal policy problem in 
a  standard  New  Keynesian  model.  Thereafter,  we  describe  the  monetary  policy  rule  to  be  estimated  by 
quantile  regression  and  the  estimation  method  for  this  function.  Finally,  we  take  into  consideration  an 
alternative specification of the CBB’s reaction function.  
 
 
 
 
                                                             
3  Chevapatrakul et al.  (2009)  assess  monetary policy  conduct  in the United States and  in  Japan,  whereas  Chevapatrakul and 
Paez-Farrell (2014) focus their analysis on Australia, Canada, and New Zealand. In turn, Wolters (2012) estimates the Federal 
Reserve’s reaction function. 
4 For further details on the 2SQR method, see Amemiya (1982), Powell (1983) and Kim and Muller (2004, 2008). 

3 

 

2.1 The monetary policy rule in the conditional mean  
 
Initially,  we  assumed  that  CBB  monetary  policy  decisions  could  be  describe  by  the  following  reaction 
function, estimated on the interest rate conditional mean:  
 

 

(1) 

 

where it is the nominal interest rate,  πt is the inflation rate, π*
t  is the inflation target,  yt is the output gap 
(i.e., the difference between actual output and potential output), Et-1(xt) is the expectation of xt conditional 
on the information available at the end of the previous period and  mt is the exogenous random shock for 
the interest rate. This shock is assumed to be i.i.d and can be interpreted as the monetary policy’s purely 
random  component.  Note  that  we  consider  a  variable  inflation  target.  This  is  necessary  because  the 
inflation  targets  established  by  the  Brazilian  National  Monetary  Council  varied  annually  in  the  period 
1999-2004.  Finally,  we  also  included  it-1  and  it-2  in  the  reaction  function  to  capture  the  CBB  soothing 
behavior and to avoid possible serial autocorrelation problems.5  

For estimation purposes, the expected values for inflation and output gap in (1) are replaced with 
their observed values. By making these amendments, the specification of the policy rule to be estimated is 
given by:  
 

 

      (2)    

. The coefficients 

 

 

where β′i  = (1 – θ1 – θ2) βi, i=0,1,2, and 
and β′2  
β′1  
output gap. 

(β1 and β2) measure the short-term (long-term) response of the interest rate to inflation and to 

Once inflation and output gap forecast errors are an integral part of term εt, πt and yt are correlated 
with this error term. In view of that, (2) in the conditional mean of the monetary policy’s interest rate will 
be estimated by IV and by the generalized method of moments (GMM).  
 
2.2 The monetary policy rule across different conditional quantiles  
 
Quantile  regression  models  manage  to  determine  the  heterogeneous  impacts  of  variables  at  different 
points  along  a  distribution.  Quantile  regression  was  first  proposed  by  Koenker  and  Bassett  (1978)  and  
has rather attractive features, namely: i) it can be used to assess the response of the dependent variable to 
explanatory  variables  at  different  points  of  the  dependent  variable  distribution;  ii)  quantile  regression 
estimators are more efficient than OLS estimators when the error term is non-Gaussian; and iii) quantile 
regression  estimators  are  less  sensitive  to  the  presence  of  outliers  in  the  dependent  variable  (Koenker, 
2005).  
Quartiles split observations into four segments with equal proportions of benchmark observations 
 
in each segment. Quintiles and deciles, similarly to quartiles, split observations into 5 and 10 segments, 
respectively.  Quantiles  or  percentiles  refer  to  the  general  case  (Koenker  and  Hallock,  2001).  For  our 
monetary  policy  problem,  the  τth  conditional  quantile  is  defined  as  qτ  (it  |  it-1,   it-2,  πt  –  π*
t  ,  yt)  such  that  the 
likelihood of the nominal interest rate being smaller than qτ (it | it-1, it-2, πt – π*
   
 

t , yt) is equal to τ, i.e.: 

       

 

(3)    

 

where f it | it-1, it-2,  πt –  π*t ,   yt (it | it-1, it-2, πt – π*
t  and yt. This is a 
nonparametric  specification  in  which  τ  can  vary  continually  between  zero  and  one;  hence,  there  are  an 
infinite  number  of  possible  parameter  vectors.6  For  τ  =  ½,  equation  (3)  shows  the  conditional  median 
function of it given it-1,  it-2,  πt – π*

t , yt) is the conditional density of it given it-1,   it-2,   πt – π*

t  and  yt. 

                                                             
5 This procedure was also adopted by Aragón and Portugal (2010) and Minella and Souza-Sobrinho (2013). 
6 This requires fewer details about the specification of the distribution of y|x (Greene, 2012). 

4 

 

*12011211122(1)()tttttttttiEEyiim*0121122()tttttttiyii1,12,1(())(())ttttttttttEyEym*12*12|,,,*12|,,,|,,,,(0,1)ttttttttttttqiyiittttttiyiifiyiidi 
 

Taking (3), the CBB’s reaction function at quantile τ can be expressed as: 

       

 

(4)    

Unfortunately,  by  virtue  of  the  presence  of  endogenous  regressors  πt 

 
According  to  equation  (4),  the  parameters  of  the  CBB’s  reaction  function  can  be  estimated  at  different 
quantiles,  thereby  allowing  for  a  complete  description  of  the  conditional  distribution  of  the  monetary 
policy interest rate.   
  and  yt,  the  estimation  of 
 
reaction function (4) by the quantile regression method proposed by  Koenker and Bassett (1978)  yields 
biased  estimates  (Kim  and  Muller,  2012).  To  circumvent  this  problem,  an  alternative  would  be  to  use 
two-stage  quantile  regression  (2SQR).  This  method  is  based  on  the  two-stage  least  absolute  deviation 
estimator developed by Amemiya (1982) and Powell (1983), and extended to quantile regression by Chen 
and  Portnoy  (1996)  and  Kim  and  Muller  (2004,  2012).  For  our  problem,  the  two  stages  of  the  2SQR 
method consist in: i) estimating regressions on endogenous regressors πt 
 and yt as  a function of a set of 
selected instruments and calculating the adjusted values of  these regressors; ii) estimating monetary rule 
(4) by quantile regression replacing πt  and yt with their adjusted (or predicted) values obtained in step (i).  
 
Although  the  2SQR  method  yields  consistent  estimators  for  slope  parameters,  the  intercept 
estimator  is  biased  (Kim  and  Muller,  2012).  Because  of  that,  we  utilize  the  inverse  quantile  regression 
(IVQR) method, proposed by Chernozhukov and Hansen (2005, 2006).7 The advantage of this procedure 
is  that  it  yields  unbiased  estimates  even  when  changes  in  endogenous  regressors  alter  the  conditional 
distribution of the dependent variable. As pointed out by Wolters (2012), this appears to be the case of the 
estimation of the monetary authority’s reaction function in which the nominal interest rate exhibits a zero 
bound.  Given  such  constraint,  it  is  reasonable  to  assume  that  a  decrease  in  inflation  followed  by  a 
reduction  in  nominal  interest  rates  alters  the  conditional  distribution  of  this  policy  instrument.  In  what 
follows, we briefly describe the IVQR method. 
 
2.2.1 Inverse quantile regression  
 
The  IVQR  method  derives  from  the  following  moment  condition  regarded  as  the  major  identification 
constraint: 
 

 

 

 

      (5)    

where  P(.|.)  stands  for  the  conditional  probability,  Y  is  the  dependent  variable,  D  is  a  vector  of 
endogenous  variables,  X  is  a  vector  of exogenous  variables  including  the  constant,  and  Z  is  a  vector  of 
additional instrumental variables.8 In the case of interest rate rule (4), Y is the policy instrument it, D is 
made of inflation output (πt – π*
t ) and output gap (yt), X is the vector that includes the intercept, it-1 and it-2, 
and Z is the vector of additional instruments that may include lagged values  of inflation gap and output 
gap. 

In  IVQR,  the  moment  condition  is  equivalent  to  stating  that  0  is  the  τth  quantile  of  the  random 
variable Y – qτ(D, X) conditional on (X, Z). Thus, equation (5) is the transform within an analogous sample. 
For that reason, we have to find the parameters for function qτ(D, X) such that zero is the solution to the 
quantile regression problem, in which the error term regressor is Y – qτ(D, X) in any function of (X, Z). Let 
δD = [βπ-π* βy]′ be the vector of parameters of endogenous variables, δX = [β0 θ1 θ2]′ the vector of parameters 
of  exogenous  variables  and  Λ  a  set  of  possible  values  for  δD.  Therefore,  the  conditional  quantile  as  a 
linear function is qτ(Y|D, X) = D′δD(τ) + X′δX(τ).  

According  to  Wolters  (2012),  the  algorithm  that  implements  the  IVQR  estimator  can  be 
summarized  in  three  steps.  The  first  step  consists  in  estimating  regressions  by  least  squares,  relating 
                                                             
7 This method is also known as instrumental variable quantile regression (Chernozhukov and Hansen, 2006). 
8 The function qτ(D,X|X,Z) in (5) is a structural quantile function. This is not the same as the conditional quantile function qτ(it | 
it-1, it-2, πt – π*
t , yt) presented in (4). It is important to say that, in general, the conditional quantile function is not the same as the 
structural quantile function. Therefore, to test for robustness, we shall also estimate the CBB reaction function by 2SQR, which 
is more closely related to the conditional quantile function.   

5 

 

**120121122|,,,tttttttttttqiyiiyii,|,PYqDXXZendogenous regressors (D) to the vectors of exogenous variables (X) and instruments (Z), and obtaining 

). In the second step, for all δD 
the vector of predicted values (
δX and δZ as the solution to the following minimization problem: 

 Λ, we obtain the estimates for vectors 

 

 

 

 

       
(6)    

where  φτ(u)  =  (τ  –  1(u  <  0))u  is  the  asymmetric  loss  function  of  the  least  absolute  deviation  from  the 
standard  quantile  regression  and  δZ  is  the  vector  of  parameters  related  to  additional  instruments  in  the 
regressions shown in the previous step. In the third step, the estimate of δD is obtained as the solution to 
the problem:  
 

 

 

 

       
(7)    

This minimization ensures that Y – qτ(D,  X) no longer depends on 
, i.e., on (X, Z). As noted in (6) and 
(7), the estimates of the parameters of the model are obtained by the estimation of an array of standard 
quantile regressions (in which convex optimization problems are solved in order to estimate δX and δZ, in 
combination with a grid search only for the values of the vector of parameters δD.9  
 
2.2.2 Moving blocks bootstrap  
 
To  obtain  the  standard  errors  of  the  coefficients  of  the  reaction  function  estimated  by  IVQR,  we  used 
moving blocks bootstrap (MBB), proposed by  Fitzenberger (1997). This author demonstrates that MBB 
yields standard errors that are robust to unknown forms of heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation, both in 
linear regressions estimated by OLS and in quantile regressions. As in Clarida et al. (1998) and Wolters 
(2012), we restricted the autocorrelation to the time horizon of 1  year, which is reasonable for monthly 
data.  Note  that  in  MBB  each  bootstrap  block  of  the  variables  (including  the  dependent  variable,  the 
endogenous variables, the exogenous variables, and the instruments) is obtained randomly from the whole 
sample. After that, the estimates of the parameters by IVQR are obtained for each of the 1000 bootstraps, 
and  the  standard errors  are  calculated as the  standard  deviation  of  the  1000  estimates  obtained  for each 
parameter.10  
 
2.3 An alternative specification for the CBB’s reaction function  
 
Consonant  with  Minella  et  al.  (2003),  Aragón  and  Portugal  (2010)  and  Minella  and  Souza-Sobrinho 
(2013),  we  also  estimate a  specification  of  the  reaction  function  that  includes  the  deviation  of  inflation 
expectations  from  the  inflation  target  (or  from  the  expected  inflation  gap).  In  this  case,  the  reaction 
function with constant parameters is given by: 
 

 

 

Whereas the reaction function at quantile τ can be expressed as 

 

 

 

with variable Djt denoted as  

 

 

 

 

    (8)   

       

 

(9)    

       

(10)    

 

                                                             
9 For further details, see Koenker (2005) and Chernozhukov and Hansen (2006). 
10 For more details about MBB, see Fitzenberger (1997). 

 

6 

ˆD,11ˆargminXDTXDZDttDtXtZtYDXDTargminDDZDZDˆD0121122ttttttiDjyii120121122|,,,tttttttttqiDjyiiDjyii**11121212jTTjTTtDjjjEET  is the inflation target for year T and *

where j is the monthly index, EjT is the inflation expectation in month j for year T, EjT+1 is the inflation 
expectation in month j for year T+1, *
T+1 is the inflation target for 
year  T+1.  As  inflation  expectations  and  output  gap  are  potentially  endogenous  variables,  the  IVQR 
method will be used to estimate the coefficients of monetary rule (9).11 
 
3 Results 
 
3.1 Data and unit root tests  
 
To estimate the CBB’s reaction functions, we utilized monthly series for the period between January 2000 
and  December  2013.  The  series  were  obtained  from  the  websites  of  the  Applied  Economics  Research 
Institute (IPEA) and CBB.  

The  dependent  variable,  it,  is  the  annualized  Selic  rate  accumulated  on  a  monthly  basis.  This 

variable has been used as the major monetary policy instrument in the inflation-targeting regime. 
 
The inflation rate, t, is the inflation accumulated over the past 12 months, measured by the broad 
consumer price index (IPCA).12 Since inflation targets are considered to be time-varying, we interpolated 
the annual targets to obtain the monthly series of the target for the inflation accumulated over the next 12 
months.13 

The variable Djt is built from the inflation targets set for years T and T+1, and from the inflation 
expectations series obtained from the survey conducted by the CBB with financing and consulting firms. 
In this survey, firms indicate the inflation rate they expect for years T (EjT) and T+1 (EjT+1). 
The  output  gap  (yt)  is  measured  by  the  percentage  difference  between  the  seasonally  adjusted 
 
industrial production index and potential output. Potential output is an unobservable variable and, for that 
reason,  it  should  be  estimated.  We  obtained  the  proxy  for  potential  output  using  the  Hodrick-Prescott 
(HP) filter.  
 

 

 

 

Figure 1 Selic rate and deviation of inflation from its target (panel a) and histogram for the Selic rate (panel b). 
 

The histogram for the Selic rate and the behavior of this variable and of the deviation of inflation 
from its target are depicted in Figure 1. By comparing the behavior of inflation gap with that of the Selic 
rate, we note that the CBB has increased (decreased) the use of this policy instrument in response to rises 
(reductions) in inflation rate. The correlation coefficient between it and πt – π*
t  was 0.72, suggesting a close 
relationship  between  these  series.  The  histogram  for  the  Selic  rate  indicates  that  the  distribution  of  this 
series  is  asymmetric  and  skewed  to  the  right  and  platykurtic.14  So,  the  Jarque-Bera  statistic  (6.66) 
indicates  the  null  hypothesis  of  normality  of  the  Selic  rate  is  rejected  at  5%.  Additionally,  it  should  be 
                                                             
11 For the determinants of inflation expectations in Brazil, see Bevilaqua et al. (2008) and Carvalho and Minella (2012). 
12 IPCA is calculated by the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) and is the price index used by the National 
Monetary Council as benchmark for the inflation-targeting regime. 
13 To obtain the inflation target for the next 12 months, we interpolated the annual targets using equation  π*
(j/12)π*
inflation target for year T+1. 
14 The coefficient of asymmetry was 0.45 and the coefficient of kurtosis was 2.62. 

j  is  the  inflation  target  in  month  j  for  the  next  12  months,  π*

T  is  the  inflation  target  for  year  T,  π*

j = [(12-j)/12]π*

T+1,  where  π*

T +  
T  is  the 

 

7 

-50510152025300001020304050607080910111213Selic interest rateDeviation of inflation from target(a)024681012148101214161820222426(b)noted that the Selic rate is way above zero  at the lower quantiles. This suggests that the fear of a lower 
bound with value zero cannot explain possible asymmetric reactions of  the CBB in the lower  tail of the 
conditional distribution of it.  
 
Before  resuming  the  estimations,  we  checked  whether  the  variables  used  in  this  study  are 
stationary.  Initially,  we  investigated  the order  of  integration  of the  variables  by  the  application  of  three 
GLS tests, suggested by Perron and Ng (1996) 
tests: ADF (Augmented Dickey-Fuller), and MZα
and Ng and Perron (2001).15 As pointed out by Ng and Perron (2001), the selection of the number of lags 
(k) was based on the modified Akaike information criterion (MAIC) regarded as the maximum number of 
lags  of  kmax  =  int(12(T/100)1/4)  =  13.  Constant  (c)  and  a  linear  trend  (t)  were  included  as  deterministic 
components for the cases in which these components were statistically significant.  

GLS and MZt

Variable 

Exogenous 
regressors 

it 

 
 

Djt 
yt 

 

Table 1 – Unit root tests 

ADF(k) 

-3.309*(4) 
-1.909(13) 
-3.225**(0) 
-2.088 (10) 
-3.508***(0) 

MZα

GLS(k) 

MZt

GLS(k) 

-11.471 (9) 
-13.77**(1) 
-6.142*(0) 
-11.75**(10) 
-18.95***(0) 

-2.386 (9) 
-2.599***(1) 
-1.698*(0) 
-2.410**(10) 
-3.053***(0) 

c,t 
C 
C 
C 
C 

                   Note: *** Significant at 1%. ** Significant at 5%. * Significant at 10%. 

 
 
The  results  in  Table  1  show  that,  in  general,  it  is  possible  to  reject  the  unit  root  hypothesis  in 
GLS test results 

inflation, inflation target, output gap, and Djt series. For the Selic rate, the MZα
indicate this variable is nonstationary in the level. 

GLS and MZt

Since  the  failure  to  reject  the  unit  root  null  hypothesis  in  the  Selic  rate  may  be  related  to  the 
existence of a structural break in the trend function, two procedures were performed.16 First, we used the 
Exp-WFS statistic, proposed by Perron and Yabu (2009), to test the null hypothesis of no structural break 
in the trend function of the Selic rate against the alternative hypothesis of a break in intercept and slope of 
the  trend  function  at  an  unknown  date.17  The  value  of  this  statistic  (9.42)  implies  rejection  of  the 
hypothesis of no structural break at a 1% significance level. Therefore, two unit root tests with structural 
GLS(λ0) statistics were 
breaks were run. Following Carrion-i-Silvestre et al. (2009), the MZα
used to test the unit root null hypothesis, allowing for three breaks in the trend function at an unknown 
GLS  (-
date  under  the  null  and  alternative  hypotheses.  The  values  obtained  for  MZα
7.52) allow rejecting the unit root hypothesis in the Selic rate at 1%. 
 
3.2 The CBB’s reaction function in the conditional mean  
 
First,  we  estimated  reaction  functions  (2)  and  (8)  in  the  conditional  mean  using  IV  and  GMM  with  the 
optimal  weighting  matrix,  taking  into  account  possible  heteroskedasticity  and  serial  autocorrelation  in 
residuals.  Specifically,  we  applied  the  method  proposed  by  Newey  and  West  (1987)  with  the  Bartlett 
kernel  and  fixed  bandwidth  to  estimate  the  covariance  matrix.  The  following  instruments  were  used:  a 
constant term, lags 1-2 of the Selic rate and deviation of (current or expected) inflation from the target, 
lags 2-3 of the output gap, and nominal exchange rate movement at t-1 (ΔEt-1).18  

GLS  (-113.4)  and  MZt

GLS(λ0) and MZt

 
 
 
 

 

                                                             
15 The null hypothesis of the tests is that the series is nonstationary (or unit root). 
16 See, for instance, Perron (1989).  
17 Perron and Yabu (2009) present some tests for the structural break in the trend function that do not require knowing a priori 
whether the noise component of the series is stationary or has a unit root. These authors also demonstrate that, in the case in 
which the structural break is unknown, the Exp-WFS functional of Wald’s test provides a test with almost identical limit values 
for a noise component I(0) or I(1). Therefore, test procedures with similar sizes can be performed for those two cases. 
18 Exchange rate movement is the percentage variation of the Real/Dollar nominal exchange rate (mean for the period). 

8 

 

t*tTable 2 – Estimates of the CBB’s reaction functions  

Parameters 

Eqn. (2) 

β′0 

β′1 

β′2    

θ1 

θ2 

β1 

β2 

J-statistic (p-value) 

Hausman test (p-value) 
Cragg-Donald F-stat 

R2-adjusted 

IV 

0.179*** 
(0.067) 
0.025 
(0.017) 
0.037*** 
(0.009) 
1.753*** 
(0.062) 
-0.770*** 
(0.062) 
1.452 
(1.005) 
2.196*** 
(0.771) 
0.213 
0.008 
26.61† 
0.996 

GMM 
0.171*** 
(0.061) 
0.016 
(0.014) 
0.039*** 
(0.008) 
1.716*** 
(0.058) 
-0.732*** 
(0.057) 
0.995  
(0.798) 
2.407*** 
(0.865) 
0.486 
0.036 
26.61† 
0.996 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

Eqn. (8) 

IV 

0.120 
(0.088) 
0.115*** 
(0.029) 
0.042*** 
(0.010) 
1.627*** 
(0.068) 
-0.644*** 
(0.070) 
7.067** 
(3.104) 
2.602** 
(1.125) 
0.803 
0.000 
24.00† 
0.996 

GMM 
0.134* 
(0.076) 
0.111*** 
(0.030) 
0.043*** 
(0.010) 
1.627*** 
(0.063) 
-0.645*** 
(0.063) 
6.377*** 
(2.190) 
2.469*** 
(0.931) 
0.664 
0.017 
24.00† 
0.996 

Note:  ***Significant at 1%.  ** Significant at 5%.  *  Significant at 10%. Standard deviation (in  brackets).    † Indicates that the 

relative bias of the IV (or GMM) in relation to the OLS estimator corresponds to at most 5%. 

 

The set of instruments implies three overidentification constraints. We tested the validity of these 
constraints  with  Hansen’s  (1982)  J  test.  Additionally,  another  two  tests  were  employed:  i)  Durbin-Wu-
Hausman’ test to verify the null hypothesis of exogeneity of regressors πt – π*
t  and   yt in equation (2), and 
Djt and yt in equation (8); and ii) Cragg-Donald’s F test, proposed by Stock and Yogo (2005), to test the 
null hypothesis that the instruments are weak.19,20 The results of these tests, shown in Table 2, indicate we 
may reject the hypotheses that (current or expected) inflation gap and output gap are exogenous and that 
the instruments used in the regressions are weak. Also, the  J test shows we cannot reject the hypothesis 
that the overidentification constraints are met. 

The  estimates  of  the  CBB’s  reaction  function  parameters  obtained  by  IV  and  GMM  are  quite 
similar. For specification (2), the values of the coefficients that measure short-term (β′1 ) and long-term (β1) 
responses of the Selic rate to inflation were not statistically different from zero in the conditional interest 
rate  mean.  This  suggests  that  the  CBB  has  not  adopted  a  stabilization  policy  for  the  current  inflation 
around the inflation target, as the increase in inflation has not been followed by a significant increase in 
the  Selic  rate.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Selic  rate  responded to  the  changes  in  output  gap.  The  long-term 
coefficients  of  this  variable  were  equal  to  2.2  and  2.4  for  rule  (2)  estimated  by  IV  and  GMM, 
respectively, and were significant at 1%. Finally, the Selic rate smoothing (θ1+θ2) yielded approximately 
0.98.  This  result  is  consistent  with  the  literature  on  short-term interest  rate  smoothing  and  indicates  the 
adjustment of this policy instrument at discrete intervals and in discrete amounts.21 
With respect to monetary rule (8), the estimates of coefficient β1 indicate that, in the conditional 
 
Selic  rate  mean,  the  CBB  has  reacted  strongly  to  the  deviation  of  expected  inflation  from  the  inflation 
target.  Specifically,  the  values  obtained  for  this  parameter  show  the  monetary  policy  rule  fulfills  the 
Taylor principle (1993), i.e., the CBB has increased the Selic rate just enough to rise the real interest rate 
in response to an increase in expected inflation. This result is in line with those encountered by Minella et 
al. (2003), Moura and Carvalho (2010), Sanches-Fung (2011), Aragón and Medeiros (2013) and Minella 
and  Souza-Sobrinho  (2013).  Compared  to  the  estimates  of  β1  for  reaction  function  (2),  the  CBB  has 

                                                             
19  As  underscored  by  Stock  and  Yogo  (2005),  the  presence  of  weak  instruments  may  yield  biased  IV  estimators.  Thus, 
following these authors, we considered instruments to be weak when the bias of the IV or GMM estimator relative to the bias 
of the OLS estimator was greater than any value b (for example, b = 5%). 
20 The critical values of this test are described in Stock andYogo (2005). 
21 For short-term interest rate smoothing, see Goodfriend (1991) and Rudebusch (1995).  

9 

 

responded more strongly to expected inflation than to current inflation. This procedure is consistent with 
a forward-looking policy rule and indicates the CBB has been concerned mainly with anchoring inflation 
expectations to the inflation target set by the National Monetary Council. In regard to coefficient β2, the 
results were analogous to those obtained for monetary rule (2) and show the Brazilian monetary authority 
has also reacted to the demand pressure. 
 
3.3 Quantile regression results 
 
Now,  we  present  the  results  for  the  CBB’s  reaction  function  estimated  by  IVQR.  Figure  2  contains  the 
coefficients  estimated  by  quantile  regressions  and  the  90%  confidence  bands.  The  estimates  for  each 
quantile  τ  ϵ  {0.05,0.1,  0.2,...,0.9,  0.95}  are  shown.  Unlike  IV  and  GMM  results,  the  short-term  Selic 
interest  rate  response  to  inflation  gap,  β′1  (τ),  is  statistically  different  from  zero  from  quantile  0.5  to 
quantile  0.9.  In  contrast,  the  response  to  inflation  is  not  significant  for  the  lower  quantiles  of  the 
conditional  Selic  rate  distribution.  Hence,  results  reveal  that  the  CBB’s  response  to  inflation  gap  is 
stronger  when  the  Selic  rate  is  adjusted  to  a  higher  level  than  its  conditional  median.  In  addition,  the 
response  to  inflation  is  more  intense  between  quantiles  0.5  and  0.9.  This  result  is  also  observed  by 
Chevapatrakul et al. (2009) and Wolters (2012) for the Federal Reserve, and by Chevapatrakul and Paez-
Farrell (2014) for the Central Bank of Australia.   

Figure 2 also shows that the short-term response of the Selic rate to output gap                                                            is significant from 
quantile  0.1  to  quantile  0.8  and  is  not  statistically  different  from  zero  at  the  extreme  quantiles  of  the 
conditional interest rate distribution. In comparison with the IV results, the response to the output gap in 
the conditional mean is, in general, stronger than the estimates obtained for the quantiles. However, this 
difference  is  subtle  as  the  confidence  interval  for  the  IV  estimate  includes  those  estimates  obtained  by 
IVQR. 

 
 

 

 

 

 

Figure  2  Estimated  coefficients  od  reaction  function  (4).  Notes:  Solid  lines  show  IVQR  estimates  together  with 
90% confidence bands of 1000 bootstraps. Dashed lines show IV estimates together with 90% confidence bands. 
 
The results regarding the interest rate smoothing coefficients are significantly different from zero. 
 
Between  quantiles  0.05  and  0.8,  there  was  a  reduction  in  coefficient  θ1(τ),  whereas  θ2(τ)  increased.  By 
adding  up  θ1(τ)  +  θ2(τ),  we  verify  that  the  Selic  rate  smoothing  went  up  from  0.959  at  quantile  0.05  to 
0.981  at  quantile  0.95.  This  demonstrates  that  the  CBB’s  monetary  policy  is  characterized  by  large 
smoothing of the Selic rate and that this smoothing increases at the higher quantiles along the distribution.  
 
Figure 3 depicts the long-term responses of the Selic rate to deviations of inflation from the target 
and to output gap for specification (4). The solid line shows the coefficients obtained by  IVQR and the 
dashed lines show the IV estimates with  90% confidence bands. Consonant with Wolters (2012), we do 
not provide the confidence interval for the coefficients  at the quantiles because, in general, we had high 

 

10 

standard errors which, consequently, implied rather broad confidence intervals.22 A possible explanation 
for that is that the sum of the smoothing parameters is very close to 1, yielding very high estimates for the 
standard errors obtained by the Delta method.23  

 

 

 

Figure 3 Long-term response of the Selic rate to inflation (β1) and to output gap (β2) for reaction function (4). Note: 
Dashed lines show IV estimates together with 90% confidence bands. 
 
 
 
That  being  said,  we  may  note  that,  when  the  Selic  rate  is  in  the  lower  tail  of  the  conditional 
distribution, the reaction to inflation and to output gap is more passive and becomes more active as we 
move  towards  the  right  side  of  the  distribution.  In  addition,  we  verified  that,  in  the  upper  tail  of  the 
distribution,  the  reaction  of  the  interest  rate  to  inflation  was  stronger  than  that  obtained  by  IV.  The 
estimates of β1(τ) were significant at quantiles 0.6 (3.81 with a standard error of 1.89) and 0.7 (5.59 with a 
standard  error  of  3.31),  whereas the  IV  estimate  was  not  statistically  different  from  zero.  This  suggests 
that the response of the Selic rate to inflation is stronger when this interest rate is above its conditional 
median.  The  upper  tail  of  the  distribution  exhibits  a  weaker  response  to  inflation  than  in  the  IV 
estimation,  although  the  coefficients  are  insignificant  in  both  cases.  Compared  with  the  coefficient  of 
inflation,  the  long-term  response  to  output  gap  is  more  stable  along  the  whole  distribution, as  the  point 
estimates obtained by quantile regression usually fall within the confidence interval of the IV estimate. 
 
To access the difference between the linear (estimated by IV) and the non-linear function (4), we 
estimate, in which point in time for our sample, the position of the interest rate (Selic) in its conditional 
distribution. To do that we calculated the adjusted values for the interest rate       , for           using the 
results  of  the  reactions  function  (4)  estimated  by  IVQR.  Then,  we  chose,  for  each  observation,  the 
quantile     that minimizes the quadratics difference between the adjusted values         and the observed 
values    .  Using  these  chosen       estimates  we  decomposed  the  interest  rate  (Selic)  deviations  from  the 
interest  values  obtained  from  the  linear  reaction  function  (2)  estimated  by  IV  (         ,  in  terms  of  the 
explanatory variables diviations plus a error term   . That is 

 

 

 

where   
  ,   
 ,   
  ,     e     are IV estimates from linear reaction function (2) and    
      ,   
      ,   
       , 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          e            are  IVQR  estimates  from  reaction  function  (4)  in  the  estimated  quantile     .  Since  the 
calculated error term    is close to zero, for each time t, we have              . 
Figure  4  shows  these  interest  rate  decompositions        .  It  seems  that  constant  term  deviations 
 
(IVQR  versus  IV)  are  small.  On  the  other  hand,  the  deviations  on  inflation  and  on  the  interest  rate 
smoothing were the main determinants of the changes in the estimated conditional mean of the monetary 
rule. It can be noticed that until mid 2003 the CBB response to inflation were usually greater than it was 
predicted by the linear policy rule. This is particularly so in the end of 2002 and in the first semester of 
2003,  when,  because  of  weak  credibility  due  to  a  change  in  government,  Brazil  experienced  a  strong 
exchange  and  inflation  rate  shock.  Between  2004  and  the  third  quarter  of  2008,  the  linear  policy  rule 
deviations were small, reflecting a period when monetary policy had become credible again. By the end 
of 2008 Brazil was hit by the world financial crises. It can be seem that in this period CBB reacted more 

                                                             
22 The standard errors of the long-term responses of the Selic rate may be provided by the authors upon request.  
23 Chevapatrakul et al. (2009) solve this problem by estimating the original Taylor rule, i.e., without the smoothing parameter. 
However,  as  the  short-term  interest  rate  smoothing  is  observed  in  CBB’s  monetary  policy,  we  opted  not  to  follow 
Chevapatrakul et al. (2009), as we would have misspecification of the reaction function to be estimated. 

11 

 

*001122111222ˆˆˆˆˆˆtttttttttttttiiyiistrongly  to  the  output  gap  than  it  was  predicted  by  the  linear  rule.  Finally,  between  2010  and  2012  the 
CBB kept the basic interest rate (Selic) below what would be recommended (predicted) by the conditional 
mean policy rule. This happens partially because of negative deviations of the IVQR constant in relation 
of the IV constant. This may be a reflecting a setting of the basic interest rate systematically below what 
would be recommended by the linear reaction function. The policy response to the inflation gap was also 
smaller than it was suggested by the linear reaction function in that same period.    
 
  

1 

0.5 

0 

-0.5 

-1 

-1.5 

2002 

2004 

2006 

2008 

2010 

2012 

interest rate smoothing 

output 

inflation 

constant 

 

Figure  4  Decomposition  of  policy  deviations  from  the  values  implied  by  policy  rule  (2)  estimated  at  the 
conditional  mean.    Note:  The  bars  denote  differences  between  estimated  policy  reactions  and  policy  reactions 
implied  by  a  policy  rule  estimated  at  the  conditional  mean  (constant:     
            
   ,  inflation:     
           
  , 
          
 
 
 
 
output gap:    
            
     , interest rate smoothing:                                             ). 
 
 
 
 
Figure  5  shows  the  short-term  coefficients  of  monetary  rule  (9)  estimated  for  the quantiles.  The 
short-term response of the Selic rate to the expected inflation gap is statistically  different from quantile 
0.4 onwards. Results also demonstrate that this response has an uptrend as we move towards the right side 
of  the  conditional  Selic  rate distribution. Moreover,  note  that  from  quantile  0.6,  the  estimate  of  β′1  (τ)  is 
higher than the estimate obtained by IV. Nonetheless, this difference is not significant, as the confidence 
intervals of the estimates at the quantiles include the point IV estimate. Finally, when we compare these 
results  with  those  shown  in  Figure  2,  we  verify  that  the  short-term  response  of  the  Selic  rate  to  the 
expected  inflation  gap  is  stronger  than  that  to  the  current  inflation  gap  between  quantiles  0.4  and  0.95. 
This indicates that the CBB’s forward-looking behavior is observed not only in the conditional mean, but 
also in most of the Selic rate distribution. 
 

 

 

 

 

Figure  5  Estimated  coefficients  of  reaction  function  (9).  Notes:  Solid  lines  show  IVQR  estimates  together  with 
90% confidence bands of 1000 bootstraps. Dashed lines show IV estimates together with 90% confidence bands. 
 

The response of output gap is significant between quantiles 0.05 and 0.9 and shows a downtrend 
along the conditional interest rate distribution. With respect to interest rate smoothing, it should be noted 
that the coefficient θ1(τ) has a downtrend whereas the coefficient θ2(τ) exhibits the opposite behavior. As 
with monetary rule (4), the sum θ1(τ) + θ2(τ) indicates larger smoothing at the upper quantiles of the Selic 
rate distribution. 

 

12 

 

 

 

 

Figure  6  Long-term  responses  of  the  Selic  rate  to  Djt  (β1)  and  output  gap  (β2)  for  reaction  function  (9).  Note: 
Dashed lines show IV estimates together with 90% confidence bands. 
 

Figure  6  displays  the  long-term  responses  of  the  Selic  rate  to  Djt  and  to  the  output  gap  for 
specification  (9).  Note  that  the  response  of  the  interest  rate  to  these  variables  is  increasing  along  the 
conditional  distribution.  However,  the  standard  errors  allow  us  to  say  that  the  estimate  of  β1(τ)  is 
significant only at quantile 0.6 (15.41 with a standard error of 8.87). On the other hand, the estimates of 
the  coefficient  of  output  gap  (β2)  were  significant  at  quantiles  0.05  (1.56  with a  standard  error  of  0.80) 
and  0.3  (2.33  with  a  standard  error  of  1.10),  but  insignificant  at  the  other  quantiles  of  the  conditional 
distribution.  

Figure 7 presents the decomposition of the interest rate (Selic) deviations          , given by policy 
rule specifications (8) and (9). The deviations in the interest rate smoothing and in the expected inflation 
gap (Djt) were the main determinants of the changes in relation to the linear policy rule. Except for the 
end of 2008 and the beginning of 2009, the output gap did not affect the deviations between the interest 
rate (Selic) in relation to what was predicted by the conditional mean policy rule.  

 

1 

0.5 

0 

-0.5 

-1 

-1.5 

2002 

2004 

2006 

2008 

2010 

2012 

interest rate smoothing 

output 

expected inflation gap 

constant 

 

Figure  7  Decomposition  of  policy  deviations  from  the  values  implied  by  policy  rule  (8)  estimated  at  the 
conditional  mean.    Note:  The  bars  denote  differences  between  estimated  policy  reactions  and  policy  reactions 
implied by a policy rule estimated at the conditional mean (constant:    
            
   , expected inflation  gap:    
        
 
 
 
 1′   , output gap:  2′    2′  , interest rate smoothing:  1(     1   1+ 2(     2   2 ). 
 
3.4 Robustness of the results  
 
In  this  section,  we  check  the  robustness  of  the  results  by  performing  three  exercises:  i)  using  an 
alternative  measure  of  output  gap;  ii)  including  the  exchange  rate  in  the  CBB’s  reaction  function;  iii) 
estimating the CBB reaction function by 2SQR and comparing with IVQR estimates.  
 
3.4.1 Different output gap measure  
 
Figure  8  shows  the  results  estimated  by  IV  and  IVQR  for  reaction  function  (4)  with  output  gap  (yTL) 
obtained  from  a  linear  trend  model.24  For  this  specification,  we  identify  similarities  to  the  results  that 
consider  the  output  gap  obtained  with  the  HP  filter.  The  short-term  response  of  the  interest  rate  to 

                                                             
24 We also estimated the reaction function using an output gap derived from a quadratic trend The results are similar of those 
obtained by using a output gap derived from the HP filter. These results may be provided by the authors upon request. 

13 

 

inflation is increasing along the distribution. In addition, in the upper tail of the conditional distribution, 
this  response  has  been  stronger  than  the  results  estimated  by  IV  and  statistically  different  from  zero 
between quantiles 0.5 and 0.9. Regarding the short-term response to the output gap, it is significant from 
quantile 0.05 to quantile 0.7 and shows an uptrend.  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 8 Estimates for reaction function (4) with yTL. Notes: Solid lines show IVQR estimates together  with 90% 
confidence bands of 1000 bootstraps. Dashed lines show IV estimates together with 90% confidence bands. 

 
As far as long-term responses of the Selic rate are concerned, two results should be highlighted. 
First,  the  response  of  inflation  gap  in  the  conditional  mean  and  between  quantiles  0.5  and  0.7  is 
statistically different from zero and satisfies the Taylor (1993) principle. Second, the response of the Selic 
rate to  output  gap  is  statistically  different  from  zero  up  to  quantile  0.7.  Nevertheless,  all  the  significant 
part  of  the  IVQR  is  within  the  confidence  interval  estimated  by  IV  for  the  conditional  mean.  Thus,  we 
may  infer  that  the  long-term  response  of  the  Selic  rate  to  output  gap  is  more  stable  than  that  of  the 
inflation gap along the distribution of this policy instrument. 

Figure  9  shows  the  results  obtained  by  IV  and  IVQR  for  reaction  function  (9)  with  output  gap 
(yTL) obtained from a linear trend model. As demonstrated above, there are nonlinearities in the short-term 
response of the Selic rate to expected inflation. Particularly, we note that the CBB’s short-term response 
to  expected  inflation  is  significant  between  quantiles  0.3  and  0.95,  but  not  in  the  extreme  tail  of  the 
distribution. In turn, the response of the interest rate to output gap is not statistically different from zero at 
the quantiles 0.1 and above 0.8.   
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 9 Estimates for reaction function (9) with yTL. Notes: Solid lines show IVQR estimates together  with 90% 
confidence bands of 1000 bootstraps. Dashed lines show IV estimates together with 90% confidence bands. 
 
 
 

 

14 

3.4.2 Exchange rate effects 
 
Several  studies  have  investigated  whether  central  banks  react  directly  to  exchange  rate  movements. 
Clarida et al. (1998) revealed that the central banks of Germany and of Japan include the real exchange 
rate  in  their  reaction  functions,  even  though  the  magnitude  of  the  reactions  is  negligible.  Mohanty  and 
Klau (2004) estimated modified Taylor rules and found that several central banks in emerging countries 
(e.g.,  Brazil  and  Chile)  react  to  exchange  rate  movements.  Lubik  and  Schorfheide  (2007)  estimated  a 
DSGE  model  for  Australia,  New  Zealand,  Canada,  and  the  United  Kingdom  and  verified  that  only  the 
central  banks  of  the  first  two  countries  react  to  exchange  rate  movements.  In  line  with  Lubik  and 
Schorfheide (2007), Furlani et al. (2010) observed that the CBB does not change the Selic rate in response 
to  exchange  rate  movements.  Mello  and  Moccero  (2009)  revealed  that  the  monetary  policy  instrument 
reacts  to  exchange  rate  in  Mexico,  but  not  in  Brazil,  Chile,  and  Colombia.  Aizenman  et  al.  (2011)  and 
Ostry  et  al.  (2012)  demonstrated  that  the  central  banks  of  several  emerging  markets  that  adopted  the 
inflation-targeting regime react to exchange rate movements. 

Many are the reasons that may lead the monetary authority to show deep concern for the exchange 
rate.  First,  in  an  economy  with  part  of  the  debt  denominated  in  foreign  currency,  exchange  rate 
devaluations may increase debt service, hinder the balances of firms and banks, limit credit, expand the 
number of bankruptcy filings, and reduce employment and aggregate output. Haussmann et al. (2001) and 
Calvo  and  Reinhart  (2002)  highlight  that  the  effects  on  economic  agents’  balances  has  been  the  major 
reason why central banks seek to avoid currency devaluations in the presence of external shocks. On the 
other hand, Aghion et al. (2009) developed a theoretical model to show that exchange rate appreciations 
may reduce firms’ gains and, consequently, their capacity to take loans and make innovations. This would 
negatively  affect  long-term  output  growth,  with  a  larger  impact  on  economies  with  a  less  developed 
financial  system.  Aizenman  et  al.  (2011)  proposed  a  simple  macroeconomic  model  to  assess  monetary 
policy  in  a  small  open  economy.  They  verified  that  a  large  weight  on  exchange  rate  volatility  in  the 
central  bank’s  loss  function  strengthens  the  reaction  of  the  policy  instrument  to  the  exchange  rate  and 
may bring welfare gains. These authors also argue that these gains may be larger in emerging economies 
or in those which export commodities, are more vulnerable to shocks on the terms of trade, and have a 
poorly developed financial system. 

To  check  whether  the  CBB  has  reacted  to  exchange  rate  movements,  we  estimate  the  following 

reaction function on the interest rate conditional mean:  
 

 

 

 

    (11)    

where et is the effective real exchange rate gap (i.e., the deviation of the natural log of the effective real 
exchange  rate  from  its  trend,  estimated  by  the  HP  filter).25  In  this  case,  the  CBB’s  reaction  function  at 
quantile τ can be expressed as: 

 

     

  (12)    

 

The  results  of  specifications  (11)-(12)  are  shown  in  Figure  10.26  The  short-term  response  of  the 
 
Selic rate to the current inflation gap was not different from zero for the rule estimated in the conditional 
mean, but was increasing and, in general, significant at the upper quantiles of the conditional distribution. 
Conversely,  the  coefficient  that  measures  the  short-term  response  to  output  gap  was  significant  in  the 
conditional mean, as well as at almost all quantiles of the Selic rate distribution.  
 

                                                             
25 We used the series (no. 11752) of the effective real exchange rate - IPCA provided by the CBB.  
26 We also estimated reaction functions (8) e (9) including the Exchange rate as one of the explanatory variables. In general the 
results did not change significantly from figure 8. These results are available from the authors upon request. 

15 

 

*01231122()ttttttttiyeii**1201231122|,,,,tttttttttttttqiyeiiyeii 

 

 

 

 

Figure  10  Estimates  for  reaction  functions  (11)  and  (12).  Notes:  Solid  lines  show  IVQR  estimates  together  with 
90% confidence bands of 1000 bootstraps. Dashed lines show IV estimates together with 90% confidence bands. 
 

Results  also  reveal  that  the  CBB  has  a  positive  response  to  real  exchange  rate  both  in  the 
conditional mean and along the interest rate distribution. This is consistent with the evidence provided by 
Soares and Barbosa (2006), who found a positive response of the Selic rate to real exchange rate, and by 
Palma and Portugal (2014), who show that the CBB has given a positive weight to real exchange rate in 
its loss function. Finally, results indicate that the response to real exchange rate is usually stronger in the 
upper tail of the conditional Selic rate distribution for both specifications. 

 

3.4.3 Results obtained by 2SQR method 
 
As a robustness test we also estimate equations (4) e (9) by 2SQR. These results are presented in Figures 
(11) e (12). In general the 2SQR estimates are similar of those from IVQR. In both cases the CBB reacts 
more strongly on the inflation gap (both current and expected) for the higher quantiles in the distribution 
of  the  conditional  interest  rate.  On  the  other  hand,  the  reaction  on  the  output  gap  is  stable  across  the 
conditional  distribution.  Finally,  both  estimation  methods  indicate  that  the  coefficient  of  i t-1  is  smaller 
than the coefficient of it-2 as we move towards the upper side of the conditional distribution. 
 

 

 

 

 

Figure  11  Estimated  coefficients  od  reaction  function  (4)  by  2SQR  e  IVQR.  Notes:  Dashed  lines  show  2SQR 
estimates together with 90% confidence bands. Solid line shows IVQR estimates. 
 

 

16 

 

 

 

 

Figure  12  Estimated  coefficients  od  reaction  function  (9)  by  2SQR  e  IVQR.  Notes:  Dashed  lines  show  2SQR 
estimates together with 90% confidence bands. Solid line shows IVQR estimates. 
 
4 Conclusions 
 
In  this  paper,  we  sought  to  assess  nonlinearities  in  the  CBB’s  reaction  function  by  using  quantile 
regression. As the monetary policy rule has endogenous regressors, we followed the procedures suggested 
by  Wolters  (2012)  and  the  inverse  quantile  regression  (IVQR)  method  proposed  by  Chernozhukov  and 
Hansen  (2005,  2006)  to  estimate  the  CBB’s  quantile  reaction  function  parameters  for  the  inflation-
targeting regime. This method allowed us to detect nonlinearities in the CBB’s reaction function without 
having to make specific assumptions about the causal factors that underlie these nonlinearities.  
 
The  conditional  mean  results  indicate  an  insignificant  response  of  the  Selic  rate  to  the  current 
inflation gap, but an otherwise positive one to the deviation of expected inflation from inflation targets. 
We  also  noted  that  the  Selic  rate  reacted  to  output  gap  movements,  and  the  smoothing  of  this  policy 
instrument was around 0.98.  

The quantile regression results show that the CBB’s  short-term response to current inflation was 
significant and increasing between quantiles 0.5 and 0.9. In turn, the short-term response of the Selic rate 
to output gap increased from quantile 0.2 to quantile 0.7 and was not statistically  different from zero at 
the  extreme  quantiles  of  the  conditional  interest  rate  distribution.  We  also  observed  that  the  short-term 
response  of  the  Selic  rate  to  the  expected  inflation  gap  was  significant  from  quantile  0.4  of  the  CBB’s 
reaction function, exhibiting an uptrend. Concerning the long-term response, results suggest the reactions 
of  the  Selic  rate  to  current  and  expected  inflation  were,  in  general,  stronger  when  the  interest  rate  was 
above its median. On the other hand, the long-term response to output gap was significant only at some 
quantiles on the interval [0.05, 0.7]. This suggests the CBB does not react to demand pressures when the 
interest rate is too high. When we included real exchange rate as a regressor for the interest rate rule, the 
CBB had a positive reaction to the real exchange rate both in the conditional mean and along the interest 
rate distribution. Moreover, results show the reaction to the real exchange rate was, in general, stronger in 
the upper tail of the conditional Selic rate distribution.  

 

References 
 
Adam  K,  Billi  RM  (2006)  Optimal  monetary  policy  under  commitment  with  a  zero  bound  on  nominal 
interest rates. J Money Credit Bank 38(7): 1877-1905 
Aghion P, Bacchetta, P, Rancière, R, Rogoff, K (2009) Exchange rate volatility and productivity growth: 
The role of financial development. J Monetary Econ 56: 494-513 
Aizenman  J,  Hutchison  M,  Noy  I  (2011)  Inflation  Targeting  and  Real  Exchange  Rates  in  Emerging 
Markets. World Development 39(5): 712-724  
Amemiya T (1982) Two stage least absolute deviations estimators. Econometrica 50: 689-711 

 

17 

Aragón  EKdaSB,  Portugal  MS  (2010)  Nonlinearities  in  Central  Bank  of  Brazil’s  reaction  function:  the 
case of asymmetric preferences. Estudos Econômicos 40(2):373-399 
Aragon EKdaSB, Medeiros GB (2013) Testing asymmetries in central bank preferences in a small open 
economy: a study for Brazil. EconomiA 14(2): 61-76 
Aragon  EKdaSB,  Medeiros  GB  (2014)  Monetary  policy  in  Brazil:  evidence  of  a  reaction  function  with 
time-varying parameters and endogenous regressors. Empir Econ doi: 10.1007/s00181-013-0791-5 
Bec F, Salem MB, Collard F (2002) Asymmetries in monetary policy reaction function: evidence for the 
U.S., French and German Central Banks. Stud Nonlinear Dyn  Econom 6(2):1-22 
Bevilaqua  AS,  Mesquita  M,  Minella  A  (2008)  Brazil:  Taming  Inflation  Expectation.  In:  Bank  for 
International  Settlements  (ed),  Transmission  Mechanisms  for  Monetary  Policy  in  Emerging  Market 
Economies, BIS Papers 35:139-158 
Calvo G, Reinhart C (2002) Fear of floating. Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(2): 379-408. 
Carrion-i-Silvestre JL, Kim D, Perron P (2009) GLS-based unit root tests with multiple structural breaks 
both under the null and the alternative hypotheses. Econom Theory 25:1754-1792 
Carvalho  FA,  Minella  A  (2012)  Survey  forecasts  in  Brazil:  a  prismatic  assessment  of  epidemiology, 
performance, and determinants. J International Money Finance 31(6):1371-1391 
Chen  LA,  Ponrtnoy  S  (1996)  Two-stage  regression  quantile  and  two-stage  trimmed  least  squares 
estimators for structural equation models. Commun Stat- Theory Methods 25(5): 1005-1032. 
Chevapatrakul, T, Tae-hwan K, Paul M (2009) The Taylor Principle and Monetary Policy Approaching a 
Zero  Bound  on  Nominal  Rates:  Quantile  Regression  Results  for  the  United  States  and  Japan.  J  Money 
Credit Bank 41(8): 1706-1723 
Chevapatrakul T, Paez-farrell J (2014) Monetary Policy reaction Functions in Small Open Economies: a 
Quantile Regression Approach. Manch. Sch. 82(2): 237-256 
Chernozhukov V, Hansen C (2005) An IV Model of Quantile Treatment Effects. Econometrica 73: 245-
261 
Chernozhukov  V,  Hansen  C  (2006)  Instrumental  Quantile  Regression  Inference  for    Structural  and 
Treatment Effect Models. J Econom 132(2): 491-525  
Clarida R, Galí J, Gertler M (1998) Monetary policy rules in practice: some international evidence.  Eur 
Econ Rev 42:1033-1067 
Clarida  R,  Galí  J,  Gertler  M  (2000)  Monetary  policy  rules  and  macroeconomic  stability:  evidence  and 
some theory. Q J Econ 115(1):147-180 
Cukierman  A,  Muscatelli  V  (2008)  Non  Linear  Taylor  Rules  and  Asymmetric  Preferences  in  Central 
Banking: evidence from the UK and the US. The B.E J  Macroecon 8(1)  
de  Mello  L,  Moccero  D  (2009)  Monetary  policy  and  inflation  expectations  in  Latin  America:  long-run 
effects and volatility spillovers. J Money Credit Bank 41:1671-1690 
Dolado  JJ,  Maria-Dolores  R,  Ruge-Murcia  FJ  (2004)  Nonlinear  monetary  policy  rules:  some  new 
evidence for the US. Stud Nonlinear Dyn Econom 8(3): 1558-3708 
Dolado JJ, Maria-Dolores R, Naveira M (2005) Are monetary-policy reaction functions asymmetric? The 
role of nonlinearity in the Phillips curve. Eur Econ Rev 49(2): 485-503 
Fitzenberger B (1997) The moving blocks bootstrap and robust inference for linear least squares and 
quantile regressions. J Econom. 82: 235-287 
Furlani LGC, Portugal MS, Laurini, MP (2010) Exchange rate movements and monetary policy in Brazil: 
Econometric and simulation evidence. Econ Model 27: 284-295 
Goodfriend  M.  (1991)  Interest  rates  and the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Carnegie–Rochester  Series  on 
Public Policy 34: 7-30 
Greene W (2012) Econometric Analysis. 7th edition, Pearson / Prentice Hall 
Hansen LP (1982) Large sample properties of generalized method of moments estimators. Econometrica 
50(4): 1029-1054 
Hausmann R,  Ugo P, Ernesto S (2001)  Why Do Countries  Float the Way They  Float? J. Dev Econ 66: 
387-414 
Kato R, Nishiyama S-I (2005) Optimal monetary policy when interest rates are bounded at zero.  J Econ 
Dyn Control. 29: 97-133 

18 

 

Kim  TH,  Muller  C  (2004)  Two-Stage  Quantile  Regression  When  the  First  Stage  Is  based  on  Quantile 
Regression. Econom J 7: 218–231 
Kim  T-H,  Muller  C  (2012)  Bias  Transmission  and  Variance  Reduction  in  Two-Stage  Estimation.  Aix-
Marseille School of Economics Working Paper  No. 1221 
Koenker  R  (2005)  Quantile  Regression.  Econometric  Society  Monograph,  Cambridge  University  Press, 
Cambridge 
Koenker R, Bassett G (1978) Regression Quantiles. Econometrica 46(1): 33–50 
Koenker R, Hallock K (2001) Quantile Regression: An Introduction. J Econ Perspec 15(2): 143-156 
Lopes  KC,  Aragon EKdaSB (2014) Preferências Assimétricas Variantes no Tempo na  Função Perda do 
Banco Central do Brasil. Análise Econômica 32(62): 33-62 
Lubik  TA,  Schorfheide  F  (2007)  Do  central  banks  respond  to  exchange  rate  movements?  A  structural 
investigation. J Monetary Econ 54: 1069–1087 
Minella  A,  Freitas  PS,  Goldfajn  I,  Muinhos  MK  (2003)  Inflation  targeting  in  Brazil:  constructing 
credibility under exchange rate volatility. J International Money Finance 22(7):1015–1040 
Minella A, Souza-Sobrinho NF (2013) Monetary policy in  Brazil through the  Lens of a Semi-Structural 
Model. Econ Model 30:405-419 
Mohanty M, Klau M (2004) Monetary policy rules in emerging market  economies: issues and evidence. 
BIS Working Paper n.149, Basel: Bank for International Settlements 
Moura ML, Carvalho Ade (2010) What can Taylor rules say about monetary policy in Latin America? J 
Macroecon 32(1):392-404 
Newey  WK,  West  KD  (1987)  A  simple,  positive  semi-definite,  heteroskedasticity  and  autocorrelation 
consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica 55(3): 703-708 
Ng  S,  Perron  P  (2001)  Lag  length  selection  and  the  construction  of  unit  root  tests  with  good  size  and 
power. Econometrica 69(6):1519-1554 
Nobay AR, Peel D (2000) Optimal monetary policy with a nonlinear Phillips curve.  Econ Lett 67: 159–
164 
Nobay AR, Peel DA (2003) Optimal discretionary monetary policy in a model of asymmetric central 
bank preferences. Econ J 113: 657-665 
Ostry  JD,  Ghosh,  A,  Chamon  M.  (2012)  Two  Targets,  Two  Instruments:  Monetary  and  Exchange  Rate 
Policies in Emerging Market Economies. IMF Staff Discussion Notes, n.12/1 
Palma  AA,  Portugal  MS  (2014)  Preferences  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Brazil  under  the  inflation  targeting 
regime: estimation using a DSGE model for a small open economy. J Policy Model (fortcoming) 
Perron,  P  (1989)  The  great  crash,  the  oil  price  shock  and  the  unit  root  hypothesis.  Econometrica, 
57(6):1361-1401 
Perron P, Ng S (1996) Useful modifications to some unit root tests with dependent errors and their local 
asymptotic properties. Rev Econ Stud 63(3): 435-463  
Perron P, Yabu T (2009) Testing for shifts in the trend with an integrated or stationary noise component. J 
Bus Econ Stat 27:369-396 
Powell  J  (1983)  The  asymptotic  Normality  of  Two-Stage  Least  Absolute  Deviations  Estimators. 
Econometrica 51: 1569-1575 
Sá R, Portugal MS (2011) Central bank and asymmetric preferences: an application of sieve estimators to 
the U.S. and Brazil, Texto para Discussão, Porto Alegre: PPGE/UFRGS  
Sánchez-Fung JR (2011) Estimating monetary policy reaction functions for emerging market economies: 
The case of Brazil. Econ Model 28(4):1730-1738 
Schaling  E  (2004)  The  nonlinear  curve  and  inflation  forecast  targeting:  symmetric  versus  asymmetric 
monetary policy rules. J Money Credit Bank 36(3): 361-386  
Schifino,  LA,  Portugal  MS,  Tourrucôo  F  (2013)  Regras  monetárias  ótimas  para  o  Banco  Central  do 
Brasil: considerando a restrição de não negatividade, Texto para Discussão, Porto Alegre: PPGE/UFRGS  
Soares JJS, Barbosa FdeH (2006) Regra de Taylor no Brasil: 1999-2005. XXXIV Encontro Nacional de 
Economia. Anais. Salvador, 2006. 

 

19 

Stock  JH,  Yogo  M  (2005)    Testing  for  weak  instruments  in  linear  IV  regression.  In:  Identification  and 
inference for econometric models: Essays in honor of Thomas Rothenberg, ed. D.W. Andrews and J. H. 
Stock. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 
Surico P (2007)The Fed's monetary policy rule and U.S. inflation: The case of asymmetric preferences. J. 
Econ Dyn Control. 31(1): 305–324  
Taylor JB (1993) Discretion versus policy rules in practice.  Carnegie-Rochester Conf Ser Public Policy 
39:195-214 
Tillmann P (2011) Parameter uncertainty and nonlinear monetary policy. Macroecon Dyn 15: 184–200 
Wolters  MH  (2012)Estimating  Monetary  Policy  Reaction  Functions  Using  Quantile  Regressions.  J 
Macroecon 34: 342–361 

 

20 

