‘Property rights’ in illicit drug markets∗

Jeﬀerson D. P. Bertolai† & Luiz G. D. S. Scorzafave

FEARP/USP

July 21, 2018

Abstract In this paper we study a situation in which an agreement among criminals, resembling
property rights’ enforceability on its eﬀect to the economic allocation, can emerge in illicit drug
markets. In our main result, we use the mechanism design approach to show that a change inside the
prison system, from a competitive environment to the hegemony of a group of criminals, implies the
subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium (SPNE) in illicit markets outside prison to shift from warfare to
peace among market dealers. Speciﬁcally, the hegemonic group of criminals is shown to desire and
to be able to promote a collusive agreement among dealers under which no violence is performed.
This contrasts with the SPNE under no hegemony inside prison system, in which the possibility to
expel others from the market is shown to drive violence up to a positive level. The main testable
implication of our theory is not rejected in the data from S˜ao Paulo, the richest state in Brazil. In
statistical terms, correlation between violent crimes and drug dealing is positive before the change
inside the prison system and inexistent after it. Our result is relevant for public policy since it
shows that legalizing proﬁtable illicit activities would not have the expected eﬀect (reduction on the
activity-related violence) if property rights has already been enforced by market participants.
JEL-Classiﬁcation: D23, D74, K42
Keywords: Drug-dealing game, property rights, violence, peaceful equilibrium
ANPEC area: Microeconomics, Quantitative Methods and Finance

Resumo Estuda-se neste artigo uma situa¸c˜ao na qual um acordo entre criminosos, lembrando estab-
elecimento de direitos de propriedade, pode emergir em mercados de drogas il´ıcitas. A abordagem de
desenho de mecanismo ´e usada no principal resultado do artigo para mostrar que uma mudan¸ca den-
tro do sistema prisional (de um ambiente competitivo para a hegemonia de um grupo de criminosos)
muda o Equil´ıbrio de Nash Perfeito em Subjogos (ENPS) vigente no mercado de droga il´ıcita fora da
pris˜ao, de um estado de guerra para a paz entre traﬁcantes. Especiﬁcamente, ´e demonstrado que o
grupo hegemˆonico deseja e ´e capaz de promover um acordo de paz entre os traﬁcantes fora da pris˜ao.
Isto contrasta com o ENPS vigente quando n˜ao h´a hegemonia dentro do sistema prisional, no qual
a possibilidade de expulsar competidores do mercado motiva n´ıvel positivo de violˆencia. A principal
implica¸c˜ao test´avel desta teoria n˜ao ´e rejeitada pelos dados dispon´ıveis para S˜ao Paulo. Em termos
estat´ısticos, a correla¸c˜ao entre crimes violentos e tr´aﬁco de drogas ´e positivo antes da mudan¸ca den-
tro do sistema prisional e inexistente depois dela. Tal resultado ´e relevante para pol´ıtica p´ublica,
pois mostra que a legaliza¸c˜ao de atividades il´ıcitas lucrativas n˜ao ter´a o efeito esperado (redu¸c˜ao na
violˆencia) se os direitos de propriedade j´a foram estabelecidos pelos participantes do mercado.
Classiﬁca¸c˜ao JEL: D23, D74, K42
Palavras-chave: Jogo de tr´aﬁco de drogas, direito de propriedade, violˆencia, equil´ıbrio pac´ıﬁco
´Area ANPEC: Microeconomia, M´etodos Quantitativos e Finan¸cas

∗We are grateful to Cl´audio Lucinda, Fabio Gomes, Daniel Santos, Jo˜ao M.P. Mello, Jos´e H. Faro, Rodrigo Soares,
Braz Camargo, Daniel Monte, and Ricardo Cavalcanti for helpful comments and suggestions, and to seminar partici-
pants at FEARP-USP, INSPER and EESP-FGV. All errors are our own.

†Corresponding author: jbertolai@fearp.usp.br

1

1

Introduction

In Alchian (2008), property right is deﬁned as a socially enforced right to select uses of an economic
good. Also, such right to choose among alternative uses allows the exchange for similar rights over
other goods. Most important for our purposes, society enforces the right to sell the good by detecting,
convicting and punishing those (other than the right’s owner) trying to restrict or to perform such
exchange.

In that sense, one can see illicit markets as those for which society has assigned the property
right over the corresponding good to itself and has decided to not sell it.1 Licit markets, on the other
hand, can be seen as those for which society has assigned the property right to dealers and enforces
it, for example, by forbidding the use of violence among them as a competition instrument.

The extent to which property rights are enforceable depends on society’s ability to detect, convict
and punish those (other than the right’s owner) trying to restrict exchanges in licit markets and/or
to perform exchanges in illicit markets. If society’s ability is high enough, no trading takes place in
illicit markets and no violence is performed in licit markets in order to restrict property rights. On
the other hand, if society’s ability is not high enough, trading occurs in illicit markets, and violence
takes place in both licit and illicit markets as a competition instrument – an instrument to enforce
property rights.

The most obvious feature determining society’s ability to enforce property rights is trading prof-
itability. For highly proﬁtable markets, both restricting other’s trading and promoting his own trade
are worth taking the risk to be punished by society. More subtle features are also important to
determine detection and conviction capacity. For example, in societies where the respect to a rele-
vant amount of human rights2 is required when convicting and punishing someone, police work in
detecting and evidencing crimes is a sophisticated activity and state’s power to punish criminals is
bounded. If the police is not suﬃciently able to produce evidence of guilty while preserving criminals’
human rights, judicial system in such societies is not able to convict them. Even though conviction
is achieved, society cannot made punishment arbitrarily high without violating criminals’ human
rights. As a result, criminals assess bounded expected punishment.

Such reasoning about proﬁtability and boundness can be seen as fundamental for the standard
economic model to the decision individuals make between legal and illegal activities (Becker, 1968).
According to this approach, potential criminals decide going illegal if the expected proﬁtability of
the illegal activity is greater than the bounded expected punishment they are exposed to. Applied
to our discussion about licit and illicit markets, this model shows that property rights are not fully
enforceable in markets for which proﬁtability is greater than expected punishment. We make this
point for the illicit-markets case in section 2 by presenting a game intended to model an illicit-drug
market and showing that both violence and trading take place if expected punishment is low and
expected proﬁtability is high.

A situation not considered in Alchian (2008)’s deﬁnition is the case property right emerges even
without society’s enforceability. This would require an agent, other than the society-sponsored state,
to be able and to desire to enforce such rights. Our result in this paper is that such agent can be
a group of criminals that becomes hegemonic inside prison system. Building on Lessing (2014)’s
analysis, we argue that a change inside the prison system, from a competitive environment to the
monopoly, endows the hegemonic group with the ability to distort punishments inside prison. This
establishes a channel of inﬂuence over out-of-prison criminals that can be used to enforce property
rights in illicit drug markets.3 In section 3, we show that trading without violence among dealers

1For example, Demsetz (1967) describes state ownership as a situation in which “the state may exclude anyone

from the use of a right...”.
2See Assembly (1948).
3Also, because this agent is not necessarily constrained by human rights concerns, its ability to convict and punish

those detected violating property rights is much higher than the society’s one.

2

(property rights) is enforced in the illicit market model presented in section 2 if the hegemonic prison
gang has suﬃciently high power to distort expected punishment inside the prison system.4

1.1 Closely related literature

Our model makes use of standard tools found on the Economics of Conﬂict literature5 to study the
market for illicit drugs. The conﬂict among dealers is a zero sum game in which each player seeks
to obtain some prize (drug proﬁts) by investing some eﬀort or resources (violence). For this matter,
we heavily build on Burrus (1999)’s model of competition among drug dealers.

In studying how participants in the illicit markets can collude to sustain a peaceful equilibrium
inside the Economics of Conﬂict’s framework, we are closely related to Castillo (2013). But, while
the author justify the cooperative behavior among drug dealers resorting to the standard combination
of high level of patience and inﬁnite horizon, our result holds on a two-stage model sustained by the
prison gangs’ inﬂuence over out-of-prison criminals studied in Lessing (2014). Our simpler model
allows us to study the cooperative behaviour using the mechanism design approach. That way, we
are not only able to establish that the peaceful arrangement is a subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium,
as Castillo (2013) proposes to do, but also that it is the best equilibrium for the game designer (in
our case, the prison gang).

As in Burrus (1999), the prize from the conﬂict in our model is the control over retailer drug
markets while in the Castillo (2013)’s model it is the control over smuggling routes. The ﬁrst ﬁts
well for drug-consumer countries like Brazil (our motivating case described in subsection 1.2) and
USA while in the latter, Castillo (2013) intends to model drug-producer countries like Colombia.6

At a more basic theoretical level, our interpretation of such collusive arrangement as the emergence
of property rights without society enforcement is related to Caldara (2013)’s analysis on how property
rights emerges from anarchy. Such a connection could be used to see prison gang as a primitive form
of state inside the democratic state, an interpretation we do not pursue here since it is not necessary
to our result.

1.2 Empirical content of the theory

We present our motivating case, the fall on violent crimes rate in S˜ao Paulo in the 2000’s, in order
to establish the empirical content of the theory to be presented in sections 2 and 3.

S˜ao Paulo (hereafter SP), the richest state in Brazil, has experienced a sharp change in crime
rates in the recent past7. Figure 1(a) shows that SP’s experience on murder rates is atypical for
the Brazilian context. It presents annual data on homicide rates for the state of SP and for the ﬁve
regions in the country, from 1996 to 2011. In this period, homicide rate in SP fell on average 6.28%
per year, while the average rate among the remaining states grew on average 2.4% per year.

Therefore, the causes for such decline seems to rest on speciﬁc features that diﬀerentiate SP from
other Brazilian states. Consistent with the theoretical framework to be presented in sections 2 and
3, we argue that two factors make SP’s experience unique in Brazil: (i) imprisonment policy in
SP, which has traditionally been stricter than the other states’, has become even more aggressive

4An important feature of our result is that it does not require unbounded power to distort punishment.
5See Garﬁnkel and Skaperdas (2007) for a comprehensive review on the economic theory of conﬂicts.
6For other theoretical works focused in drug-consumer nations see Reuter and Kleiman (1986) and Lee (1993). For

drug-producer nations, see Grossman and Mej´ıa (2008) and Poret (2002).

7Figure 5 in appendix B illustrates the big picture. Time-series for virtually all crimes in the ﬁgures have reversed
trend at the beginning of the 2000’s, after persistent growth in the 1990’s. The most striking cases are violent crimes
like murder, attempted murder, robbery followed by death, and vehicle robbery. Less violent crimes like theft, vehicle
theft, and robbery (excluded vehicle robbery) have stopped increasing and remained stable in the 2000’s. Finally,
drug dealing registrations started growing at a higher rate from 2001 on. It grew on average 4% per year from the
third quarter 1995 to the end of 2000 and 12% from the beginning of 2001 to the ﬁrst quarter of 2014.

3

Figure 1: Some speciﬁc features to S˜ao Paulo’s experience

(a) Homicide rate - S˜ao Paulo and
Brazilian regions

(b) Prison population rate – SP and
Brazil (except SP)

(c) Murders in prison (SP, 1990-
2010)

Source: (a) Waiselﬁsz (2006, 2013) (b) INFOPEN, SAP/SP and IBGE. (c) Dias (2011)

in the 1990’s and; (ii) a single group of criminals has consolidated control over prison life and has
propagated it throughout the prison system8.

In section 4, we present an empirical analysis for the SP’s experience on the main testable im-
plication of our theory: correlation between violent crimes (murder) and drug dealing changes from
a positive level before the channel of inﬂuence (from inside to outside prison system) is established
to no correlation after that. Speciﬁcally, we estimate the following relation between murder rate (h)
and drug dealing rate (d), taking into account the channel of inﬂuence (c) from inside prison:

h = δ0 + δ1c + δ2d + δ3c.d + θ · X + ε

(1)

where X is a vector of covariates. Our theory predicts that before the channel (c = 0) correlation is
positive (δ2 > 0) and that after the channel takes place (c = 1) correlation is inexistent (δ2 + δ3 = 0).
As presented in table 1, our ﬁndings strongly support the ﬁrst prediction and do not reject the second
one at the level of signiﬁcance of 5%.

2 A drug dealing game

We propose a model of drug dealing based on both dealers’ competition presented in Burrus (1999)
and prison gangs’ inﬂuence over out-of-prison criminals studied in Lessing (2014). Two features in

It can be seen how singular SP’s imprisonment policy was.

8The ﬁrst fact is illustrated in Figure 1(b), which displays the evolution for the incarceration rate9 in the 1990’s
for SP and the remaining Brazilian states.
In 1994,
incarceration rate was 2.7 times higher in SP. Moreover, it grew on average 3.49% per year in SP from 1994 to 2002,
while it grew only 2.76% per year for the other states.
The second aﬃrmative has been studied by sociology and political science literatures and publicized by the press. Dias
(2011) presents a detailed description on the events that resulted in the consolidation and propagation of a group of
criminals over the prison system in SP. By presenting similar case studies from Brazil, California, El Salvador, and
Texas, Lessing (2014)’s analysis implies such situation is not speciﬁc to SP context. Figure 1(c) clearly illustrates how
events inside prison the system follows closely trend reversion in crime rates (as presented in ﬁgure 5 in appendix B).
Murders in prison (as a result of prisoners’ conﬂicts) has sharply increased in the 1990’s, but, starting in 2001, it fell
at a rate even faster than it has increased.
Dias (2011)’s detailed presentation shows that most of such deaths resulted from conﬂicts among prison gangs during
prisoners rebellions. Moreover, it is documented that by 2001 a single prison gang has emerged from these conﬂicts
as the dominating organization inside the prison system. As a result, most of battles among prisoners ceased, as well
as the associated murders.

Also, our theoretical framework brings consistency for two apparently unrelated evidence on the pattern of criminal
activities.10 First, out-of-prison criminals are required to make monthly payments to the hegemonic prison gang,
in what is known as ‘mensalidades’ (Dias, 2011, p. 230). Second, prison gang’s rules (laws) are enforced fast and
eﬀectively (though not necessarily respecting basic human rights) in what is known in Brazil as “Tribunal do Crime”,
something similar to a court where prison gangs punish those not complying with its rules (Dias, 2011; Feltran, 2010).

4

this market are key for our analysis: (i) dealing drugs is an illegal activity, and therefore, no dealer is
able to legally enforce property rights over his selling post through the judicial system. Instead, each
of them protects their claimed properties and eventually violently attack their rivals.11 Following
Burrus (1999), we refer to these battles for selling posts as turf wars; and (ii) dealers who are caught
and arrested enter the prison system and can potentially be distorted by previously arrested criminals.
That establishes a (probabilistic) link between inside prison events and drug markets’ functioning
in that current prisoners could make treatment inside the prison system contingent on out-of-prison
behavior. Following Lessing (2014), we refer to these group of current prisoners as the prison gang
or PG.

2.1 The environment

There is a homogeneous drug, whose trading is illegal and for which (inverse) aggregate demand
function is P (Q). There are two dealers in the drug market, dealer 1 and dealer 2. It will be shown
convenient to refer to dealer j ∈ {1, 2} as Dj. Competition instrument is the violence to expel other
dealer from the market. There is a police force to arrest those not complying with drug prohibition
and/or committing violence acts.

The timing
The timing is given by two stages, as shown in Figure 2. First and second stages are denominated,
respectively, turf war stage and trading stage. Police force acts twice. First, in between the turf
war stage and the trading stage it arrests criminals for violence acts and excludes them from the
drug market according to probability ν ∈ [0, 1], which we assume to be independent among criminals.
Second, after the trading stage it arrests dealer j ∈ {1, 2} for selling drugs and conﬁscates his revenues
according to the probability ρ ∈ [0, 1].12
Turf war stage

Trading stage

Arrests for violence Arrests for trading

Figure 2: Timing of the two-stage game

The turf war stage:
In the ﬁrst stage, each dealer chooses how much violence to implement in order to defend himself
and/or to conquer monopoly power – over consumers and over the city’s territory. The ﬁght is
summarized by a vector of violence amounts V = (V1, V2) ∈ R2
+ and the winner w ∈ {1, 2}. Actions
(violence) in this stage are simultaneously chosen and determine the probability distribution over the
two possible results for turf war: Dj defeats his opponent under probability Sj(V ) and is expelled
from the market and gets nothing with probability Sk(V ) = 1 − Sj(V ), k 6= j.
With probability ν dealer j ∈ {1, 2} is arrested, suﬀers punishment hj for each unit of violence
acts he has performed, and stays out of the market13. We assume the cost hj is composed of a
punishment common to all prisoners, h, and a speciﬁc one, βj, by supposing that hj = βjh for
βj ≥ 1.14
11Classical example is violence among alcohol dealers in USA during prohibition of alcohol in the 1920’s.
12For richer formulation in which the probability to be arrested dealing drugs depends on the quantity sold, see

Poret and T´ej´edo (2006).

13This is the present value of costs associated to being in the jail. It includes the traditional opportunity cost in
form of wages he could earn during his time in prison, but also legal expenses during his trial and family expenses
to visit him at the prison. Also, it captures monetary value of expected welfare losses of being inside prison. For
example, individuals inside prison might face higher probability of getting sick or being victim of aggressions, robbery,
extortion or murder.

14One could also assume this is a cost for the dealer’s organization as a reduced-form modeling of contract relation

between organization and its employees. See Polo (1996) for a rich formulation to this agency problem.

5

The trading stage:
Suppose turf war has taken place. Winner dealer j ∈ {1, 2}, if not arrested, trade drugs under
monopoly: Dj decides how much drug to sell, qj ∈ R+. There is no cost in producing and supplying
drugs15 and, therefore, proﬁts equal revenues, P (qj)qj. The (inverse) aggregate demand is assumed
to satisfy the properties in Assumption 116.

Assumption 1 The inverse demand function P (·) is twice diﬀerentiable and such that P ′(·) < 0,
0 < P (0) < ∞ and ∀x ≥ 0 (P ′′(x)x + 2P ′(x) < 0).

With probability ρ, dealer j ∈ {1, 2} is arrested, have their proﬁts conﬁscated and suﬀers pun-
ishment dj = αjd for each unit of drug sold, where αj ≥ 1. This is again the present value of costs
associated to being in the jail and is composed by common and speciﬁc factors, d and αj.

The police and the expected payoﬀs
Just before being exposed to the second police intervention, the expected payoﬀ the monopolist
dealer gets after selling Q units of drug and facing punishment factor α is

π(Q, α) ≡ (1 − ρ)P (Q)Q − ρdαQ.

(2)

Similarly, just before the ﬁrst police intervention, the expected payoﬀ dealer j gets for each (V, Q, α, β)
is

Uj(V, Q, α, β) ≡ (1 − ν)Sj(V )π(Q, α) − νhβVj

(3)

The Contest Success Function
The relation between probabilities and violence eﬀorts is based in Contest Success Function literature
that followed Tullock (1980)’s rent-seeking model.17 In the simplest formulation, the one we assume
here, relative success is stated as a function of the ratio of the respective resource commitments – in
our case, violence eﬀort:

Sj
Sk

Vj
Vk

=

,

if Vk > 0.

(4)

If Vk = 0, we have Sk = 0 if Vj > 0 and Sk = Sj if Vj = 0. Using (4) and the fact S1 + S2 = 1, we
have the same Contest Success Function 18 studied in Hirshleifer (1989) and Burrus (1999)19:

Sj(V ) =(cid:26) Vj

V1+V2
1
2 ,

,

if (V1, V2) 6= (0, 0)
otherwise.

15Because our motivating case is a drug-consumer country, we abstract from wholesale drug market.
16First property in Assumption 1 requires demand for drugs to be downward sloping. The second one says that there
exists a ﬁnite and positive price above which demand for drugs is zero. The third requirement means that revenues
are concave in Q. Burrus (1999) assumes that inverse demand function is linear, a special case of Assumption 1.

17As pointed out by Hirshleifer (1989), however, such formulation “... applies far beyond the rent-seeking context.
Military combats, election campaigns, industrial struggles (strikes and lockouts), legal conﬂicts (lawsuits), and even
rivalries among siblings or between spouses within the family all fall under this heading”(Hirshleifer, 1989, p. 101).

18Axiomatization for more general contest success function has been provided by Skaperdas (1996) and Clark and
Riis (1998). For an overview on how such functions has been used in Economics, see Garﬁnkel and Skaperdas (2007).
19Actually, our drug dealing model is heavily based in Burrus (1999)’s model. We only make few modiﬁcations in his
setup. First, we generalize the inverse demand function from his linear functional form to the Assumption 1. Second,
although assuming the same contest success function, we follow Garﬁnkel and Skaperdas (2007) in interpreting Sj as
the probability under which Dj defeats his opponent, while Burrus (1999) makes Sj the market share Dj conquer for
sure. Third, and most important, we allow punishment inside prison system to be speciﬁc to each dealer.
Minor diﬀerences between our model and Burrus (1999) is that all prisons in his model take place after trading stage.
In our setup, prisons for violence acts happens before trading stage. Also, we assume that proﬁts are conﬁscated when
dealer is arrested for drug dealing, while Burrus (1999) does not.

6

2.2 The subgame-perfect equilibrium

In order to compute the subgame-perfect equilibrium for this game, we must impose that dealer’s
strategies constitute a Nash equilibrium in every subgame. We do this computing player’s strategies
in a backwards induction fashion, computing stage outcomes from the last stage to the ﬁrst one.

The trading equilibrium:
Equilibrium outcome in the trading equilibrium is trivial, since dealers always operate under monopoly.
The optimal quantity and the implied optimal expected proﬁts are given by qm(α) ≡ arg maxQ≥0 π(Q, α)
and πm(α) ≡ π(qm(α), α), which are invariant to the violence amounts chosen in the turf war,
V = (V1, V2), since the objective function maximized in the trading stage does not depend on V , as
deﬁned in (2).

Lemma 2 Let ¯ρ(α) = P (0)

P (0)+dα < 1. Then, for each α ≥ 1, qm(α) in uniquely determined by

∂π
∂Q

(Q, α) ≤ 0

and

Q

∂π
∂Q

(Q, α) = 0.

(5)

As a consequence, qm(α) > 0 and πm(α) > 0 if and only if ρ < ¯ρ(α).

Proof. First, observe that (5) is the ﬁrst-order condition to the monopolist’s optimization in the
trading stage. From Assumption 1, we have ∂2π
∂Q2 (Q, α) = (1 − ρ)[P ′′(Q)Q + 2P ′(Q)] < 0 and,
therefore, objective function is strictly concave.
It follows that (5) delivers the unique optimal
solution. For qm(α) > 0, observe that ∂π
∂Q (0, α) is strictly positive if and only if ρ < ¯ρ(α) since it
equals (1 − ρ)[P ′(0).0 + P (0)] − ρdα = (P (0) + αd)(¯ρ(α) − ρ).
Lemma 2 shows that drug dealing under monopoly is proﬁtable if society’s ability to enforce
property rights is not high enough. Also, it is made xplicit how such ability depends on the ability
to detect and convict those dealing drugs (ρ) and the magnitude of punishment (α).

The turf war equilibrium:
Taking as given the equilibrium payoﬀs in the last stage, πm(α), from (3) and lemma 2, expected
payoﬀ is

(1 − ν)Sj(V )πm(αj) − νhβjVj.

(6)
For each conjecture Vk about his opponent choice, Dj chooses Vj ≥ 0 in order to maximize (6).20
If detection and conviction is sure (ν = 1) or dealing drugs is not worth at all (πm(αj) = 0), then
property rights are enforced in equilibrium since no violence (Vj = 0) is optimal for each possible
conjecture Vk ≥ 0. The other case (ν < 1 and πm(αj) > 0) is presented in what follows in this
subsection.

Lemma 3 Suppose that ν < 1 and πm(αj) > 0 for all j ∈ {1, 2}. Then, there is no optimal solution
under conjecture Vk = 021.

20We highlight that under the standard contest success function we assume here, the decisions on violence amounts

are strategic complements.

21Lemma 3 states that, if police work in arresting criminals for violence acts is not perfect and punishment inside
prison system is not high enough to make drug dealing non-proﬁtable for all dealers, then no violence (Vj = 0) is not
a best response for the no-violence conjecture (Vk = 0). Therefore, it implies that if a turf war equilibrium exists in
this situation, then it entails positive violence for some dealer. The only cases no violence is a possible equilibrium
outcome are those where violence is not worth at all (ν = 1 or πm(α) = 0).

The economics behind this result is that, absent property rights, the only punishments Dj gets choosing Vj = ε > 0,
with ε → 0, is hε under probability ν, whereas the expected reward (1 − ν)πm(αj) is strictly positive and invariant
to ε. On the other hand, when dealing drugs is not illicit and property rights holds, defeated dealer can resort to the
judicial system to require a punishment H to his aggressor. If such a punishment is high enough and invariant to the
aggression level, so that H > (1 − ν)πm(1), then no violence becomes a best response to no violence.

7

Proof. Suppose the conjecture Vk = 0 and observe that for every Vj > 0, we have Sj(0, 0) = 1
2 < 1 =
Sj(Vj, 0). Therefore, by choosing Vj = 0, dealer j gets (1 − ν)πm(αj)/2 − νhβj.0 = (1 − ν)πm(αj)/2,
and, by choosing any Vj > 0 he gets (1− ν)πm(αj)− νhβjVj. Therefore, any violence amount Vj such
that 0 < Vj < (1 − ν)πm(αj)/2νhβj is a response to Vk = 0 stricly better than Vj = 0. In addition,
any violence amount ε > 0 is strictly worse than ε/2 as a reply to Vk = 0.
Now, consider the conjecture Vk > 0 still in the case ν < 1 and πm(αj) > 0 for each j. Then,
objective function (6) is strictly concave in Vj. Therefore, ﬁrst-order condition and constraint Vj ≥ 0
imply the following Dj’s best response function:

Vj(Vk) =( 0

q (1−ν)πm(αj )

νhβj

√Vk − Vk

if Vk > (1 − ν)πm(αj)/νhβj
otherwise.

(7)

Observe that no violence is optimal to Dj if opponent’s violence (Vk) is suﬃciently high. The
cutoﬀ violence beyond which violence is not worth, (1 − ν)πm(αj)/νhβj, is lower when Dj’s expect
monopoly proﬁts are lower and/or expected punishment for violence acts is high. This shows that
dealer k is always able to surely expel Dj from the market by increasing Vk beyond such cutoﬀ. But,
from Lemma 3 we know that this cannot constitute an equilibrium, since Dk has no optimal response
to no-violence conjecture (Vj = 0) when πm(α1) > 0, πm(α2) > 0 and ν < 1.

Lemma 4 Suppose that ν < 1 and πm(αj) > 0 for all j ∈ {1, 2}. Then, turf war equilibrium, for
given equilibrium payoﬀs in the trading stage, is

1 , V ∗

V ∗ = (V ∗

2 ) =(cid:18)(1 − ν)πm(α1)

θ(α, β)(cid:19)
(β1πm(α1)+β2πm(α2))2 ≤ 1. As a consequence, equilibrium payoﬀs are

(1 − ν)πm(α2)

θ(α, β),

νhβ1

νhβ2

where θ(α, β) = β1β2πm(α1)πm(α2)

U ∗
j (α, β) ≡ (1 − ν)πm(αj)

βkπm(αj)
βjπm(αk)

θ(α, β).

(8)

(9)

Proof. V ∗
j

is obtained by computing V ∗

j = Vj[Vk(V ∗

j )], where Vj(Vk) is deﬁned in (7).

Remark 5 As a conclusion, lemmas 3 and 4 have shown that when society’s ability to enforce
property rights is not high enough (ν < 1 and ρ < mini ¯ρ(αi)), violence and trading will take place in
illicit drug markets.

3 Property rights in illicit markets

We now extend the model in section 2 to allow the punishment dealers get inside prison system when
arrested, (α, β), to be distorted by previously arrested criminals. We compare two situations, which
are intended to represent the two diﬀerent equilibria inside prison system illustrated in Figure 1(b).
The ﬁrst one assumes a competitive environment among prison gangs and refers to the situation
prior to 2000. In this case, no prison gang is able to distort punishments (αj = βj = 1 for all j),
since prisoners are equally exposed to attacks and protection from the competing identical gangs. In
the second situation, the period after 2000, a hegemonic prison gang has emerged and become able
to distort punishments up to a limit λ ≥ 122.
22Throughout this section, we assume that social choice process (whatever it is) has resulted in an ability to enforce
property rights such that ν < 1 and ρ < ¯ρ(1). That way, trading and violence occur in equilibrium in the ﬁrst situation,
as implied by section 2.2. In what follows in this section, we study the second situation.

8

3.1 The hegemonic prison gang’s problem

Suppose the hegemonic prison gang (hereafter PG) wants to maximize its revenues and is be able to
perfectly monitor outside-prison actions. We suppose PG has no access to any production function so
that the only way it potentially can get revenues is by extorting/taxing outside-prison drug dealers.
The instruments for convincing them to comply with such taxation are a perfect monitoring ability
and distortions in (αj, βj) based on Dj’s outside-prison behavior. PG’s power to distort inside-prison
payoﬀ is not unlimited: we require αj ∈ [1, λ] and βj ∈ [1, λ]23.
Inspired on our motivating case described in section 1.2, we assume PG demands payments from
dealers before turf war stage and communicates how dealers should behave outside prison with respect
to violence amounts (v1, v2) and drug dealing (q1, q2). In addition, PG credible promises to distort
punishment inside prison (α, β) according to (a, b). The following deﬁnition makes clear the objects
to be chosen by PG when building its extortion mechanism.

Deﬁnition 6 An extortion mechanism is e = (t, v, q, a, b) such that
(i) t ∈ R2 speciﬁes a payment tj from each dealer j ∈ {1, 2},
(ii) v : R2 → R2 speciﬁes a vector of violence amounts vτ = (v1τ , v2τ ) for each payment vector τ ∈ R2,
(iii) b : R4 → R2 describes for each possible (τ, V ), the punishment factor bjτ (V ) dealer j gets inside
the prison system when arrested for violence acts,
(iv) q : R4 → R2 speciﬁes, for each possible (τ, V ), the quantity qjτ (V ) to be sold in the market when
Dj is the only seller; and
(v) a : R6 → R2 speciﬁes, for each possible (τ, V, Q), the speciﬁc punishment ajτ (V, Q) dealer j gets
inside the prison system when arrested for dealing drugs.

Observe that (a, b) is allowed to depend on how dealers has behaved outside prison, since a mech-
anism speciﬁes what dealers are supposed to do, and which expected punishment they are exposed to,
for each possible contingency could emerge from the drug dealing activity. Most important, dealers’
outside option is to stay out of drug markets. Once operating in the market, they are subject to
promised punishments (a, b).

When choosing the extortion mechanism, PG is restricted to mechanisms that are feasible24.

+

Deﬁnition 7 The extortion mechanism e = (t, v, q, a, b) is feasible if for each j ∈ {1, 2} (i) tj ≥ 0
(ii) vjτ ≥ 0 for all τ ∈ R2
(iii) bjτ (v) ∈ [1, λ], for all (τ, V ) ∈ R4
(iv) qjτ (V ) ≥ 0 for all (τ, V ) ∈ R4
(iv) ajτ (v, Q) ∈ [1, λ] for all (τ, V, Q) ∈ R6
Having deﬁned what a feasible mechanism is, we are now able to deﬁne expected payoﬀs for PG and
(D1, D2). PG is assumed to derive utility from the revenues extorted from dealers and, therefore, its
payoﬀ function is

+

+

+

W (e) = W (t, v, q, a, b) = t1 + t2.

(10)

If Dj expects the other dealer to completely comply with the extortion mechanism e, then its expected
payoﬀ when paying τ ≥ 0 and complying with the remaining recommendations in the mechanism is
j (τ ) and equals Uj(cid:2)vˆt, qjˆt (vˆt) , ajˆt(cid:0)vˆt, qjˆt (vˆt)(cid:1) , bjˆt (vˆt)(cid:3), where ˆt = (τ, tk) and the function
denoted U e
Uj(·) is deﬁned in (3).
23Accordingly, λ can be view as an indicator of how powerful PG is in distorting (α, β). PG’s power is inexistent

when λ = 1 and gets unlimited when λ → ∞.
24Property (i) in deﬁnition 7 requires payments from dealers to PG to be nonnegative, i.e., PG is not able to make
payments to outside dealers. Condition (ii) establishes that violence cannot be negative, which could be interpreted
as dealers not being able to caress each other in a way that is relevant for their expected payoﬀs. Property (iii) and
(v) says that PG’s power to distort prisoners’ payoﬀs is limited by λ, and condition (iv) requires the trading to be
nonnegative.

9

In addition to feasibility, PG’s choice is required to be compatible with dealers’ participation and

dealer’s incentives, as presented in the following deﬁnition.

Deﬁnition 8 The extortion mechanism e = (t, v, q, a, b) is said to be compatible with Dj’s partici-
pation if it is feasible and

Also, it is said to be incentive compatible for Dj if it is feasible and (t, v, q) is optimal for Dj in each
possible contingency, i.e.,

U e
j (tj) − tj ≥ 0.

(PC)

for each (τ, V ) ∈ R4
+,

qjτ (V ) ∈ arg max

Q≥0

π (Q, ajτ (V, Q)) ;

vjτ solves max
x≥0

Uj(cid:16)(x, vkτ ), qjτ (x, vkτ ), aτ(cid:16)(x, vkτ ), qjτ (x, vkτ )(cid:17), bτ (x, vkτ )(cid:17)

(ICq)

(ICV )

(ICτ )

τj ∈ arg max

t≥0 (cid:8)U e

j (tj) − tj(cid:9)

Finally, the mechanism is implementable if it is compatible with participation and with the incentive
for all dealers.

We are now able to deﬁne what is an optimal extortion mechanism for the prison gang.

Deﬁnition 9 The mechanism e∗ = (t, v, q, a, b) is optimal for PG if it solves

max
e {W (e) : (PC), (ICq), (ICV ), and (ICτ )}

(PGp)

In deﬁning what a mechanism is, we have allowed PG’s choice to lie in a quite general space. This is
intended to provide robustness to our no-violence result. Having that said, we show in subsection 3.2
that the optimal mechanism is quite simple: it promises the minimum punishment in the equilibrium
path (α = β = 1) and the worse treatment inside prison after any deviation from recommendations
(α = β = λ). Also, trading is always monopoly quantities qm(α).

Remark 10 Problem (PGp) is always feasible, since PG is always able to implement the subgame-
perfect equilibrium described in section 2.2. It is enough to recommend punishments a and b invariant
to history, the violence amounts presented in lemma 4, and no payments from drug dealers.

3.2 Property rights’ optimality and enforceability

In what follows, we provide a quite simple necessary and suﬃcient condition for the no-violence
agreement among criminals (property rights enforceability) to be the optimal extortion mechanism
for PG, i.e., to solve (PGp). Remarks 11 and 14 present properties the optimal extortion mechanism
satisfy, respectively, out-of-equilibrium path and in the equilibrium path.

Remark 11 PG chooses the harshest possible punishment after deviations from the extortion mech-
anism.

Lemmas 12 and 13 establishes such result.

We ﬁrst observe that at the optimal solution we have ajτ (V, Q) = λ for Q 6= qjτ (V ), i.e., PG
chooses the harshest feasible punishment for dealers not complying with its recommendation for
trading after an arbitrary history (τ, V ) with turf-war winner w = j. In order to see this is the case,
observe that when Q 6= qjτ (V ), we have aτ (V, Q) aﬀecting (PGp) only through constraint (ICq).
Also, (ICq) can be rewritten as

π(cid:16)qjτ (V ), ajτ(cid:16)V, qjτ (V )(cid:17)(cid:17) ≥

sup

π(x, ajτ (V, x))

x∈R+\{qjτ (V )}

(11)

10

for each (j, τ, V ) ∈ {1, 2}× R4
+. But from deﬁnition (2), we know that π(x, α) is decreasing in α and,
therefore, π(x, ajτ (V, x)) ≥ π(x, λ) for all feasible punishment ajτ (V, x) ∈ [1, λ]. As a consequence,
we can take αjτ (V, x) = λ for all x 6= qjτ (V ) in order to minimize the right hand side (rhs) of
inequality (11), since in doing so we relax (ICq) without changing any other object in (PGp). Since
supx∈R+\{qjτ (V )} π(x, λ) = πm(λ), we have established the following result:

Lemma 12 Constraint (ICq) can be replaced in problem (PGp) without loss of generality by con-
straints ajτ (V, x) = λ for x 6= qjτ (V ) and

π(cid:16)qjτ (V ), ajτ(cid:16)V, qjτ (V )(cid:17)(cid:17) ≥ πm(λ),

∀(j, τ, V ) ∈ {1, 2} × R4
+.

(IC′
q)

Next, it is optimal to set ajτ (V, qjτ (V )) = bjτ (V ) = λ for V 6= vτ , i.e., PG chooses the harshest
feasible punishments if someone refuses to comply with its recommendation for violence after history
τ . As a consequence, constraint (IC′
q) for V 6= vτ becomes π(qjτ (V ), λ) ≥ πm(λ) and binds since the
unique implementable trading in this case is qjτ (V ) = qm(λ), as implied by lemma 2. In order to see
that the harshest punishment is optimal for V 6= vτ , observe that (ICV ) for Dj can be rewritten as
sup

Uj(cid:16)(x, vkτ ), qjτ (x, vkτ ), aτh(x, vkτ ), qjτ (x, vkτ )i, bτ (x, vkτ )(cid:17) Uj(cid:16)vτ , qjτ (vτ ), aτ [vτ , qjτ (vτ )] , bτ (vτ )(cid:17)(12)

0≤x6=vjτ

q) and the lhs of (12). In particular, they aﬀect (IC′

and that qjτ (V ) and ajτ (V, qjτ (V )), for V 6= vt, aﬀect problem (PGp) only through the left-hand
side (lhs) of (IC′
q) and (12) only through ex-
pected proﬁts π(qjτ (V ), ajτ (V, qjτ (V ))). Therefore, by minimizing the lhs of (IC′
q) until it binds,
we relax (ICV ) without changing the objective function and the remaining constraints. Therefore,
ajτ (V, qjτ (V )) = λ and qjτ (V ) = qm(λ). Finally, from deﬁnition (3), it is clear that the lhs of (12)
is decreasing in bjτ (V ). Then, choosing the maximum feasible punishment bjτ (V ) = λ relax (ICV )
without changing the objective function and the remaining constraints. Thus, we have established
the following property:

Lemma 13 Constraints (IC′
q) and (ICV ) can be replaced in problem (PGp) without loss of generality
by constraints ajτ (V, qjτ (V )) = bjτ (V ) = λ and qjτ (V ) = qm(λ) for V 6= vτ , and for all (j, τ ) ∈
{1, 2} × R2
+.
(IC′′
q )

π (qjτ (vτ ), ajτ [vτ , qjτ (vτ )]) ≥ πm(λ),

Uj(cid:16)vτ , qjτ (vτ ), aτ [vτ , qjτ (vτ )] , bjτ (vτ )(cid:17) ≥ sup

0≤x6=vτ

Uj(cid:16)(x, vkτ ), qm(λ), λ, λ(cid:17)

(IC′

V )

Remark 14 PG minimizes punishment to cooperating dealers and maximizes their proﬁts.

We observe that for the equilibrium path (t, vt), it is optimal to maximize π (qjt(vt), ajt(vt, qjt(vt)))
and to minimize bjt(vt), i.e., PG chooses for cooperating dealers the lightest punishment bjt(vt) =
ajt(vt, qjt(vt))) = 1 and the most proﬁtable trading qjt(vt) = qm(1). Such property comes from the
fact that by maximizing equilibrium proﬁts and minimizing equilibrium punishments, it is possible
to relax constraints (PC), (IC′′
V ) and (ICτ ) without changing objective function in (PGp). To
make this point clear, observe that (ICτ ) can be rewritten as

q ), (IC′

U e

j (tj) − tj ≥ sup(cid:8)U e

j (x) − x : 0 ≤ x 6= tj(cid:9) ,

∀j ∈ {1, 2}.

(13)

From deﬁnition of U e
in the lhs of constraints (13), (PC), (IC′′
and maximizing proﬁts in the equilibrium path.

j (t) and (3), it can be seen that π (qjt(vt), ajt[vt, qjt(vt)]) and bjt(vt) appear only
V ). They are relaxed by minimizing punishment

q ), and (IC′

As a consequence of remark 14, (IC′′

and πm(·) is decreasing. Also, the lhs of both (PC) and (13) becomes U e
νhvjt − tj. We are now able to prove the following lemma:

q ) slacks in the equilibrium path since it equals πm(1) ≥ πm(λ)
j (tj)−tj = (1−ν)Sj(vt)πm(1)−

11

Lemma 15 Constraint (13) binds at the optimal solution e∗ and, therefore,

• PG’s objective function equals

(1 − ν)πm(1) − νh(v1t + v2t) − Xj=1,2

sup

0≤xj6=tj(cid:8)U e

j (xj) − xj(cid:9) ,

• feasibility constraint tj ≥ 0 becomes

Proof. See appendix A.

(1 − ν)Sj(vt)πm(1) − νhvjt ≥ sup(cid:8)U e

j (x) − x : 0 ≤ x 6= tj(cid:9) .

(14)

(15)

Lemma 15 implies that PG’s problem reduces to the choice of (vjτ , qjτ (vτ )) in R2

+ and

q ), (IC′

(ajτ [vτ , qjτ (vτ )], bjτ (vτ )) in [1, λ]2 for each (j, τ ) ∈ {1, 2} × R2
+ in order to maximize (14) subject to
(IC′′
V ), and feasibility constraint (15). Also, because (13) binds at the optimal solution, the
properties established in lemmas 12 and 13 are not only without loss of generality, but also desired
for PG. Most important, property (14) in lemma 15 shows that (if implementable) PG will optimally
choose no violence in the equilibrium path (v1t = v2t = 0). The following proposition is our main
result and establishes a (quite simple) suﬃcient and necessary condition for implementability of such
no-violence agreement.

Proposition 16 If ν < 1 and πm(αj) > 0 for all j, then the optimal extortion mechanism for PG
features no violence in the equilibrium path (vt = (0, 0)) if and only if

πm(1) ≥ 2πm(λ).

(16)

Proof. See appendix A.

Collusion sustainability
Our second result makes more transparent the conditions under which property rights can emerge
after a prison gang becomes hegemonic inside the prison system. The purpose is to highlight the
importance of the speciﬁc features to the S˜ao Paulo’s experience discussed in subsection 1.225.

Corollary 17 Suppose ρ < ¯ρ(1) and ν < 1. Then, optimal extortion mechanism for PG features no
violence in the equilibrium path if either police eﬀectiveness or PG’s power inside prison system is
high enough,

and only if police work has some eﬀectiveness (ρ > 0) and PG has some power inside the prison
system (λ > 1).

ρ
1 − ρ

P (0)

d

λ ≥

(POe)

Proof. From proposition 16, we know that ν < 1 implies that no-violence in the equilibrium
path is optimal if and only if πm(1) ≥ 2πm(λ),
i.e., Γ(ρ, λ) ≡ maxx≥0 [(1 − ρ)P (x)x − ρdx] −
2 maxy≥0 [(1 − ρ)P (y)y − ρdλy] ≥ 0. For the necessity result, observe that Γ(0, λ) = − maxx P (x)x <
0 for all λ ≥ 1, and Γ(ρ, 1) = −πm(1) < 0 for all ρ ∈ [0, ¯ρ). For the suﬃciency result, remember
that π(Q, α) is assumed strictly concave in Q and observe that its derivative at Q = 0 equals
(1 − ρ)P (0) − ρdα. Then, using (5) we have P (0) > ρ
∂Q (0, α) > 0 ⇒ qm(α) > 0. Also,
P (0) ≤ ρ
1−ρ dα ⇒ ∂π
∀Q > 0 ⇒ qm(α) = 0. Now, observe that under (POe) and
ρ < ¯ρ, we have
1−ρdλ and, therefore, qm(1) > 0, qm(λ) = 0. As a conclusion,
πm(1) > 0 = 2πm(λ).

∂Q (Q, α) < 0,
1−ρd < P (0) ≤ ρ

1−ρ dα ⇒ ∂π

ρ

The suﬃciency result holds because by increasing detention probability ρ and/or by increasing
PG’s power to punish deviators λ, the beneﬁt in deviating from collusion is eliminated (πm(λ) → 0),
while some beneﬁt from cooperation is still available (πm(1) > 0).

25The intuition for the necessity result (which already appears in Lessing (2014)) is that traitor dealer could protect
himself from prison gang punishment because he would never be arrested if ρ = 0, and that cooperation with PG would
have no eﬀect on imprisonment costs if λ = 1.

12

4 Empirical analysis: an application to S˜ao Paulo

S˜ao Paulo (or SP), the richest state in Brazil, has experienced a crime dynamics that is compatible
with our theory results. First, the state experienced the strongest homicide rate decline in Brazil
between 2001 and 2013 (30%). This evolution is remarkable diﬀerent from other Brazilian states
in the same period, making SP case an intriguing one.26 But what factors could be driven this
evolution? According to Economics of Crime literature, factors like unemployment and real wages
could be responsible for this evolution. However, SP numbers in these two indicators reveals a pattern
similar to ones found in other states. For example, while in SP, unemployment rate fall 4.8 percentage
points between 2001 and 2012, similar to other states of Southeast region (4.3 p.p.). In terms of per
capita GDP, SP growth between 20-01 and 2012 (2.6% per year) is smaller than neighbor states rates
(3.1% per year). So, because wages and employment were increasing throughout the country in the
2000’s, one can expect falling homicide rates as the rule in Brazil. However, Figure 1(a) shows that
SP’s experience is atypical for the Brazilian context. In the period shown in the ﬁgure, homicide rate
in SP fell on average 6.28% per year, while the average among the remaining states grew on average
2.4% per year.27

Therefore, the question on the causes for such decline must rest on speciﬁc features that diﬀeren-
tiate SP from other Brazilian states. Consistent with the theoretical framework presented in sections
2 and 3, we argue that two factors makes SP’s experience unique in Brazil: (i) imprisonment policy
in SP, which has traditionally been stricter than the other states’, has become even more aggressive
in the 1990’s and (ii) a single group of criminals has consolidated control over prison life and has
propagated it throughout the prison system.

Facts (i) and (ii) have been illustrated in ﬁgures 1(a) and 1(b) in subsection 1.2, but fact (ii)
deserves a more detailed discussion. The hegemonic gang inside SP’s prison system is called Primeiro
Comando da Capital, the SP counterpart of the PG in our model (hereafter SPPG). The origins of
SPPG remounts to 1991, but the ﬁrst known action of the group is its “formal” foundation as a gang
during a rebellion in 1993. In this event, they impose their domination over a prison unity in the
city of Taubat´e (in SP), which was known by its strict discipline. One of the main claims in the
rebelion (attended by the state government) was the transfer of the leaders in the rebellion to the
largest Brazilian prison, Casa de Deten¸c˜ao, located in SP capital, S˜ao Paulo. The domination of
Casa de Deten¸c˜ao was consolidated in 1995, when SPPG members killed other prison gang leaders in
July, 23rd (Christino and Tognolli, 2017). SPPG expanded across prison unities in SP in a similar
fashion, transfers of members to other facilities and subsequent rebellions in which opponents were
killed (generally by decapitation).

The 1990’s was a period of growing violence and strong instability inside the prison system (prison
escapes, rebellions, and murders were frequent) and growth in the number of prisoners. According
to Dias (2011), the murders inside the prison system presented in ﬁgure 1(b) for the period between
1996 and 2001 resulted from SPPG members eliminating rival gangs inside prison. The sharp decline
in murders inside the prison system after 2001, on the other hand, is identiﬁed by Dias (2011) as
evidence that SPPG becomes an hegemonic gang in SP prison system28.

Another important piece of evidence about SPPG domination is the series of rebellions that took

26Only two other states (Rio de Janeiro and Pernambuco) has experienced a fall in homicide rates in the period,

but they were much smaller than SP’s one.

27Homicide rate’s fall in ﬁgure 1(a) was driven by falling murder rates instead of manslaughter, as shown in graph
??(c). That way, we discard unintentional acts (like transit accidents, for example) as an explanation. Additionally,
non-violent crimes do not show the same sharp decline in SP.

28With the elimination of its main rivals, the consolidation of its domination and the conquest of hegemony, the
Primeiro Comando da Capital achieved external and internal stability and promoted a complex accommodation of
relations with the government, making it possible to completely reconﬁgure the social relations among the prisoners,
constructing a new social order (...) characterized by a new balance of power in which physical violence ceases to
be the central element of the domination relations.(...) The reduction of the killings of prisoners is the eﬀect of the
consolidation of a power against which there are no longer rivals. So killing is not necessary anymore. (Dias, 2011)

13

place in 2001 (hereafter “mega-rebellion”). They simultaneously happened in 29 out 63 prison units
and were the ﬁrst public signal of SPPG domination of life matters inside the prison system. The
mega-rebellion happened in February, 18th, during the tradicional visiting of relatives on Sundays.
Up to this date, Sunday was a “sacred” day inside the prison according to an informal conduct code
among prisoners that prohibited ﬁghts, rebellions, etc. This code was then broken with 25 thousand
prisoners in 29 prisons rebelling against the transfer of some SPPG leaders from Casa de Deten¸c˜ao.
Relatives of prisoners were taken as hostages and the rebellion started in all prisons in the same
hour, denoting that they are communicating each other through cell phones.

The expansion of SPPG through the system between 2001 and 2006 took place with few episodes
of violence inside prisons. The pattern was shaped by the construction of new prison facilities across
the state. According to Dias (2011), as a strategy to diﬃcult the type of coordination observed
during the mega-rebellion in 2001, the new prison unities were built in smaller sizes and were located
in a dispersed way across the state. The implied transfers of prisoners from old facilities to the new
ones made it possible to SPPG to disseminate across the state without using violence against rival
gangs. As a piece of evidence of such dissemination, SPPG organized in May (12nd) of 2006 riots in
74 out of 130 prisons. As the main demand, they protested against the transfer of its leader to a
maximum security prison at Presidente Venceslau (a city in SP). Endowed with such power over the
prison system, SPPG coordinated attacks outside the prison system at the same time of the rebellions:
55 police stations were attacked and 30 policemen were murdered.

Once we have this brief history of the origin, growth and hegemony of SPPG, we are able to
precisely present our main empirical task. We investigate the impact of the emergence of this group
inside SP’s prison system into the correlation between drug dealing and homicides. The objective
is an empirical analysis for the SP’s experience on the main testable implication of our theory:
correlation between violent crimes (homicides) and drug dealing changes from a positive level before
the channel of inﬂuence is established (from inside to outside prison system) to no correlation after
that.

The main challenge in such analysis is how to deﬁne a variable that incorporates the power of
the SPPG inside the prison system. We capture the growing power of SPPG over time and space by
studying every rebellion in SP since 1993 and identifying those that shows murders with decapitation
as a clear evidence of SPPG domination. We assume that once SPPG dominates a prison inside a micro-
region (a small set of neighbour municipalities), its inﬂuence cover every city in this micro-region.
The ﬁgure 3(a) shows the fraction of cities dominated by SPPG according to this variable.

Figure 3: Fraction of cities with SPPG’s inﬂuence

As it is possible to see, after 2001, there is an stability in the number of cities over SPPG domination.
However, after this period, there is also new prisons created. So, as a robustness check, we construct
an alternative SPPG variable assuming that all new prisons opened after 2001 born already dominated
by SPPG (and, consequently, all cities in its micro-region). With this variable, the conﬁguration of
proportion of cities dominated by SPPG is in Figure 3(b).

As a strong evidence that our strategy in constructing SPPG variable is trustworthy, it leads to
the identiﬁcation as a dominated prison of 25 out of 29 prisons that participated in the “2001 mega-

14

rebellion”. Two of these four prisons were created only two years before the mega-rebellion, what
can explain the fact that we do not atribute it to SPPG domination up to 2001.

Data and Econometric Model
In order to investigate the relationship between drug traﬃc and homicides before and after SPPG in
municipalities, we estimate the following model:

Homicideit = δ0 + δ1SPPGit + δ2Drugit + δ3SPPG ∗ Drugit + θX + ψt + ηi + εit

(17)

where Homicideit is the intentional homicide rate (per 100 thousands inhabitants) of the municipality
i in year t; SPPGit is a dummy variable indicating the year from which the municipality i becomes
inﬂuenced by SPPG. Drugit is the drug traﬃc rate (occurrences per 100 thousands inhabitants) in
municipality i in year t; X is a matrix of control variables (formal sector wages Gini index; population
density and urbanization rate); ψt is a set of year dummies; ηi is a set of municipality dummies and
εit is an error term.

We have a panel data of municipalities of SP, encompassing the period between 1997 and 2006.
This period is characterized by the growth and posterior fall of homicides in SP, as well as is the
period of growth and consolidation of SPPG in the incarceration system.

Clearly, the estimation of (17) is biased by ﬁxed eﬀects, because homicides and drug traﬃc are
simultaneously determined and drug traﬃc is subject to measurement error. In order to handle this
problem, we use an instrumental variable approach. In particular, we use two variables as instruments
for drug traﬃc. The ﬁrst one is the number of people covered by cell phones in the micro-region.
We have information about the exact date of the installation of the ﬁrst cell phone operator in each
municipality of SP state. There is variation both in time and space in this variable and the period
that we are considering encompass exactly the beginning of cell phone adoption in Brazil. The idea
is that cell phone is an exogenous innovation that facilitates SPPG organization and reduces the risk
of drug traﬃc activity. On the other hand, there is no plausible reason to think that cell phone
adoption can be related to homicide rates except by drug traﬃc rates. The other instrument is the
formal sector median wage of the municipality. The idea is that richer cities exhibit a more proﬁtable
drug market, leading to higher drug traﬃc but these aspect if unrelated to εit.

Descriptive Statistics
S˜ao Paulo has 645 municipalities, but in our paper we excluded those in microregions that do not
have a prison unit. This is because the way we construct SPPG variable it cannot take a value 1 for
cities in microregions without prison units and our sample ends with 439 cities.

Figure 4(a) shows the scatterplot of drug traﬃc and homicides in our sample over time. We
can see that while there is a important decrease in homicide rate, the drug traﬃc has an opposite
movement. But this aggregate ﬁgure do not precisely show that the correlation of drug traﬃc and
homicide has declined with the growth of SPPG power. We then estimate the OLS model below in
order to compute the correlation of these two crimes over time. The results are reported in 4(b).

Figure 4: Relation between drug dealing and homicides

Homicideit = α0 + α1Drugit +

δtγt +

2007

X1996

2007

X1996

15

δt ∗ Drugit ∗ Θt + εit

(18)

Figure 4(b) shows that the correlation falls overtime.

It is a reasonable pathway, considering
that in 2001 SPPG dominated a large number of cities. So it is expected a fall in correlation after
that. However, as we stated before, the SPPG entrance was heterogeneous in space and time. So, we
estimate the following equation by OLS, relating the timing of entrance of SPPG in the city (lagged
up to 6 years and forward 6 years for each city).

Homicideit = α0 + α1Drugit +

SPPGijγj +

6

Xj=−6

6

Xj=−6

SPPGij ∗ Drugit ∗ Θj + εit

(19)

The results are reported in Figure 4(c) and show that before SPPG entrance, the correlation
between homicides and traﬃc was positive and two years after SPPG entrance in the municipality,
there is no more correlation among the crimes, a stylized fact in line with the predictions of our
theory.

Results
We present the estimation results of equation (17) in table 129.

Table 1: Econometric estimations of equation (17)

Drug*SPPG

Drug

Gini

SPPG

FE

-0.0006
(0.0484)

0.016
(0.043)

-0.814***

(0.179)
0.117
(1.950)

Population Density -0.026***

Urbanization Rate

Year Dummies
P-value δ1 + δ2 = 0
N

(0.007)
0.649***
(0.165)

Yes
0.434
4873

IV-FE
-1.216***
(0.278)
2.013**
(0.828)
0.126
(0.577)
36.58***
(8.12)
-0.029*
(0.015)
0.098
(0.583)
Yes
0.074
4873

IV-FE
-1.536***
(0.430)
2.831***
(0.954)

FE
0.038
(0.036)
-0.015
(0.034)
-0.782*** 0.345
(0.171)
-4.643
(1.790)
-0.024*** -0.039**
(0.005)
0.493***
(0.169)
Yes
0.190
4873

(0.016)
0.370
(0.543)
Yes
0.299
4873

(0.673)
48.96***
(12.18)

The second stage result indicates the importance to consider the IV approach. The coeﬃcients
of drug dealing is positive in both IV estimations (supporting our theory implication). Before SPPG
inﬂuence in the city, an increase in drug dealing in 1 case per 100.000 inhabitants is associated with
a 2.0 to 2.8 increase in intentional homicide rate. After the SPPG enters the city, these relationship is
strongly attenuated (-1.2 to -1.5). Testing the null hypothesis that the sum of these coeﬃcients are
equal to zero (our second theoretical prediction) leads to not reject the equality of these coeﬃcients
at 5% level in all cases, but in one estimation, we reject the null at 10%.

Our results shows that after SPPG enters in a city, there is a fall in the correlation between
homicides and drug dealing, even after taking into count other regressors, time and cities speciﬁc
eﬀects and the endogeneity of drug dealing and homicides.

29The dependent variable is the intentional homicide rate (per 100 thousand inhabitants). In the ﬁrst two columns,
the SPPG variable considers that prisons created after 2001 ”born” dominated by SPPG. The last two columns do not
consider new prisons after 2001 in the variable deﬁnition. All models are estimated with cluster of micro-regions,
because SPPG variable is aggregated at this level. In columns 2 and 4 the instruments used are the number of people
in the micror-region that lives in an area covered by cell phones and the median wage in the formal labor market.
Data covered 443 cities in the period between 1997 and 2007.

16

5 Final remarks

We have provided a new channel through which property rights can emerge in illicit drug markets.
Instead of resorting to inﬁnite horizon and high patience, as Castillo (2013) proposes to do, we
extend the two stage game in Burrus (1999) to show that the channel of inﬂuence studied by Lessing
(2014), from inside to outside the prison system, makes reasonable to expect turf wars to cease after
a prison gang becomes hegemonic inside prison system. Such expectation is shown reasonable using
the mechanism design approach. Speciﬁcally, the hegemonic group of prisoners is shown to desire and
to be able to promote the collusive agreement among dealers under which no violence is performed.
It is worth emphasizing that features in our model to illicit drug markets does not include some
most commonly expected reasons for the peaceful arrangement to be attractive to drug dealing.
Players do not spend productive resources in the conﬂict since there is no resource cost for violence
acts. Violence eﬀort aﬀects only the probability distribution over turf war results, implying no
losses from dead personnel or destruction. Also, demand for drugs and police work are invariant to
violence levels and prison gang power to distort punishments is bounded. This property reinforces
our argument for reasonability in predicting property rights to take place, since they do take place
in our model even without the features just mentioned

We have argued for empirical content to our theory by presenting our motivating case, the fall
on violent crimes rate in SP in the 2000’s. The data strongly support the ﬁrst theoretical prediction
(correlation between drug dealing and murders is positive before SPPG) and do not reject the second
(correlation is inexistent after SPPG) one at the level of signiﬁcance of 5%.

More than having conclusive evidence on our theory for the changes in the pattern on crime
rates, the strength of our reasoning comes from bringing consistence for apparently unrelated pieces
of information, such as falling rates of violent crimes both inside and outside the prison system,
increasing drug dealing in general, the existence of parallel Justice System (Tribunal do Crime), and
monthly payments from outside to inside-prison-system criminals (Mensalidades).

For the discussion about public policies against violence, our theoretical framework weakens
reasoning for drug legalization. Economists’ argument for drug legalization as a way to ﬁght violent
crimes would have no eﬀect if property rights have already been enforced in illicit drug markets.

References

A. A. Alchian. Property rights. In S. N. Durlauf and L. E. Blume, editors, The New Palgrave Dictionary of

Economics. Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke, 2008.

U. G. Assembly. Universal declaration of human rights. Resolution adopted by the General Assembly, 10

(12), 1948.

G. S. Becker. Crime and punishment: An economic approach. The Journal of Political Economy, 76(2):

169–217, 1968.

C. Biderman, J. M. De Mello, and A. Schneider. Dry laws and homicides: Evidence from the s˜ao paulo

metropolitan area*. The economic journal, 120(543):157–182, 2010.

R. T. Burrus. Do eﬀorts to reduce the supply of illicit drugs increase turf war violence? a theoretical

analysis. Journal of Economics and Finance, 23(3):226–234, 1999.

M. Caldara. The origin of the state as a stationary bandit: How property rights evolve out of anarchy. 2013.

J. C. Castillo. Should drug policy be aimed at cartel leaders? breaking down a peaceful equilibrium. Breaking

Down a Peaceful Equilibrium (August 2, 2013). Documento CEDE, (2013-41), 2013.

M. Christino and C. Tognolli. La¸cos de sangue: A hist´oria secreta do PCC:. 2017. ISBN 9788582304266.

URL https://books.google.com.br/books?id=QGJADwAAQBAJ.

17

D. J. Clark and C. Riis. Contest success functions: an extension. Economic Theory, 11(1):201–204, 1998.

J. M. De Mello. Assessing the crack hypothesis using data from a crime wave: the case of s˜ao paulo. Texto

para Discuss˜ao, (586), 2010.

J. M. P. de Mello. Reassessing the Demography Hypothesis: the Great Brazilian Crime Shift. Textos para
discuss˜ao 579, Department of Economics PUC-Rio (Brazil), Sep 2010. URL http://ideas.repec.org/p/
rio/texdis/579.html.

H. Demsetz. Toward a theory of property rights. The American economic review, pages 347–359, 1967.

C. C. N. Dias. Da pulveriza¸c˜ao ao monop´olio da violˆencia: expans˜ao e consolida¸c˜ao do Primeiro Comando

da Capital (PCC) no sistema carcer´ario paulista. PhD thesis, Universidade de S˜ao Paulo, 2011.

G. Feltran. The management of violence on the s˜ao paulo periphery: the repertoire of normative apparatus

in the pcc era. Vibrant, 7(2):109–134, 2010.

M. R. Garﬁnkel and S. Skaperdas. Economics of conﬂict: An overview. Handbook of defense economics, 2:

649–709, 2007.

H. I. Grossman and D. Mej´ıa. The war against drug producers. Economics of Governance, 9(1):5–23, 2008.

J. Hirshleifer. Conﬂict and rent-seeking success functions: Ratio vs. diﬀerence models of relative success.

Public choice, 63(2):101–112, 1989.

L. W. Lee. Would harassing drug users work? Journal of Political Economy, pages 939–959, 1993.

B. Lessing. A hole at the center of the state: Prison gangs and the limits to punitive power. CDDRL

Working Papers, 2014.

M. Polo. Internal cohesion and competition among criminal organisations. In G. Fiorentini and S. Peltz-
man, editors, The economics of organised crime, pages 87–108. Cambridge University Press, 1996. ISBN
9780511751882. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511751882.008. Cambridge Books Online.

S. Poret. Paradoxical eﬀects of law enforcement policies: the case of the illicit drug market. International

Review of Law and Economics, 22(4):465–493, 2002.

S. Poret and C. T´ej´edo. Law enforcement and concentration in illicit drug markets. European Journal of

Political Economy, 22(1):99–114, 2006.

P. Reuter and M. A. Kleiman. Risks and prices: an economic analysis of drug enforcement. Crime and

justice, pages 289–340, 1986.

S. Skaperdas. Contest success functions. Economic Theory, 7(2):283–290, 1996.

G. Tullock. Eﬃcient rent-seeking.

In R. D. T. Buchanan, James M. and G. Tullock, editors, Toward a
Theory of the Rent-Seeking Society, pages 97–112. College Station: Texas A&M University Press, 1980.

J. J. Waiselﬁsz. Mapa da Violˆencia 2006: os jovens do Brasil. Organiza¸c˜ao do Estados Ibero-Americanos

para a Educa¸c˜ao, a Ciˆencia ea Cultura, 2006.

J. J. Waiselﬁsz. Mapa da violˆencia 2013:

homic´ıdios e juventude no brasil.

Dispon´ıvel em:

http://www.mapadaviolencia.org.br/pdf2013/mapa2013 homicidios juventude.pdf, 10, 2013.

18

A Proofs

V ) is nonnegative for all τ , since Dj can always get nonnegative payoﬀ by choosing no violence:

Proof of Lemma 15. We ﬁrst establish that if (13) and (IC′
that the rhs of (IC′
sup0≤x6=vjτ Uj ((x, vkτ ), qm(λ), λ, λ) ≥ Uj ((0, vkτ ), qm(λ), λ, λ) ≥ (1 − ν)Sj(0, vkτ )πm(λ) ≥ 0. Therefore, the lhs of
(IC′
j (0) ≥ 0. It follows that, if (13) and (IC′
V )
hold, then (PC) is satisﬁed since U e
j (0) − 0 ≥ 0, where the ﬁrst inequality
comes from (13) and the second one has been just established.
Now, suppose that the optimal extortion mechanism e = (t, v, q, a, b) features (13) slacking for at least one dealer

j (tj ) − tj ≥ sup0≤x6=tj(cid:0)U e

V ) are satisﬁed, then (PC) holds. In eﬀect, observe

V ) is also nonnegative. In particular, (IC′

j (x) − x(cid:1) ≥ U e

V ) for τ = (0, tk) implies U e

j ∈ {1, 2}, i.e.,

(1 − ν)Sj (vt)πm(1) − νhvjt − tj > sup

x (cid:8)U e

j (x) − x : 0 ≤ x 6= tj(cid:9) .

(20)

Then, consider an alternative extortion mechanism ˆe = (ˆt, ˆv, ˆq, ˆa, ˆb) that requires payments ˆt = (tj + ε, tk) for ε > 0
and prescribes

(ˆvτ , ˆqτ (V ), ˆaτ (V, Q), ˆbτ (V )) =


j (ˆtj) = U e

j (tj), U ˆe

(cid:16)vt, qt(V ), at(V, Q), bt(V )(cid:17),
(cid:16)vˆt, qˆt(V ), aˆt(V, Q), bˆt(V )(cid:17),
(cid:16)vτ , qτ (V ), aτ (V, Q), bτ (V )(cid:17),

j (ˆtj), and U ˆe

j (τj ) = U e

j (tj ) = U e

if τ = ˆt

if τ = t

otherwise.

j (τj ) for all τ /∈ {t, ˆt}.

That way, we assure that U ˆe

Since PG’s objective function is stricly increasing in extortion payments, mechanism ˆe is strictly better than e.
Also, because constraints (IC′′
V ) are satisﬁed by e, they also hold under ˆe since both mechanisms share the
same violence and trading recomendations. For ˆe to be shown implementable, it remains to verify that (13) is satisﬁed
under ˆe. First,

q ) and (IC′

sup

x (cid:8)U ˆe

j (x) − x : 0 ≤ x 6= ˆtj(cid:9) = max(U ˆe
≥ max(U e

j (tj) − tj,

j (ˆtj) − ˆtj,

sup

0≤x /∈{ˆtj ,tj }(cid:8)U ˆe
0≤x /∈{ˆtj ,tj }(cid:8)U e

sup

j (x) − x(cid:9)) = max(U e
j (x) − x(cid:9)) = sup
x (cid:8)U e

j (ˆtj ) − tj,

sup

0≤x /∈{ˆtj ,tj }(cid:8)U e

j (x) − x(cid:9))

j (x) − x : 0 ≤ x 6= tj(cid:9)

(21)

where the second equality comes from U ˆe

j (tj) = U e

j (ˆtj ), and U ˆe

j (τj) = U e

j (τj) for all τ /∈ {t, ˆt}.
j (x) − x : 0 ≤ x 6= ˆtj(cid:9) = supx(cid:8)U e

holds for suﬃciently low ε when (20) holds. Again, we have shown that (13) is satisﬁed by ˆe.

j (x) − x(cid:9) = sup0≤x /∈{ˆtj ,tj }(cid:8)U ˆe
j (x) − x(cid:9) = U ˆe

j (ˆtj ) − ˆtj) = ε + sup0≤x6=tj(cid:8)U e
j (x) − x(cid:9)(cid:17) = U e

j (x) − x(cid:9). In eﬀect, suppose this is not the case. Then, sup0≤x /∈{ˆtj ,tj }(cid:8)U ˆe
j (x) − x(cid:9) = sup0≤x6=tj(cid:8)U e
j (tj) − tj and, therefore, sup0≤x6=ˆtj(cid:8)U ˆe
j (x) − x(cid:9) − (U e
j (ˆtj ) − ˆtj, as implied by the last equality in (21). We conclude that U ˆe
j (ˆtj ) − ˆtj −(cid:16)ε + sup0≤x6=tj(cid:8)U e

If (21) holds equality, then from (20) we have that supx(cid:8)U ˆe
j (x) − x : 0 ≤ x 6= tj(cid:9) <
j (ˆtj)− ˆtj holds for suﬃciently low ε and (13) is satisﬁed by ˆe. On the other hand, if (21) holds with stricly inequality,
U ˆe
j (tj)−tj ≥ sup0≤x /∈{ˆtj ,tj }(cid:8)U ˆe
then U ˆe
j (x) − x(cid:9) >
j (ˆtj)−ˆtj and, therefore, sup0≤x6=ˆtj(cid:8)U ˆe
j (tj)−tj > U e
U ˆe
j (x) − x(cid:9),
It follows that, sup0≤x6=ˆtj(cid:8)U ˆe
j (x) − x(cid:9) ≤
a contradiction.
j (tj) − tj + sup0≤x6=tj(cid:8)U e
U ˆe
j (x) − x(cid:9), where the inequality comes from
j (ˆtj) − ˆtj −
sup0≤x6=tj(cid:8)U e
j (x) − x(cid:9) ≥ U e
j (tj) − tj − sup0≤x6=tj(cid:8)U e
sup0≤x6=ˆtj(cid:8)U ˆe
j (x) − x(cid:9) ≥ U ˆe
j (x) − x(cid:9) − 2ε > 0
V ) is satisﬁed for τ = t and vt = (0, 0) if and only if (1 − ν) πm(1)
Proof of proposition 16. Note that (IC′
2 ≥
supx>0 {(1 − ν)Sj(x, 0)πm(λ) − νhλx} = (1 − ν)πm(λ), which is equivalent condition (16) when ν < 1. Because we
have already established that (IC′′
q ) for τ 6= t hold.
Oﬀ-equilibrium (IC′′
q ) is trivially satisﬁed by ajτ (vτ , qjτ (vτ )) = λ and qjτ (vτ ) = qm(λ). Feasibility (15) holds be-
cause under no violence in the equilibrium path U e
j (x) − x(cid:1),
where the last inequality comes from the following reasoning. We argue that oﬀ-equilibrium (τ 6= t) recommendation
ajτ (vτ , qjτ (vτ )) = bjτ (vτ ) = λ, qjτ (vτ ) = qm(λ) and vjτ = V ∗(λ) ≡ (1 − ν)πm(λ)/4νhλ is incentive compatible
since it satisfy (IC′′
q ) trivially binds and
(IC′
, where
the ﬁrst equality is implied by lemma 4. For slacking feasibility, observe that the lhs in (15) under such recom-
mendation satisﬁes (1 − ν) πm(1)
, while its rhs equals
sup0≤x6=tj(cid:16)Uj ([V ∗(λ), V ∗(λ)], qm(λ), λ, λ) − x(cid:17) = (1 − ν) πm(λ)

i > (1 − ν) πm(λ)
However, such oﬀ-equilibrium recommendation does not necessarily minimize sup(cid:8)U e

V ) binds because supo≤x6=vjτ Uj ([x, V ∗(λ)], qm(λ), λ, λ) = Uj ([V ∗(λ), V ∗(λ)], qm(λ), λ, λ) = (1 − ν) πm(λ)

q ) holds for τ = t, it remains to show that both (15) and (IC′′

j (x) − x : 0 ≤ x 6= tj(cid:9) as

desired to increase PG’s objective function (14) and to relax (15).

4νh = (1 − ν)h πm(1)

4 ≥ sup0≤x6=τj(cid:0)U e

V ) with equality and (15) with strict inequality.

In other words, the unique SPNE of the game

2 − νh(1 − ν) πm(λ)

j (tj) = (1 − ν) πm(1)

2 ≥ (1 − ν) πm(λ)

2 − πm(λ)

In eﬀect, (IC′′

q ) and (IC′

4

4

4

4

.

19

when treatment inside prison system is homogeneous among dealers and equal to λ is not necessarily the harshest
implementable punishment after a deviation from t. Thus, the rhs of (15) satisﬁes

j (x) − x(cid:1) ≤ sup0≤x6=tj(cid:16)Uj ([V ∗(λ), V ∗(λ)], qm(λ), λ, λ) − x(cid:17) = (1 − ν) πm(λ)

4

sup0≤x6=tj(cid:0)U e
B Figures

.

(a) Drug dealing

(b) Robbery followed by death (c) Robbery (except vehicles)

(d) Vehicle robbery

(e) Theft (except vehicles)

(f) Vehicle theft

(g) Murder

(h) Attempted murder

(i) Murder and manslaughter:
whole state

(j) Detentions

(k) Conﬁscated guns

(l) Rapes

(m) Bank robbery

(n) Cargo robbery

(o) Kidnapping

Figure 5: General overview on crime types (Source: SAP/SP)

20

