Mobility in Cities: Distributional Impact Analysis of Transportation Improvement in São Paulo Metropolitan RegionEduardo A. Haddad, Nancy Lozano Gracia, Eduardo Germani, Renato S. Vieira, Ana I. Aguilera, Bianca Bianchi Alves, Shohei Nakamura, and Emmanuel SkoufiasAbstract. This paper focuses on the estimation of the impacts of transport investments/policies using a spatial computable general equilibrium (SCGE) model integrated to a travel demand model, following the methodology presented in Haddad et al. (2015). In order to enhance our understanding of the distributional impacts of transportation improvements in Brazilian cities, we simulate the impact of different types of mobility investments in the São Paulo Metropolitan Region (SPMR). To explore further the income effects of infrastructure investments, we also conduct microsimulation exercises integrated to the SCGE results. We look at 10 different scenarios, ranging from a series of infrastructure-related interventions – considering the expansion of the mass-transit public transportation network – to policies that focus on monetary disincentives to the use of cars. The simulations results suggest trade-offs between efficiency and equity.Keywords. General equilibrium; urban mobility; accessibility; productivity; transport infrastructureResumo. Este artigo avalia os impactos de políticas de mobilidade urbana na Região Metropolitana de São Paulo (SPMR) usando um modelo de equilíbrio geral calculável espacial (SCGE) integrado a um modelo de demanda de viagens, seguindo a metodologia apresentada em Haddad et al. (2015). A fim de explorarmos os efeitos da dos investimentos em infraestrutura sobre a distribuição de renda, realizamos exercícios de microssimulação integrados aos resultados do SCGE. Consideramos 10 cenários diferentes, que vão desde uma série de intervenções relacionadas à infraestrutura – considerando a expansão da rede de transporte público– até políticas que se concentram em desincentivos monetários para o uso de carros. Os resultados das simulações sugerem trade-offs entre eficiência e equidade.Palavras-chave. Equilíbrio geral; mobilidade urbana; acessibilidade; produtividade; infraestrutura de transporteÁrea 10 – Economia Regional e UrbanaJEL. C63; C68; R13; R421. IntroductionGood connectivity within cities is an essential input for productivity and livability in cities, but the distributive impacts of improvements in within-city mobility are not well understood. This work aims at filling this gap by exploring the impacts of alternative infrastructure investments and mobility policies on growth, the income distribution of households and the internal distribution of economic activity.This paper focuses on the estimation of the impacts of transport investments/policies using a spatial computable general equilibrium (SCGE) model integrated to a travel demand model, following the methodology presented in Haddad et al. (2015). In order to enhance our understanding of the distributional impacts of transportation improvements in Brazilian cities, we simulate the impact of different types of mobility investments in the São Paulo Metropolitan Region (SPMR). To explore further the income effects of infrastructure investments, we also conduct microsimulation exercises integrated to the SCGE results. We look at ten different scenarios, ranging from a series of infrastructure-related interventions – considering the expansion of the mass-transit public transportation network – to policies that focus on monetary disincentives to the use of cars. In the first group of simulations, the expansion of the supply of transportation infrastructure tends to reduce the average time in public transportation, potentially reducing congestion through the migration of part of individual transport trips, and decreasing the generalized cost of public transportation to passengers. The second group of interventions relates to policies to restrict car access to the city, increasing the generalized cost of individual transportation. In such cases, potential mode switch away from cars also tends to reduce congestion. The simulations results suggest potential trade-offs between efficiency and equity in the case of policies that restrict access of cars to the city. However, infrastructure-related interventions, not surprisingly, are associated with increases in GDP and, while their impacts on income distribution are relatively more modest, they suggest that improvements in the overall economy brought by transport investments are not coming at the expense of lower-wage workers.In what follows, we discuss the motivation for this study in section 2. We then present some stylized facts regarding the internal organization and commuting patterns at the SPMR in section 3, and discuss the main methodological aspects of the integrated modeling system in section 4. Results from the integrated modeling framework, focusing on the SCGE outcomes, are presented and discussed in section 5. Section 7 concludes.  2. Motivation and BackgroundCities come in different sizes and forms. However, cities that have been able to grow large and remain productive and competitive such as London, Singapore and New York, all have one thing in common: good connective infrastructure has allowed all areas of the city to remain connected. Connectivity has allowed the city to grow as a single entity.Connectivity is essential for the success of a city for several reasons. First, firms benefit from good links to their input and output markets. A well-connected city provides firms with a larger pool of labor and bigger markets to sell their products. Second, households also benefit from good connections in a city. They can reach more opportunities in shorter times, and have access to larger pools of goods, including housing, to choose from. When households and firms are well connected, productivity and livability can be higher (Fernald, 1999; Ghani et al, 2012; Rospabé and Selod, 2006; Gobillon et al 2007; Gobillon and Selod, 2014). Improvements to connectivity can be achieved in at least two ways. First, by reducing the cost of transport per unit of distance traveled. This can be done either through infrastructure investments that reduce commuting times between different points in the city, through subsidies that reduce the price paid by consumers, or through demand management instruments that reduce congestion and commuting times. Second, policymakers can also reduce the distance between firms (jobs) and households, by providing incentives for the co-location of these two types of actors through zoning and land use planning decisions. Policies and investments along these two lines should be seen as complements rather than substitutes, as coordinated land use and transport planning could help increasing densities that allow the economies of scale needed in transport systems to be exploited, while also managing the negative externalities that arise from concentration of firms and people, such as congestion and pollution.Computable general equilibrium (CGE) models have been used in the literature to estimate the effects of improvements in transport infrastructure and transport policy changes on macroeconomic variables as well as to assess the impact that such investments may have on the overall income distribution (World Bank, 2008; Haddad and Hewings, 2005; Haddad et al., 2011; Kim et al., 2004, among others). More recently, a SCGE model integrated to a transport model that measures accessibility in the SPMR has been applied to estimate the economic impacts of the subway system, and to assess the impacts of alternative investments on the local and national economy (Haddad et al., 2015).In this paper, we take a step forward in trying to understand the impacts of improvements to intra-city connectivity on household income distribution, by combining the SCGE model with a microsimulation model that evaluates the impact of investments or other policy changes on households’ incomes. We also extend previous work by considering improvements to the city transport network that go beyond the existing metro infrastructure and include scenarios that consider both improvements to the transport network and demand management alternatives.As mentioned above, policymakers have two main instruments at hand to improve connectivity in a city: on one hand, investments in the physical infrastructure or demand management strategies that reduce the cost of transport per distance travelled, and on the other hand, land use policies that reduce the distance traveled. To keep results tractable, in this work we focus on understanding the impacts of changes in generalized transport costs through improvements to the transport system and the use of mobility policies to reduce the use of private vehicles in the central areas of the SPMR, and leave aside the second set of instruments related to land use management policies. However, we recognize this as a limitation of the current exercise and we highlight this as an important extension that can be considered in future work.  Transport challenges in São Paulo Metropolitan RegionAs cities grow in size and income, connectivity challenges become more complex. For example, demand for private cars increases with income, and hence pollution and congestion tend to rise. Similarly, as demand for land increases with more people and firms coming to the city, the poor are often forced to locate in peripheral areas where land is cheaper but opportunities are limited. São Paulo is no exception. A large proportion of the poorest households are located in peripheral areas, where density of employment is low and connective infrastructure is weak (Villaça, 2011). Forced to live in areas were land is affordable but where opportunities are limited, these households are left behind bearing high costs (monetary as well as non-monetary, e.g. time) remaining in poverty.To tackle connectivity challenges, the City of São Paulo together with the State government have taken important steps to improve connective infrastructure in the metropolitan area, investing in the construction and expansion of the underground metro system, improvements to the existing suburban rail network, and physical integration of the various modes of public transport. However, challenges remain. Today, about 31 percent of trips are done in private vehicles, 37 percent with public transport, and 32 percent with non-motorized vehicles. The metro system is 78.5 km in length, and, while it is one of the most productive in the world in terms of passengers per kilometer and passengers per car-kilometer, its mode share is still low when compared to other metropolitan areas of similar size, mainly because of its limited length. The metro system is complemented by 261 km of suburban rail system and a municipal bus system that includes around 4,500 km of routes and almost 15,000 vehicles. The city also has a roadway network of about 17,000 km within the municipality, and the municipality has recently invested on a significant expansion of the bikeways and bus corridor systems, adding 400 km of bike infrastructure and 400 km of bus-only lanes on existing roadway system (World Bank, 2016; São Paulo City Study, 2011).There are currently different investments under consideration and planned for the next 10-15 years. However, the impacts of infrastructure investments on employment and on household income distribution are yet to be better understood. By defining different scenarios of infrastructure investments and mobility policies, this work assesses the impacts of transport-related interventions in the SPMR on growth, household income distribution, the location of economic activities within the metropolitan area, as well as CO2 emissions. 3. The Study RegionThe Internal Structure of the SPMR – Some Stylized FactsSPMR, the main economic and financial center of Brazil, consists of 39 municipalities in an intense process of conurbation. It is the fourth largest urban agglomeration of the world, and the largest urban agglomeration in the country, with about 10% of the national population (around 20 million inhabitants), and responsible for 19% of Brazilian GDP. The city of São Paulo is the core of the metropolitan area and accounts for 5.9% of the country’s population and 12% of its GDP. From a stylized perspective, the internal organization of the SPMR may be approached by a Muth-Mills-Alonso urban model, having as the central business district (CBD) the extended center of the city of São Paulo (Haddad et al., 2015). Even though the broadly-defined CBD concentrates a great proportion of the jobs, a considerable level of employment decentralization is observed in the region (Figure 1). Households spread across the territory, mainly located in the areas surrounding the center, with population density declining in the boundaries of the territory of the metropolis (Figure 2). Figure 1. Employment Density in the SPMR, 2008Source: Authors’ elaboration using data from RAIS, Ministry of Labor, IBGEFigure 2. Population Density in the SPMR, 2010Source: Authors’ elaboration using data from Demographic Census, IBGE, 2010According to the 2010 Population Census, the city of São Paulo – the core of the SPMR – received daily an inflow of almost one million commuters, representing 15.4% of workers in the city. The great majority of commuters’ flows are from peripheral regions in São Paulo and other municipalities to the metropolitan business centers in the central and western zones of São Paulo city. Low-income residents are overwhelmingly concentrated in the periphery (Figure 3), where connectivity is weaker. Facing larger commuting times and relying more on public transit (Figure 4), lower income residents tend to have lower access to jobs.One important implication of the pattern of spatial distribution of workers and residents observed in the SPMR is that it will make it harder for some workers to access jobs. In particular, the somehow diffuse job decentralization makes it harder for workers with no car to reach potential employers once these are located far from the focal points of accessibility associated with the public transit infrastructure. This spatial mismatch makes it much harder for low-income workers to find employment since they traditionally reside in the less central parts of cities (Figure 5).Figure 3. Average Household Income in the SPMR, 2010Source: Demographic Census, IBGE, 2010Figure 4. Share of Commuting by Public Transportation in the SPMR, 2007Source: OD Survey, 2007
Figure 5. Unemployment Rate in the SPMR, 2010Source: Demographic Census, IBGE, 2010Commuting Patterns in the SPMR – Some Stylized FactsAll commuting data used in this study comes from the most recent Origin Destination Origin Destination (OD) Survey of 2007, carried out by the São Paulo Metropolitan Company – Metro. This survey interviewed around 30,000 households in the SPMR. The information collected in the survey includes trip duration, motive, mode, origin, destination, and socioeconomic characteristics of households. The OD Survey divided the SPMR into 460 traffic zones (TAZs).We also use a time-equivalent generalized transport cost matrix for each pair of TAZ, both in the case of trips made by auto and public transportation. The estimation, carried with the software EMME, is based on an aggregated trip-based classic four-step model for traffic estimation (Ortúzar and Willumsen, 2011). This model is used to identify the routes with the lowest generalized cost between each pair of zones. In what follows, we present the descriptive statistics of job commuting trips extracted from the 2007 OD Survey. On an average weekday of 2007, there were about 38 million trips within SPMR, out of which 15.7 million were work (commuting) journeys. Table 1 shows the mode share distribution of commuting trips and the average commuting time of each mode. Mass transit accounted for 58.6% of commuting trips, private vehicle for 32.3% and other modes (mostly walking) accounted for 21.4%. Such distribution is drastically different from the United States commuting patterns, where the vast majority of trips are made by car. It is worth noting that transit trips are on average 86% longer than private vehicle trips. As expected, motorized transport trips are considerably longer than those of non-motorized transport. Table 1. Mode Share and Average Commuting Time (Home to Work Trips)It is also interesting to see how the commuting patterns vary in different parts of city. Figure 6, which complements the information previously shown in Figure 4, shows that average commuting time increases as the distance to the CBD rises. Finally, Table 2 shows the different commuting patterns according to income strata. Higher income workers tend to commute more by private vehicle and less by other modes. The lower the income, the higher is the share of transit, walking and bike. Such pattern is valid for all income groups, except for workers receiving between 0 and 1 minimum wages, for which the pattern reverses, with a larger percentage of the population using transit in the income bracket of 2-5 minimum wages than for those between 0-1 minimum wages. This reversal of the pattern of mode share may suggest that for the poorest, affordability of mass transport modes may be still a concern.
Figure 6. Average Commuting Time in the SPMR, 2007                    Source: OD Survey, 2007Table 2. Mode Share and Commuting Time by Income Group(Home to Work Trips)4. Overview of the MethodologyThe methodology followed in this work has three main stages. In the first stage, the policy and investment scenarios for the analysis are defined, and a travel demand model is estimated for the baseline data. The second stage involves a spatial modeling analysis that estimates the impact of changes in the transportation costs and accessibility (through changes in the transport network or policy changes introduced), as specified in the scenarios, on sectoral output, income and employment in the metropolitan region. In the final stage, microsimulation techniques are used to assess the impacts on income inequality of the policy/investment changes defined as the scenarios in stage 1. The travel demand model allows identifying the initial causality path of the different scenarios of infrastructure investments and mobility policies estimating econometrically initial individuals’ reactions on transport decisions, which in turn can be fed into a SCGE model to capture the system wide impacts. By doing so, the paths of reaction can be revealed and modified where necessary, taking into consideration changes in individual behavior rather than assuming a constant induced change in accessibility or commuting time and costs. The main channels from the travel demand model to the SCGE model are through labor productivity changes associated with changes in commuting time and accessibility to jobs. Figure 7 describes the path followed in the modeling framework and the integration of all its parts, discussed in detail in Haddad et al. (2015), and Vieira and Haddad (2015).Figure 7. The Integrated Modeling FrameworkSource: Haddad et al. (2015)Estimating the Distributional Impacts of Transport Policy Changes – The Microsimulation ModuleMicrosimulation is a technique commonly used to model the behavior of individuals by evaluating the observed attributes of a representative population that are jointly distributed (Clarke and Holm, 1987). In our framework, microsimulation is used to estimate how productivity and labor income of workers would be affected by changes in transportation policies and infrastructure investments, using information from the OD Survey. While the OD Survey in São Paulo is not designed to collect detailed income or consumption information, the income variable does appear to provide a good approximation to the income distribution in the SPMR when compared to PNAD data. Our microsimulation, as it interacts with the SCGE model results, can be divided into two distinct steps. First, a wage equation is used to calculate the effects of commuting time and accessibility on wages (productivity model in Figure 7). The estimated coefficients are used to calculate the direct impact of policies on the productivity of workers. This variation in productivity is an input for the SCGE model, which interacts back with the microsimulation by shifting the distribution of employment over the urban area, altering the accessibility of individuals. Then the results on workers’ income and commuting time are further evaluated.   Step 1 – Using the results of the transportation modelFor each scenario, the transportation model estimates a matrix of travel time  for each pair of traffic zone  and by mode . Additionally, it also estimates a value for the total demand  for each transportation mode.The travel time variation is applied to all workers  according to their zones of residence  and employment  and according to their mode choice.The variation of total mode demand is calculated by reweighting the expansion factor  of each worker.A RAS iterative proportional fitting method is then used to keep constant the share of residents and workers in each traffic zone.Moreover, the travel time variation leads to a new value for the accessibility of workers.Finally, the estimated coefficients of the wage equation are used to simulate the impact of new travel times and accessibility on the productivity  of workers.The average productivity variation  is calculated for each municipality, both in terms of workers’ place of residence and employment.  This matrix of productivity changes is used as input for a SCGE model shock.Step 2 – Using the results of the SCGE modelThe SCGE model produces a vector of employment and population change for each municipality.  This vector is multiplied by the expansion factor  of workers according to their city of employment and residence.  The redistribution of employment leads to a new vector of accessibility, which is used to calculate a new productivity shock, which is again aggregated and used as input in the SCGE model. This process is repeated until convergence is reached, and then the wages of workers are adjusted so the overall real income by municipality is equivalent to the values calculated by the last iteration of the SCGE model.5. ResultsWe evaluate the impact of the following ten scenarios, as described in Table 3. The first four policy scenarios refer to infrastructure investments in the expansion of metro, train, and bus corridors. The definition of these scenarios was based on current investment plans to 2020 and 2025. Scenarios 6 to 10 focus instead on demand management policies that impose out-of-the-pocket payments mainly to private vehicle users. Scenario 5 provides a combination of the two, including investments in infrastructure and an increase in fuel prices.  Table 3. Investment and Policy ScenariosFigure 8 presents the main causal relationships embodied in the SCGE model underlying the results of a hypothetical simulation exercise that generates increases in labor productivity of workers. According to the SCGE model structure, this represents, on one hand, decreases in the prices of composite commodities, with positive implications for real regional income (price change channel): in this cost-competitiveness approach, firms become more competitive – as production costs go down (inputs are less costly); investors foresee potential higher returns – as the cost of producing capital also decreases; and households increase their real income, envisaging higher consumption possibilities. Higher real income generates higher domestic demand, while an increase in the competitiveness of national and regional products encourages external demand. This creates room for increasing firms’ output – destined for both domestic and international markets – which requires more inputs and primary factors. Increasing demand puts pressure on the factor markets for price increases, with a concomitant expectation that the prices of domestic goods would increase. On the other hand, the increase in labor productivity is also associated with a decrease in the labor requirement per unit of output in those sectors that employ workers that are affected by the changes in commuting time. As production becomes less labor-intensive, ceteris paribus, demand for labor decreases generating excess supply of labor in the economic system (technical change channel). This creates a downward pressure on wages as well as on capital rentals due to imperfect substitutability between the primary factors, which are passed on in the form of lower prices. Second-order prices changes go in both directions – decrease and increase. The net effect is determined by the relative strength of the countervailing forces. Figure 8 summarizes the transmission mechanisms associated with major first-order and second-order effects in the adjustment process underlying the model’s aggregate results. Table 4 presents the results for the main impacts generated by the simulations, considering long run impacts of each scenario. In what follows, we present estimates for different indicators for the SPMR, highlighting some of the results that shed light on the potential trade-offs of the distributional impacts.
Figure 8. Causal Relations underlying the System of Equations of the SCGE ModelFigure 9 reveals the direct relationship between average commuting time and real GRP growth. Commuting time affects productivity through two main channels. Long commute is expected to decrease workers’ productivity as longer commuting time may induce workers to arrive late at work, or leave earlier, and increase the number of absent days (Van Ommeren and Gutièrrez-I-Puigarnau, 2009); moreover workers experiencing longer commuting trips may also become less productive as they provide lower effort levels than those residing closer to jobs (Zenou, 2002). Agglomeration economies are also expected to positively influence workers’ earnings. Workers are paid more in larger and denser markets because they are more productive there due to the presence of agglomeration economies (Melo and Graham, 2009). In this case, better mobility improves accessibility to job, which approaches workers and firms favoring a more efficient matching in the urban labor market. Since productivity is inextricably linked to long-term growth, the relationship depicted in Figure 9 follows.  Figure 10 summarizes some of the main results of Table 4, considering selected indicators. The graph contains information on three different dimensions. The x-axis presents the growth impacts on the SPMR GRP, and the y-axis presents the percentage change in the Gini for labor income. The third piece of information relates to the locational Gini using population weights: warmer colors (reddish) represent increases in concentration of economic activity, while cold colors (green) are associated with dispersion of the activity level within the SPMR – in both cases, darker colors refer to stronger effectsOverall, the impacts of the two main groups of interventions (infrastructure and policies) point in two different directions. First, scenarios 1 to 4, which are associated with infrastructure investments, are all pro-growth and reduce overall commuting. It is also clear that, as the portfolios of investments considered include a larger array of interventions (both in terms of different types of infrastructure and over time), the effects are magnified, with impacts being larger for scenarios 3 and 4 which consider expansions planned until 2025. We find that investments in transport contribute to equalizing wages across space, as barriers to mobility decline, and favor concentration of economic activity. Second, scenarios 6-10, which are associated with mobility policies that impose out-of-the pocket payments mainly to private vehicle users, point to effects that reduce growth of the SPMR. They contribute to reducing inequalities in accessibility and labor income and to promoting decentralization of the economic activity within the SPMR. They do so with increases in overall average commuting times and lower levels of overall welfare, as measured by the average real wage. Scenario 5, which represents a mix between the two groups of interventions, shows stronger effects on commuting, income and spatial inequality but lower impacts on GRP growth and smaller reductions in overall commuting times.  One dimension that is not included in the model but that is also important to consider is the political economy of the policy changes included in the scenarios. While for the group of infrastructure interventions the financial cost may be high, the political cost is relatively low. Instead, for policies that impose extra costs to car users, such as the urban toll, the political costs may be very high, despite the relatively low financial cost related to the implementation of such set of policies.Finally, the results also show that the most significant changes toward mass transit modes is seen in scenarios 5, 6, and 7 as they impose restrictions to auto use. The fact that scenarios 1 through 4 are not reflecting the largest changes in transport mode confirms the well-known fact that supply side efforts are not enough to encourage users to move to mass transport modes. These results have direct implications to the results related to CO2 emissions, which also show scenarios 5, 6  and 7 as those with higher potential to reduce transit-related pollution in the SPMR. Table 4. Summary of Long-run ImpactsFigure 9. Commuting Time and GRP GrowthFigure 10. Summary of Aggregate Results
6. ConclusionThis work simulated a set of alternative mobility policies and investments for the São Paulo Metropolitan Region. The analysis was based on a framework that integrates a transportation model, capturing the structural effects of each policy, with a spatial CGE model that allows the assessment of the economic impacts of such changes. Further exploration of the income effects of the policies was done to assess their distributional impacts.The results from this work suggest, not surprisingly, that investments in transport infrastructure are associated with increases in GDP. Further, while the impacts of such investments on income distribution are relatively modest, they do suggest that improvements in the overall economic efficiency brought by transport investments are not coming at the expense of the lower income workers. Results indicate that investments in the infrastructure of mass transport systems can lead to substantial economic gains for the metropolitan area. For all infrastructure investment scenarios, average increases in GRP throughout the region fall above 0.8%. Impacts in commuting times and income vary across the region but on average, larger decreases in commuting times are achieved through the infrastructure scenarios. On the other, hand, in the case of policies that increase the individual cost of private vehicle users, the overall impact on economic growth is negative, while their distributional impacts are relatively stronger in favor of income equity and spatial cohesion.As previously stressed, this work does not take into account the land use patterns of the city, which could contribute to strengthening or weakening the observed impacts. While coordinated land use planning and transport planning can make the layout of the city more conducive to shorter commutes than transport investments alone, constraints in the housing market can act as barriers to the internal mobility of households and firms. Recent work for Chicago provides evidence that zoning had a broader and more significant impact on the spatial distribution of economic activity than geography or transportation networks (Shertzer et al. 2016).  The jury is still out on the net effect that these may have in an urban area like the SPMR. Finally, by accounting for the impact that the infrastructure and policy changes may have on emissions, and hence pollution and health, we add another dimension of the impacts. A move to mass transport is usually associated with a reduction in emissions. However, this is only true when mass transport is cleaner than cars. In cities where the bus fleet is outdated, pollution may in fact increase and health issues may worsen. Extending the current work along these two lines can help better inform the tradeoffs that policymakers face in supporting economic growth by enhancing efficiency of the city while maintaining and improving livability. ReferencesClarke, M. and Holm, M. (1987). Microsimulation Methods in Spatial Analysis and Planning. Geografiska Annaler B, 69: 145-164.Fernald, John, G. (1999). Roads to Prosperity? Assessing the Link between Public Capital and Productivity. American Economic Review, 89(3): 619-638.Ghani, E., Goswami, A. G. and Kerr, W. R. (2012). Is India's Manufacturing Sector Moving Away From Cities? NBER Working Paper No. 17992, April.Gobillon, L. and Selod, H. (2014). Spatial Mismatch, Poverty, and Vulnerable Populations. In: M. M. Fischer and P. Nijkamp (eds.), Handbook of Regional Science, Springer.Gobillon, L., Selod, H. and Zenou, Y. (2007). The Mechanisms of Spatial Mismatch. Urban Studies, Vol. 44, No. 12, 2401-2427.Haddad, E. A. and Barufi, A. M. B (2017). From Rivers to Roads: Spatial Mismatch and Inequality of Opportunity in Urban Labor Markets of a Megacity. Habitat International, in press, .   Haddad, E.A., Hewings, G.J.D., Porsse, A.A., Van Leeuwen, E.S., and Vieira, R.S. (2015). The underground economy: Tracking the wider impacts of the São Paulo subway system. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 73, 18-30.Haddad, E.A. and Hewings, G.J.D  (2005). “Market Imperfections in a Spatial Economy: Some Experimental Results”, The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance 45: 476-496.Kim, E, Hewings, GJD and Hong, C (2004), An Application of Integrated Transport Network –Multiregional CGE Model I: A Framework for Economic Analysis  of Highway Project, Economic Systems Research, vol. 16, pp. 235-258.Olivieri, S., Radyakin, S., Kolenikov, S., Lokshin, M., Narayan, A., Sánchez-Páramo, C. (2014) Simulating Distributional Impacts of Macro-dynamics: Theory and Practical Applications. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.Ortúzar, J. D. and Willumsen, L. G. (2011). Modelling Transport. Wiley.Rospabé, S. and Selod, H. (2006). Does City Structure Cause Unemployment ? The Case Study of Cape Town. In: H. Bhorat, R. Kanbur (eds.). Poverty and Policy in Post-Apartheid South Africa, HSRC Press, pp.262-287, 2006Shertzer, Allison; Tate Twinam, and Randall P. Walsh (2016). Zoning and the Economic Geography of Cities. NBER Working Paper No. 22658, September 2016Vieira R. S and Haddad E. A. (2015). An Accessibility Index for the Metropolitan Region of Sao Paulo. In Kourtit. K; Nijkamp, P; and Stough R.R. eds. The Rise of the City: Spatial Dynamics in the Urban Century. (Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing, 2015).Van Ommeren, J. and Gutièrrez-I-Puigarnau, E. (2009). Are Workers with a Long Commute less Productive? An Empirical Analysis of Absenteeism. Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper, TI 2009-014/3.Villaça, F. (2011). São Paulo: Segregação Urbana e Desigualdade. Estudos Avançados, São Paulo, v. 25, n. 71.World Bank (2008). Brazil, Evaluating the Macroeconomic and Distributional Impacts of Lowering Transportation Costs. Report No 40020-BR. Zenou, Y. (2002). How do Firms Redline Workers? Journal of Urban Economics, V. 52, pp. 391-408.