Does the Unilateral Divorce Laws Cause Child

Weight Gain? (cid:3)

Rafaela Nogueiray

FGV/EPGE

Abstract

This paper studies the impact of unilateral divorce laws on child weight gain.
I use di⁄erence-in-di⁄erences approach exploiting time and state variation in the
adoption of the unilateral divorce law. I analyze a comprehensive nationwide health
examination survey (NHANES I) during 1971(cid:150)1974. The results show that expos-
ure to unilateral divorce law leads to bigger Body Mass Index (BMI) for children
between 2 and 18 years. However, according to the Center of Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC), this weight gain is still under the normality patterns. Results
indicate that for the speci(cid:133)c age group of children between 7 and 18 years the
exposure to unilateral divorce law leads to bigger BMI and bigger probability to
be overweight.
I also investigate the possibles transmission mechanisms for the
increase in BMI.

Keywords: Unilateral divorce law, child health, child weight
JEL Code: J12, J13

(cid:3)I am grateful for the comments made by Cecilia Machado, Gustavo Araœjo, Humberto Moreira,

Francisco Costa, Valdemar Neto, Fernando Bignotto and Christiane Szerman.

yCorresponding Author. E-mail: rafaelamnogueira@gmail.com

1

1 Introduction

In the 70(cid:146)s, the USA witnessed a tranformation into the family unity that has been called
the (cid:147)Divorce Revolution(cid:148). The unilateral divorce(cid:151) divorce that does not require the
explicit consent of both partners(cid:151) reached 28 American states until 1974. According to
the National Vital Statistics Reports from Marriages and Divorces, while less than 20%
of couples who married in 1950 ended up divorced, almost 50% of couples who married
in 1970 did divorce. Approximately half of the children born to married parents in the
1970s saw their parents divorce, compared to only about 11% of those born in the 1950s.
The unilateral divorce law (UD) has been perceived as negative for children, once the
ease of divorce could lead to the breakdown of the traditional family. Indeed, there is
a large literature in sociology, developmental psychology, and economics that documents
the negative impact to children of divorced parents, both as children and then later
as adults. Amato and Keith (1991), for example, report that children of divorce have
more di¢ culty than children in intact families adjusting both socially and psychologically.
Surveys show that children of divorce are more likely to exhibit antisocial and impulsive
behavior. They are more likely to become delinquents (Matsueda and Heimer, 1987; Zill,
Morrison, and Coiro, 1993), and to perform worse academically (Guidubaldi, Perry, and
Cleminshaw, 1984).

In this paper, I investigate whether the UD a⁄ects child weight gain. I use di⁄erence-
in-di⁄erences approach using the variation resulting from the di⁄erences in the timing
of the adoption of UD across the adopting states. To assess the impact of UD on child
weight gain, I analyze a comprehensive nationwide health and nutrition examination
survey (NHANES I) during 1971(cid:150)1974. According to the Center of Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) there is only one type of underweight (underweight type I) and two
types of overweight (overweight and obese). I propose more two less extreme underweight
measures (underweight types II and III), to have a more detailed description weight
distribution of children .1

My results show that the introduction of UD leads to lower probability of being
underweight type II and higher Body Mass Index (BMI) for children between 2 and 18
years old. Children between 2 and 18 years that have been exposed to UD between 1 and
5 years have lower 0.06 percentage point (p.p.) chance to be underweight type II. When
exposed for 6 or more years the probability to be underweight type II is lower by 0.15
p.p. and the probability to be underweight type III is lower by 0.38 p.p.. Moreover, the

1Overweight is de(cid:133)ned as a BMI at or above the 85th percentile for their heigh and wheight and
below the 95th percentile for children and teens of the same age and sex. Obesity is de(cid:133)ned as a BMI
at or above the 95th percentile for children and teens of the same age and sex. Underweight type I is
de(cid:133)ned as a BMI at or below the 5th percentile, underweight type II is de(cid:133)ned as a BMI at or below the
10th percentile, underweight type II is de(cid:133)ned as a BMI at or below the 25th percentile for children and
teens of the same age and sex.

2

BMI increases by 2.36 units when the child is exposed to UD for at least 6 years, which
is 14.8% of the baseline BMI. The big picture is that after the introduction of the UD
children are increasing their BMI but they still under a normal weight pattern according
to the CDC. According to my proposed approach, however, there is evidence that the
a⁄ected children are getting healthier, once there is lower probability to be underweight
type II after the introduction of UD.

I then turn to investigate possible transmission mechanisms from UD to BMI. First,
there is the direct e⁄ect, the e⁄ect of UD on divorce. The UD can dissolve the marriage
contract and, therefore, can be seen as a change in those marriage contracts already
in place at the time of the reform. Second, marriage decisions could also change in
response to UD. Selection into marriage could either be positive or negative. Couples
of relatively low match quality are now willing to marry, reducing the average match
quality of married couples and therefore increasing their marriage and divorce propensity
(Alesina and Giuliano, 2007). Contradictorily, since UD undermines the role of marriage
as a commitment device, couples with relatively low match quality no longer marry, which
increases the average quality of married couples and, therefore, decreases the marriage
and the divorce propensity (Matouschek and Rasul, 2006). A third possible mechanism
are the changes in incentives for relationship-speci(cid:133)c investments (children). Marriage can
be thought of as a commitment device that cultivates cooperation and induces partners to
make relationship-speci(cid:133)c investments (Matouschek and Rasul, 2006). Finally, making
divorce easier can change the nature of the bargaining relationships between husband
and wife. If UD weakens the bargaining position of women within marriage, children
may have been negatively a⁄ected, independently of the occurrence of a divorce. But, if
the opposite occurs, i.e, UD increases the bargaining position of women within marriage,
children may have been positively a⁄ected.

In order to adress the (cid:133)rst mechanism I examine both the impact on the likelihood
that adults in childbearing age are divorced and the impact on other marital status that
may be a⁄ected by this shift in legal regimes. The results from this exercise indicate that
divorce per is acting as a transmission mechanims from UD to child BMI. Even though
the probability of being married is not a⁄ected by the UD, it is important to note that,
my results are capturing the contemporaneous e⁄ect of UD. Therefore, I cannot rule out
the role of marriage as a transmission mechanism in the long term.

In order to shut down the selection into marriage and relationship-speci(cid:133)c investments
mechanims, I study children between 7 and 18 years. This age group is mostly comprised
of children born before the introduction of the UD, with marriage decisions taken before
the UD comes into place. Children exposed to UD between 1 and 5 years have 0.08 p.p.
lower chance to be underweight type II. Children exposed to UD for 6 or more years
have higher BMI by 3.77 units, which is 25.8% of the baseline BMI, lower the probability

3

of being underweight type II by 0.08 p.p. and lower probability of being underweight
type III by 0.15 p.p.. However, the probability of being overweight increases by 0.87
p.p. when exposed to 6 or more years to UD. The results can be considered mixed, once
on the one hand, it indicates that children have lower chance to be underweight type
II. And on the other hand, indicates that those same children have higher chance to be
overweight. These (cid:133)nding indicate that the total e⁄ect of selection into marriage and
marriage-speci(cid:133)c investiment is positive (decreases the wheight of children) and greater
than the total e⁄ect of divorce per se and bargaining (increases the wheight of children).
The literature on the e⁄ects of UD on children is not extensive. Gruber (2004), using
a sample of adults (25 to 50 years old) from the US Census data for the period 1960 to
1990, (cid:133)nds that those who were exposed to the reform as children have lower educational
attainments and lower family incomes, marry earlier but separate more often, and have
higher odds of adult suicide. Delpiano and Giolito (2008) using Census data for the
period 1960 to 1980, link children between ages 6 and 15 with their mothers. They (cid:133)nd
that, because of the reform, mothers are more likely to be below the poverty line, to be
divorced and to have lower family income. At the same time, they (cid:133)nd that children are
less likely to attend a private school and, in the case of black children, more likely to be
repeating a grade.

I extend the previous literature by analysing the impact of UD on child weight. Few
papers (Yannakoulia, et. al., 2008; Kimbro, 2013; Biehl et. al., 2014) show evidence
that children are at greater risk of being obese because they are living outside of an
intact family. A central limitation of these studies, however, is that divorce is not an
exogenous event with respect to other determinants of child outcomes. Moreover, I study
the heterogeneity in the impact of the reform among children exploiting the di⁄erences in
the size of the exposure to UD and di⁄erences in age at which the child faced the reform.
With this speci(cid:133)cation, I am also able to study potential transmission mechanisms from
UD to the family and from the family to the child, depending on at which point of the
child(cid:146)s life the family has faced the reform.

This article proceeds as follows. In Section 2, I present literature review. Section 3
presents the history of UD. In Section 4, I discuss my data and empirical strategy. Section
5 presents the results and Section 6 presents a full discussion on the results, interpretation
and mechanisms. Section 7 concludes the paper.

2 Literature Review

The beginning of the 70(cid:146)the USA witnessed a rise in divorce rates. Initially, part of the
literature (Peters, 1986) proposed that the UD implementacion did not change divorce
rates. The argument behind Peters(cid:146)conclusions is that the introduction of UD simply

4

represents the reallocation of an existing property right from one spouse to the other.
According to the Coase theorem, a change in property rights does not change resource
allocation but in(cid:135)uences the distribuition of wealth. Therefore, the transaction costs
should not be important for the study of marriage. Latter on, another part of the liter-
ature suggested that the ease of divorce was a major contributing factor for the rapidly
rise in divorce rates because it represented the breakdown of the traditional family struc-
ture (Douglas, 1992; Friedberg,1998). This (cid:133)ndings has since been widely accepted until
(Wolfers, 2006). He (cid:133)nds that the divorce rate rose sharply following the adoption of
unilateral divorce laws, but that this rise was reversed within about a decade. Therefore,
he claims that there is no evidence that the rise in divorce is persistent.2

Divorce has been perceived as negative for children since it represented a rupture
of the tradicional family structure. Several studies have tried to identify the impact of
easier divorce process on a child outcomes. After reviewing 92 studies, Amato and Keith
(1991) reported that children of divorced parents have more di¢ culty then children in
intact families adjusting both socially and psychologically. Surveys show that children
from divorced families are more likely to exhibit behavior that is antisocial or impulsive.
They are more likely to become delinquents and they are more likely to perform worse
academically (Matsueda and Heimer 1987; Zill, Morrison, and Coiro 1993).

The research on adolescents from divorced families also documents negative con-
sequences. Adolescents with divorced parents are two to three times more likely to
drop out of school, become pregnant, or engage in antisocial and delinquent behavior,
and they score above clinical cuto⁄s on standardized tests of behavior (Achenbach and
Edelbrock 1983). These adolescents also begin to date and have sex at a younger age
(Flewelling and Bauman 1990). Adolescents whose parents have divorced are more likely
to have a low academic performance and to drop out of school, even after one controls
for socioeconomic status (Guidubaldi et. al. 1984; Krein and Beller 1988).

A central limitation of these studies is that divorce not necessarily is an exogenous
event with respect to other determinants of child outcomes. The exception are Gruber
(2004) and Delpiano and Giolito (2008). Gruber points out that adults who were exposed
to UD regulations as children are less well educated, have lower family incomes, marry
earlier but separate more often and have higher odds of adult suicide. Delpiano and
Giolito (2008) found that the unilateral divorce reform have negative e⁄ects on child

2Wolfers (2006) explores several possible explanations. First, he explres dynamics, i.e, UD may have
simply led to the earlier dissolution of bad matches, thereby shifting a number of divorces from the 1980s
into the 1970s. Second, there is matching. The quantity and quality of marriage market matches may
change in response to divorce law changes. Moreover, there is contamination. An easier access to divorce
in reform states may also reduce stigma in non-reform states, leading their divorce rates to rise, albeit
with a lag. Finally, ther is the the regression to the mean. States with historically higher divorce rates
were more likely to choose to reform their laws. Therefore, this suggests that convergence in divorce
norms, or regression to the mean, may explain why divorce rates rose faster in control states, yielding
negative coe¢ cients.

5

outcomes, measured by the likelihood of children aged 0-4 being held back in school.

A few papers have di⁄erent approachs and found di⁄erent results. Piketty (2003)
suggests that parental con(cid:135)icts, rather then separation per se, is bad for children by
looking at the school performance of children a couple of years before their parents sep-
arate. Piketty found that these children are doing as bad as children already living with
only one of their parents. Bjorklund and Sundstron (2006) adopted a sibling-di⁄erence
approach, in order to take di⁄erences in family background more e¢ ciently into account.
They found no impact of parental separation. Thus, an older sibling who lived with both
parents during his/her childhood did not have an educational advantage over a younger
sibling who experienced a separation in childhood.

The previous literature in economics scrutinized several child outcomes due to par-
ental divorce, but not child weight gain. However, some papers from di⁄erent research
(cid:133)elds have investigated the weight gain e⁄ects of divorce on children by measuring the
association of the two, without the assessment of causality. Their data indicate that
family-related factors, namely divorce, parental BMI, number of siblings, and daily screen
time, signi(cid:133)cantly predicted child(cid:146)s BMI at the age of 9(cid:150)11 years. Kimbro (2013) assessed
whether U.S children are at greater risk of being obese because they are living outside
of an intact family. The result from his article indicate that children in non-tradicional
families had higher odds of obesity compared to children in married-parent households.
Biehl et al. (2014) found that general and abdominal obesities were more prevalent among
children of divorced parents in Norway.

3 History of Unilateral Divorce Law

Fault divorce was the traditional state regulation in the United States which allowed for
divorce only for such grounds as in(cid:133)delity and physical abuse. The necessary condition
to have a divorce was to have a partner at fault. Furthermore, the fault divorce had to be
mutually agreed upon by both partners. Marriages that were viewed as (cid:147)broken(cid:148)by the
couple could not be dissolved without more complex justi(cid:133)cation. This law was widely
viewed as socially inadequate, which led to a movement for reform of U.S. divorce laws.
The (cid:133)rst step in these reforms was moving to no-fault divorce, which was in place before
1950 in a number of states. The no-fault divorce, while maintaining the mutual consent
feature, allowed the divorce even if neither party was at fault.

The UD, which allowed divorce with the consent of just one rather then both spouses,
was possibly the biggest change to divorce law in the United States in its history. The
UD was rare before the late 60s, but it was in place in most states by the mid-1970s.

The (cid:133)rst American state to allow the UD was New Mexico in 1933, and in the sequence,
Alaska in 1935. The majority of states, however, changed their regulation in the 70(cid:146)s.

6

Between 1971 and 1974, 19 states changed their regulations to UD, totaling 28 states.
Note that, even untill today, 17 states including the District of Columbia, do not allow
for UD.

I use the same information as Gruber (2004) for the availability of UD in each state
from 1910 to the present. Table 1 presents the cronological order of adoption of the
divorce regulations across the states. States could pass either unrestricted UD or UD
with the requirement that spouses live separated for some period of time (typically 1(cid:150)5
years). I focus on UD that do not include separation requirements.

4 Data and Empirical Strategy

4.1 Data and Descriptive Statistics

The data used in this paper comes from The First National Health and Nutrition Exam-
ination Survey (NHANES I) from Center of Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The
NHANES I was conducted between 1971-1974 on a nationwide probability sample of ap-
proximately 32,000 persons aging 1 to 74. NHANES I includes a number of demographic
and socioeconomic variables: gender, race, income, education, weight and height. The
sample used is composed of American children between 2 to 18 years old, with sample
size of 6,737 children.

The primary variable of interest is the child(cid:146)s BMI. BMI is calculated as weight in
kilograms divided by height in meters squared (kg=m2).3 The BMI is o¢ cially calculated
beginning from age of 2 years old. According to CDC there are four types of weight
categories: underweight type I, normal weight, overweight and obese. The CDC has
produced a chart of percentiles describing the BMI distribution by age (in months) and
sex of children based on early waves (from the 1960s, 70s, and 80s) of the nationally
representative NHANES. Overweight is de(cid:133)ned as a BMI at or above the 85th percentile
and below the 95th percentile for children and teens of the same age and sex. Obesity is
de(cid:133)ned as a BMI at or above the 95th percentile for children and teens of the same age
and sex. Underweight type I is de(cid:133)ned as a BMI at or below the 5th percentile. In order
to estimate the consequences of the UD on child weight gain I also consider two more
types of underweight (types II and III) because the CDC has two thresholds for children
above the normal weight and one threshold for children under the normal weight. The
threshold (10th and 25th percentiles) that de(cid:133)ne the level of underweight were chosen
because they were the only avaliables from CDC charts. Underweight type II is de(cid:133)ned
as a BMI at or below the 10th percentile, underweight type III is de(cid:133)ned as a BMI at
or below the 25th percentile for children and teens of the same age and sex. I consider
these two more types of underweight to have a more detail description of the children

3http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts/2000growthchart-us.pdf

7

with an inferior BMI, once the CDC only provides one type of underweight. However,
it is important to note that, according to the CDC, underweight types II and III are
considered normal weight.

A key variable in this study is the child(cid:146)s exposure to the UD. This variable quanti(cid:133)es
the number of years of exposure to UD. If a child was born in 1971, for example, in a
state that only allowed UD from 1972 onwards and the interview occurred in 1974, then
this child would have 2 years of exposure to UD. Analogously, a child born in 1973, in a
state that only allowed UD from 1972 onwards and the interview occurred in 1974, would
have 1 year of exposure to UD. People born in states that never allowed UD have zero
exposure. Thus, the variable exposure depends of three variables: birth year, interview
year and the year of introduction of UD.

NHANES I has two limitations. First, it does not inform the state of residence of the
sampled person. Instead, I rely on place of birth information. However, place of birth can
also help me against the selective migration. And second, NHANES I does not connect
family members. Consequently, I do not know the marital status of the child(cid:146)s parents.
Not knowing the marital status of the child(cid:146)s parents is not a problem. First, because
divorce is not necessarily an exogenous event with respect to other determinants of child
outcomes. Thus, this paper studies the impact of the UD on child outcome and not the
impact of divorce on child outcome. Second, even though I do not have the marital status
of the child(cid:146)s parents I explore the impact of UD on a few marital status indicators in
order to study possible transmission mechanisms from UD to BMI.

Table 2 provides descriptive statistics for all outcomes and explanatory variables.
The average BMI of chidren between 2 and 18 years old is 18.21, 14.97% of then are
overweight or obese, 6% of then are underweight type I, 9% are underweight type II and
24% underweight type III. The mean exposure to UD from the child sample is 0.59 years
and 25.72% of them have some exposure to UD. From the same child sample 25.17% were
exposed to UD between 1 and 5 years.

Half of the child sample is composed of boys and 84% are white. The average exposure
to UD from adult sample in childbearing age is 20.8%. The fraction of divorced, married
and separated in the adult sample is 0.04%, 82.9% and 0.02% respectively.

5 Results

5.1 Baseline Results and Mechanisms

5.1.1 Children Between 2 and 18 year

I use di⁄erence-in-di⁄erences approach to estimate the e⁄ects of UD on child(cid:146)s BMI (and
others weight measures). I use the variation resulting from the di⁄erences in the timing

8

of the adoption of UD across the adopting states, and the fact that some states did not
pass this reform UD.

My baseline speci(cid:133)cation for child weight measure is:

W Mi;j;t = (cid:11)0 + (cid:11)1Exp1 to 5

i;j;t + (cid:11)2Exp6 or more

i;j;t

+ X0

i;j;t(cid:11)3 + (cid:14)t + (cid:21)j + "i;j;t

(1)

i;j;t

i;j;t

where, W Mi;j;t is the weight measure (BMI, Underweight types I, II and III, Overweight
and Obese) of children i in state j and time t. Exp1 to 5
equals to 1 if the person i in state
j and time t was exposed to UD from 1 to 5 years; and equals to 0 otherwise. The variable
equals to 1 if the person had equal or more then 6 years of exposure to UD;
Exp6 or more
and equals to 0 otherwise.4 (cid:21)j is a set of state (cid:133)xed e⁄ects which absorbs time-invariant
di⁄erences in observable and unobservable characteristics. (cid:14)t is a set of year (cid:133)xed e⁄ects
that accounts for potential common time e⁄ects across states. Xi;j;t is a set of control
variables such as race and age of children. The standard error are made to adjust for the
survey sample scheme. The variable "i;j;t is the error term.5

The results from Eq. (1) are presented in Table 3. Column (1) reports the result for a
simple OLS regression for child BMI. Column (2) includes state (cid:133)xed e⁄ects and Column
(3) includes year (cid:133)xed e⁄ects. Column (4) includes a set of race dummies and Column
(5), which is my preferred speci(cid:133)cation, also includes a set of age dummies. The results
show that children exposed to UD for 6 or more years have a higher BMI of 2.36 units,
which is 14.8% of baseline. BMI is not a⁄ected by exposure to UD between 1 and 5 years.
The results from Column (5) indicate an increase of the child(cid:146)s BMI due to the intro-
duction of the divorce regime. It is important to highlight the fact that, higher BMI not
necessarily indicates an unhealthy outcome. According to the CDC, a BMI is considered
normal if it is between 5th and 85th percentile for their age and sex group. Therefore, a
child can increase his BMI and still be under normal weight.

In order to evaluate if the impact of UD is actually making chidren worse, i.e, un-
healthy, I run Eq.
(1) with (cid:133)ve types of dummy dependent variables: being obese,
overweight and underweight types I, II and III. Column (6) and (7) present the results
for the probability of being obese and overweight. Neither weight indicator is signi(cid:133)cantly
a⁄ected by the introduction of the UD regime. Column (8) show that the the probability
of being underweight type I is not a⁄ected by UD. Column (9) shows that the probability
of being underweight type II descreases by 0.06 p.p. when exposed between 1 and 5 years
and descreases by 0.15 p.p. when exposed to 6 or more years. Column (10) shows that
the probability of being underweight type III descreases by 0.38 p.p. when exposed to 6

4The Robustness Checks Section shows the results with other lengths of exposure to unilateral divorce

and explains why I chose as baseline speci(cid:133)cation 1 to 5 years of exposure and 6 or more years.

5For more information see Binder (1983). On the variances of asymptotically normal estimators from

complex surveys.

9

or more years.

The central interpretive issue with these results is the mechanisms through which UD
regulation leads to outcomes. There are four possibilities, non mutually exclusive. The
(cid:133)rst candidate is parental divorce per se. The easing of divorce laws made it easier for
people to leave bad marriages. A child that is exposed to their parents (cid:133)ght could improve,
in terms of well-being, when they divorce. Alternatively, having divorced parents may be
worse in terms of welfare for the child because of coordination, for example. Divorce per
se, theferore, can either have a positive nor negative impact on a child(cid:146)s life.

Second, UD may change the selection into marriage, which could be either positive or
negative. Selection into marriage may lead to a negative selection into marriage. That
is, couples of relatively low match quality are now willing to marry, reducing the average
match quality of married couples and therefore increasing their marriage and divorce
propensity (Alesina and Giuliano, 2007). Alternatively, since UD undermines the role of
marriage as a commitment device, couples with relatively low match quality no longer
marry, which increases the average quality of married couples and, therefore, decreases
the marriage and the divorce propensity (Matouschek and Rasul, 2006).

Another possible channel is through changes in incentives for relationship-speci(cid:133)c in-
vestments. Marriage can be thought of as a commitment device that cultivate cooperation
and induces partners to make relationship-speci(cid:133)c investments (Matouschek and Rasul,
2006). Children (quantity) and child investment (quality) can be considered marriage-
speci(cid:133)c assets. The UD could reduce the incentive to allocate resources to children if
couples(cid:146)incentives to make investments in relationship-speci(cid:133)c becomes smaller.

Finally, making divorce easier can change the nature of the bargaining relationships
between husband and wife. There is a large literature on development that has docu-
mented that the amount of resources allocated to children depends on the relative bar-
gaining position between husband and wife (Strauss and Thomas, 1995; Frankenberg and
Thomas, 2000). If UD weakens the bargaining position of women within marriage, chil-
dren may have been negatively a⁄ected, independently of the occurrence of a divorce. If
the opposite occurs, i.e, the UD weakens the bargaining position of man within marriage,
then children may have been positively a⁄ected.

5.1.2 Does UD A⁄ects Divorce Decisions?

Now, I address the following question: does the possibility of UD a⁄ects divorce decisions?
I examine both the impact on the likelihood that adults in childbearing age (25 to 45 years
old) are divorced and the impact on other marital status that may be a⁄ected by this
shift in legal regimes. This exercise allows me to untangle two transmission mechanims:
divorce per se and marriage. To assess the impact of UD regulations on marital status,
I run regressions of the form:

10

Divorcei;j;t = (cid:11)0 + (cid:11)1Exp1 to 5

i;j;t + (cid:11)2Exp6 or more

i;j;t

+ X0

i;j;t(cid:11)3 + (cid:14)t + (cid:21)j + "i;j;t

(2)

where in addition to the other indices Divorcei;j;t is a variable equals to 1 when the person
i in state j and time t is divorced (or some other marital status indicator) and equals to
0 otherwise.

The results are presented in Table 4 from Eq.(2). Column (1) reports the result for
the impact of UD on the probability of being divorced including a set of individual(cid:146)s age
and race dummies, state (cid:133)xed e⁄ects and year (cid:133)xed e⁄ects. When exposed to 6 or more
years to UD the probability of being divorced increases 0.10 p.p.. There is evidence,
therefore, that making divorce easier increases the chance that children are more likely
to be living in nontraditional families. Exposure between 1 and 5 years to UD is not
signi(cid:133)cant. Column (2) and (3) report the results for the probability of being married
and separated. Netheir probability seems to be signi(cid:133)cantly a⁄ected by the introduction
of UD.

The results from Eq.(2) indicate that the divorce per is acting as a transmission
mechanims from UD to child BMI. Even though the probability of being married is not
a⁄ected by the UD, it is important to note that, Eq.(2) is capturing the contemporaneous
e⁄ect of UD. Therefore, I cannot rule out the role of marriage as a transmission mechanism
in the long term.

As mentioned before, the present work investigates the impact of an easier divorce
process on several marital status indicators. It is important to highlight that NHANES
I is a sample whose goal is to understand the health status of the US, theferore, it is
not ideal for this exercise. Additionally, I belive the previous work have better data and
have done a (cid:133)ne job uncovering the impact of UD on marital status indicators, which is
postive and in line with Gruber (2004) and Wolfers (2006).

5.1.3 Children between 7 and 18 years

One concern with the approach described in Section 5.1.1 is that there are several trans-
mission mechanisms from UD to child outcome. As said before, a child can be a⁄ected by
several channels. In order to minimize the e⁄ect of some of those mechanisms, I estimate
Eq.(1) for children between 7 to 18 years old. But, it is important to note that it is
not appropriate to extrapolate the results for children in general, once this approach also
introduces age speci(cid:133)c e⁄ects problem. It could be the case that the impact of UD is not
homogeneous across ages.

In this speci(cid:133)c age group 99% of than where born before the UD regime. Therefore,
I can rule out (or at least decrease at its maximum) the e⁄ect of selection bias into
marriage, once the parents got married before the UD. It is also possible to rule out

11

changes in the relationship speci(cid:133)c-investments, since those choices were already made
before the child(cid:146)s birth. The remaining mechanisms are divorce per se and changes in the
bargaining position.

The results are presented in Table 5. Column (1) reports the result for children BMI
for an OLS regression including a set of individual(cid:146)s age and race dummies, state (cid:133)xed
e⁄ects and year (cid:133)xed e⁄ects. Children exposed to UD for 6 or more years have higher
BMI by 3.77 units, which is 25.8% of baseline. BMI is not a⁄ected by exposure to UD
between 1 and 5 years.

I then consider 5 other weight indicators: being obese, overweight and underweight
types I, II and II. Column (2) present the result for the probability of being obese, which
is not signi(cid:133)cant. Column (3) presents the results for the probability of being overweight,
which increases by 0.87 p.p. when the child is exposed to 6 or more years to UD. Column
(4) shows that the probability of being underweight type I is not a⁄ected by the UD.
Column (5) shows that the probability of being underweight type II is lower by 0.08
p.p. when the child is exposed between 1 and 5 years to UD and lowers 0.08 p.p. when
exposed for at least 6 years. Column (6) reports the result for the probability of being
underweight type III. Children exposed to 6 or more years to UD have 0.15 p.p. lesser
chance to be underweight type III.

The results found in this Section suggest that the e⁄ects of the remaining mechanisms
for this age group, divorce per se and changes in the bargaining, are negative (increases
BMI) if I compare with the results found in Section 5.1.1. In Section 5.1.1 the results
indicate an increase in the BMI and lower probability to be underweight. In this Section
the results also show an increase in the BMI and lower probability to be underweight,
but now there is also the increase in the probability to be overweight. The conclusion
from these results is that the mechanisms divorce per se and changes in the bargaining
have a negative e⁄ect (increases BMI) on child health.

5.1.4 Children between 2 and 6 years

The introduction of UD can a⁄ect a child(cid:146)s health through several transmission mechan-
isms. It is important to note, however, that depending on the child(cid:146)s age, the channels
of transmission from UD to child weight should di⁄er.

In Section 5.1.1, the results showed that children between 2 and 18 years old are
increasing their BMI and being less likely to be underweight types II and III. However,
children between 2 years and 18 years are di⁄erent. In Section 5.1.2 I dived the sample
in children between 7 and 18 years but I introduce a age speci(cid:133)c e⁄ects problem. In this
Section, I use chidren between 2 and 6 years to study if there behavior are very di⁄erent
from the older ones.

In order to analyze the di⁄erent channels I also run another speci(cid:133)cation for three age

12

groups of younger children:

W Mi;j;t = (cid:11)0 + (cid:11)1DExpi;j;t + X0

i;j;t(cid:11)2 + (cid:14)t + (cid:21)j + "i;j;t

(3)

where, in addition to the other indices, DExpi;j;t is a dummy for the presence of a
unilateral reform law in the year the NHANES interview or in the previuos years. Once
the child(cid:146)s age ranges from 2 to 6 years old, it does not make sense to use a dummy
variable that indicates the presence of at least 6 years of exposure to UD. Therefore, this
speci(cid:133)cation is slightly di⁄erent from the one in Eq.(1).

The results are presented in Table 6. Columns (1)-(6) report the result for children
between 2 and 6. All of the regressions include a set of individual(cid:146)s age and race dummies,
state (cid:133)xed e⁄ects and year (cid:133)xed e⁄ects.

The results show that the UD reduces the probability of being underweight type III

by 0.13 p.p., therefore, increasing the child(cid:146)s health.

In Section 5.1.2 I estimate Eq.(2) with children between 7 and 18 years old to shut
down two possible transmission mechanisms: selection into marriage and marriage-speci(cid:133)c
investiment. Therefore, is straightforward that when I estimate Eq.(3) with children
between 2 and 6 years old there is the presence of the four transmission mechanisms.
The results of this Section should be read with careful once there are too many forces
acting here: the presence of the age speci(cid:133)c e⁄ects and two additional transmission mech-
anims (selection into marriage and marriage-speci(cid:133)c investiment).

5.2 Robustness Checks

In this section, I undertake several robustness checks. The (cid:133)rst potential threat to the
results arises from the possibility that estimated e⁄ects may re(cid:135)ect a speci(cid:133)cation bias.
I run several speci(cid:133)cations to analyse if and how the results change.

Table 7 presents the results for Eq.(1) using the whole sample of children, 2 to 18 years,
instead of only 2 and 6 years. Column (1) reports the results for child BMI, Column (2) for
probability of being obese, Column (3) for probability of being overweight, Column (4) for
probability of being underweight type I, Column (5) for probability of being underweight
type II and Colum (6) for the probability of being underweight type III. Independently
of the weight measure, the variable DExpi;j;t is not signi(cid:133)cant. The only exception is
the probability of being underweight type II. Children expose to UD have lower 0.05 p.p.
chance to be underweight type II.

I also test a new equation which is similar to Eq. (1) with a simple di⁄erence:

W Mi;j;t = (cid:11)0 + (cid:11)1Exp1 to x

i;j;t + (cid:11)2Expx+1 or more

i;j;t

+ X0

i;j;t(cid:11)3 + (cid:14)t + (cid:21)j + "i;j;t

(4)

13

where, in addition to the other indices, Exp1 to x
equals to 1 if the person i in state j and
time t was exposed to UD from 1 to x years; and equals to 0 otherwise. The variable
Expx+1 or more
equals to 1 if the person had equal or more then (x + 1) years of exposure
to UD; and equals to 0 otherwise. The variable x ranges from 2 to 4.

i;j;t

i;j;t

Table 8 presents the results from Eq. (4). Column (1) report the results using two
i;j;t ) and exposure for 3 years or
). Column (2) show the results using exposure to UD between 1 and
). Finally, Column (3)
i;j;t ) and exposure

dummies, exposure to UD between 1 and 2 years (Exp1 to 2
more (Exp3 or more
3 years (Exp1 to 3
show the results using exposure to UD between 1 and 4 years (Exp1 to 4
for 5 years or more (Exp5 or more

i;j;t ) and exposure for 4 years or more (Exp4 or more

i;j;t

i;j;t

).

i;j;t

The results from Columns (1)-(2) show no impact of UD on child BMI. Column (3),
however, shows a similar result to the ones found in section 5.1.1. When exposed for at
least 5 years to UD the child BMI increases by 2.06 units.

Finally, there is a concern that the results are driven by outlier states. The obvious
candidate is California, once its a large state and was one of the (cid:133)rsts to allow the UD.
The basic pattern of results, however, remains the same, as can be seen in Table 9.

5.3 Validating the Empirical Strategy

The empirical strategy employed in this paper exploits time and state variation in the
adoption of the UD. The underlying assumption is that the timing of introduction of
UD is not correlated with child health, meaning weigh. To test whether this hypothesis
is valid I have also pursued a series of speci(cid:133)cation checks to assess whether I am truly
uncovering a causal impact of UD regulations.

One concern is that there are somehow other omitted state variables that are correl-
ated with the passage of UD regulations. I have gathered data from the The Integrated
Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS-USA). The IPUMS consists of over sixty high-
precision samples of the American population drawn from sixteen federal censuses, from
the American Community Surveys of 2000-present. To test the hypothesis that the tim-
ing of introduction of the UD is not correlated with state characteristics is valid, I collect
a few socio demographic characteristics of the state(cid:146)s population from 1960. I examine
whether characteristics between treated and non-treated states are di⁄erent before the
establishment of the UD. The econometric model is:

Y 1960
j

= (cid:11) + (cid:12)DExpj + "j

(5)

represents a set of socio demographic char-
where in addition to the other indices Y 1960
acteristics of the state j from 1960. The coe¢ cients (cid:11) and (cid:12) are the parameters to be
estimated.

j

14

One obvious candidate of omitted variable is education. It is possible that UD were
being passed in states where there was less educational levels, once again leading to more
adverse child health outcomes. The results in Table 10 show no signi(cid:133)cant correlation with
the presence of UD in the 70(cid:146)s. Another candidate is income. Using the same strategy, as
mentioned before, I once again (cid:133)nd no signi(cid:133)cant correlation with the presence of UDs.
Another way to check whether my empirical strategy is valid is to add income and
education as control variables in the equations. The results do not alter, corroborat-
ing that the timing of introduction of UD is not correlated with the omitted variables
mentioned before.

6 Discussion

The (cid:133)rst American state to allow the UD was New Mexico in 1933, and in the sequence,
Alaska in 1935. The majority of states, however, changed their regulation in the 70(cid:146)s. In
the variation between 1971 and 1974, which is the period studied in this paper, 19 states
changed their regulations to UD, totaling 28 states. Since mid-1970s most states in the
USA allowed for UD, which allowed divorce with the consent of just one rather then both
spouses.

In order to assess the impact of the UD on child weight gain, I analyze a comprehensive
nationwide health and nutrition examination survey during 1971(cid:150)1974. I use di⁄erence-
in-di⁄erences approach using the variation resulting from the di⁄erences in the timing
of the adoption of UDs across the adopting states. The results indicate that after the
introduction of the UD, children between 2 and 18 years old have bigger BMI and lower
probability of being underweight types II and III. According to CDC, a BMI is considered
normal if it is between 5th and 85th percentile for their age and sex group. Therefore,
according to the CDC, the results indicate that children a⁄ected by the UD still under
normal weight. However, having lower probability of being underweight type II means to
have a lower probability of having a BMI below the 10th percentile, which could also be
an indicator of getting healthier.

The results paint an interesting picture of the exposed children. The previous liter-
ature (Yannakoulia, et al., 2008; Kimbro, 2013; Biehl et al., 2014) showed evidence that
children are at greater risk of being obese because they are living outside of an intact
family. My results, however, do not go in the same direction. Exposure to UD do not
leads to weight gain, in a conservative analysis. But in a more detailed analysis, exposure
to UD leads to better health for children between 2 and 18 years old. The central inter-
pretive issue with these results is the mechanisms through which UD regulation leads to
the outcomes.

It is worth noting that the UD a⁄ects BMI through several channels. Therefore, when

15

all the mechanisms are present, the (cid:133)nal e⁄ect of making divorce easier is positive for
the child. Children(cid:146)s well-being can be a⁄ected through di⁄erent channels. The most
common candidate is parental divorce per se.The UD made it easier for people to leave
unsuccessful marriages. A child that is exposed to their parents (cid:133)ght could improve in
terms of well-being, when they get a divorce. Alternatively, having divorced parents
maybe worse in terms of welfare for the child because of coordination, for example. A
higher incidence of divorce could implie that a higher proportion of children have faced
this event and are therefore forced to live under nontraditional family structure. Divorce
per se, theferore, can either have a positive nor negative impact on a child(cid:146)s life.

Moreover, UD may change the selection into marriage. On the one hand, it may lead
to a negative selection into marriage. Couples of relatively low match quality are now
willing to marry, which reduces the average match quality of married couples and increases
their marriage and divorce propensity (Alesina and Giuliano, 2007). On the other hand,
couples with relatively low match quality no longer marry, once UD undermines the
role of marriage as a commitment device, which increases the average quality of married
couples and, therefore, decreases the marriage and the divorce propensity (Matouschek
and Rasul, 2006).

Another possible channel is through changes in incentives for relationship-speci(cid:133)c
investments. Marriage can be thought of as a commitment device that cultivate cooper-
ation and induces partners to make relationship-speci(cid:133)c investments (Matouschek and
Rasul, 2006). The amount of children and their "quality" can be considered marriage-
speci(cid:133)c assets. The UD could reduce the incentive to allocate resources to children if
couples(cid:146)incentives to make investments in relationship-speci(cid:133)c becomes smaller. How-
ever, a higher incentive to make market-speci(cid:133)c investments such as labor employment
(Stevenson, 2007), may increase the amount of resources available for children.

Finally, making divorce easier can change the nature of the bargaining relationships
between husband and wife. There is vast literature on development that has documented
that the amount of resources allocated to children depends on the relative bargaining
position between husband and wife (Strauss and Thomas, 1995; Frankenberg and Thomas,
2000). Therefore, if UD weakens the bargaining position of women within marriage,
children may have been negatively a⁄ected, independently of the occurrence of a divorce.
In order to try to understand the transmission mecahnims, I study children between
7 to 18 years old.
In this speci(cid:133)c age group the majority where born before UD im-
plementation. The ideia is to rule out selection bias into marriage, once the parents
got married befora the UD law. It is also possible to rule out changes in the relation-
ship speci(cid:133)c-investments, since those choices regarding the relationship investiments were
already made before the child(cid:146)s birth. But, it is importante to keep in mid that I also in-
troduce age speci(cid:133)c e⁄ects problem. The remaining mechanisms, therefore, were divorce

16

per se and changes in the bargaining position.

The results indicate that exposure to UD no longer leads to better health for children
between 7 and 18 years. Exposed children had higher BMI, bigger probability to be
overweight and lower probability to be underweight type II. Following the de(cid:133)nitions of
healthy weight from the CDC, the introduction of UD had an overall negative impact on
child health, once underweight type II still is consider normal weigh. It is important to
remember that, the result for older chidren can not be generalized, once the majority were
born under the no-fault divorce law. The next generation will be born under the UD. The
extrapolation exercise should not be done. However, using my indicator of underweight,
the results can be considered mixed. On the one hand, there is a lower probability to be
underweight type II. On the another hand, there is a bigger probability to be overweight.
When I compare the results for children between 7 and 18 years and children between
2 and 18 years the results suggest that the e⁄ects of the remaining mechanisms for the
(cid:133)rst age group, divorce per se and changes in the bargaining, are negative. The results
for children between 2 and 18 years indicate an increase in the BMI and lower probability
to be underweight. However, the results for children between 7 and 18 years also show an
increase in the BMI and lower probability to be underweight, but now there is also the
increase in the probability to be overweight. The conclusion from these results is that
the mechanisms divorce per se and changes in the bargaining have a negative e⁄ect on
child health.

Another concern is that, depending on the child(cid:146)s age, the channels of transmission
from UD to child weight should also di⁄er. On the one hand, there is the direct parental
in(cid:135)uence: parents can in(cid:135)uence their children through several ways (Benton, 2004). First,
there is the food as reward. Parents can o⁄er of one food (dessert) as a reward for the
eating of another (vegetables). Second, there is the limit access to food, where the child
is simply not allowed to eat a certain type of food (candies, chocolate, etc). And (cid:133)nally,
there is the parental example, i.e, parents eating healthy food in front of the children.
Snoek et al. (2010) indicates that family food patterns might have great impact already
at young ages.

Moreover, there is the child own will as a mechanims. It is plausible to assume that as
the child becomes older, he/she also becomes more independent, in terms of feeding. It is
straightforward to infer that, external events can play a crucial role determining the type
and amount of food the child is eating. Exposure to traumatic events during childhood
is associated with an elevated risk of adult obesity (Gunstad et al., 2006; Felitti et al.,
2008).

Since I cannot separate these two channels, parental in(cid:135)uence vs. child own will, I
analyze three group of young children (2 to 4; 2 to 5 and 2 to 6). The groups are made so
the (cid:133)rst group is comprised of more dependent children than the second group, and second

17

group is comprised of more dependent children than the third group.
It is reasonable
to assume that, the younger the child, the strongest the parental in(cid:135)uence. Therefore,
the results from this exercise can be interpreted as "cleaned" from child own will e⁄ects.
Once again, according to CDC there is no evidence that younger kids are changing their
weight. However, following my de(cid:133)nition of underweight, there is a weak evidence that
younger kids are getting healthier, meaning smaller probabilty to be underweight type
III. It is importante to note that, when I estimate with children between 2 and 6 years
old there is the presence of the four mechanisms. The results for this age group should
be read with careful once there are too many forces acting here: the presence of the
age speci(cid:133)c e⁄ects and two more transmission mechanims (selection into marriage and
marriage-speci(cid:133)c investiment) when compared to children between 7 and 18 years.

I undertake several robustness checks. The (cid:133)rst potential threat to the results arises
from the possibility that estimated e⁄ects may re(cid:135)ect a speci(cid:133)cation bias. I (cid:133)rst tryed to
capture the impact of the UD through a unique dummy variable (any exposure to UD).
The results showed that independently of the weight measure the impact of UD was not
signi(cid:133)cant. This result is not surprising since an unique dummy variable assumes that
the impact of UD is the same for all the a⁄ected sample. The speci(cid:133)cation that uses only
one dummy variable probably do not represents what actually happens, once one would
expect that di⁄erent lenghts of exposure should have di⁄erent impacts on child health.
Its reasonable to assume that one year of exposure to UD should have a di⁄erent impact
of 10 years of exposure. Moreover, California is a obvious to be an outlier state. Once
its a large state and was one of the (cid:133)rsts states to allow the UD. The basic pattern of
results, however, remains the same.

7 Conclusion

In this paper, I investigate whether the UD a⁄ects child health through weight gain. I
use di⁄erence-in-di⁄erences approach using the variation resulting from the di⁄erences
in the timing of the adoption of UD across the adopting states. To assess the impact
of UD on child health, I analyze the NHANES I during 1971(cid:150)1974. My results do not
show that the introduction of UD leads to unhealthy weight gain. Children are putting
on more weight, however they still under the normality patterns established by the CDC.
I also verify if the UD a⁄ects the marital status. The impact of UD is positive on the
probability of being divorced when the person is in childbearing age. The probability of
being married and separated is not a⁄ected.

The UD can dissolve the marriage contract and, therefore, the unilateral reform can
be seen as a change in those marriage contracts already in place at the time of the reform.
Therefore, the change in legislation should produce di⁄erent e⁄ects over those individuals

18

who had taken marriage or investment decisions based on mutual consent divorce rules.
Even though those e⁄ects are transitional overall, they may become permanent for chil-
dren of those families caught in the transition. In order to analyse the behavior of couples
who had taken marriage or investment decisions based on mutual consent divorce rules,
I consider children between 7 and 18 years. This age group is mostly compoused of chil-
dren born before the introduction of the UD. The results, following the de(cid:133)nition of BMI
established by the CDC, indicate that children that were born before the introduction of
the UD are becoming less healthier.

Moreover, it is important to note that, depending of the child(cid:146)s age, the channels
of transmission from UD to child weight should di⁄er. Older children may have more
food independence, meaning that they can choose more freely the type and amount of
food they want to eat. The opposite should occur to younger children, once they are not
completely independent. Younger children should be largely in(cid:135)uenced by their parents
choices. Therefore, changes in the weight of youger children can be attributed mostly to
parents in(cid:135)uence. The results, also following the CDC de(cid:133)nitions, indicate that younger
children are not changing their weight after the UD.

This is the (cid:133)rst paper in the literature, to the best of my knowledge, to examine the
impact of UD on child health, meaning child weight. Further research is necessary to
understand and perhaps estimate the transmission mechanism from divorce laws through
child outcome.

19

REFERENCES

1. Adda, J., & Cornaglia, F. (2010). The e⁄ect of bans and taxes on passive smoking.

American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(1), 1-32.

2. Allen, D. W. (1992). Marriage and divorce: Comment. The American Economic

Review, 679-685.

3. Almond, D., Hoynes, H. W., & Schanzenbach, D. W. (2011). Inside the war on
poverty: The impact of food stamps on birth outcomes. The Review of Economics
and Statistics, 93(2), 387-403.)

4. Anger, S., Kvasnicka, M., & Siedler, T. (2011). One last pu⁄? Public smoking bans

and smoking behavior. Journal of Health Economics, 30(3), 591-601.

5. Benton, D. (2004). Role of parents in the determination of the food preferences
of children and the development of obesity. International journal of obesity, 28(7),
858-869.

6. Bharadwaj, P., Johnsen, J. V., & Lłken, K. V. (2014). Smoking bans, maternal

smoking and birth outcomes. Journal of Public Economics, 115, 72-93.

7. Biehl, A et al. (2014). Parental marital status and childhood overweight and obesity

in Norway: a nationally representative cross-sectional stUDy. BMJ open, 4(6).

8. Binder, D. A. (1983). On the variances of asymptotically normal estimators from
complex surveys. International Statistical Review/Revue Internationale de Stat-
istique, 279-292.

9. Briggs, R. J. (2009). The Impact of Smoking Bans on Birth Weight: Is Less More?

Working paper

10. Bj(cid:246)rklund, A., & Sundstr(cid:246)m, M. (2006). Parental separation and children(cid:146)s edu-
cational attainment: A siblings analysis on Swedish register data. Economica,
73(292), 605-624.

11. Colman, G., Grossman, M., & Joyce, T. (2003). The e⁄ect of cigarette excise taxes
on smoking before, during and after pregnancy. Journal of Health Economics, 22(6),
1053-1072.

12. Dietz, Patricia M., David Homa, Lucinda J. England, Kim Burley, Van T. Tong,
Shanta R. Dube, and John T. Bernert. (cid:147)Estimates of Nondisclosure of Cigarette
Smoking Among Pregnant and Nonpregnant Women of Reproductive Age in the
United States.(cid:148)Am. J. Epidemiol. (2011) 173 (3): 355-359.

20

13. Dolan-Mullen, P., Ramirez, G., & Gro⁄, J. Y. (1994). A meta-analysis of ran-
domized trials of prenatal smoking cessation interventions. American Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, 171(5), 1328-1334.

14. Felitti, V. J., Anda, R. F., Nordenberg, D., Williamson, D. F., Spitz, A. M., Ed-
wards, V., & Marks, J. S. (1998). Relationship of childhood abuse and household
dysfunction to many of the leading causes of death in adults: The Adverse Child-
hood Experiences (ACE) Study. American journal of preventive medicine, 14(4),
245-258.

15. Flewelling, R. L., & Bauman, K. E. (1990). Family structure as a predictor of initial
substance use and sexual intercourse in early adolescence. Journal of Marriage and
the Family, 171-181.

16. Friedberg, L. (1998). Did UD raise divorce rates? Evidence from panel data (No.

w6398). National Bureau of Economic Research.

17. Gruber, J. (2004). Is making divorce easier bad for children? The long run implic-

ations of UD. Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 22, No. 4, pp. 799-833

18. Gunstad, J., Paul, R. H., Spitznagel, M. B., Cohen, R. A., Williams, L. M., Kohn,
M., & Gordon, E. (2006). Exposure to early life trauma is associated with adult
obesity. Psychiatry research, 142(1), 31-37.

19. Horta, B. L., Victora, C. G., Menezes, A. M., Halpern, R., & Barros, F. C. (1997).
Low birthweight, preterm births and intrauterine growth retardation in relation to
maternal smoking. Pediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology, 11(2), 140-151.

20. Institute of Medicine. Washington, DC. (2010). Secondhand Smoke Exposure and
Cardiovascular E⁄ects: Making Sense of the Evidence. National Academies Press.

21. Kimbro, R. T. (2013). Family structure and obesity among US children. Journal

of Applied Research on Children: Informing Policy for Children at Risk, 4(1), 5.

22. Kramer, M. S. (1987). Determinants of low birth weight: methodological assessment

and meta-analysis. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 65(5), 663.

23. Markowitz, S., Adams, E. K., Dietz, P. M., Kannan, V., & Tong, V. (2011).
Smoking policies and birth outcomes: estimates from a new era (No. w17160).
National Bureau of Economic Research.

24. Mick, E., Biederman, J., Faraone, S. V., Sayer, J., & Kleinman, S. (2002). Case-
control stUDy of attention-de(cid:133)cit hyperactivity disorder and maternal smoking,

21

alcohol use, and drug use during pregnancy. Journal of the American Academy of
Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 41(4), 378-385.

25. Peters, H. E. (1986). Marriage and divorce: Informational constraints and private

contracting. The American Economic Review, 437-454.

26. Piketty, T. The Impact of divorce on school performance : evidence from France,

1968-2002 (2003), CEPR discussion paper series no 4146, 2003, 47 p.

27. Ringel, J. S., & Evans, W. N. (2001). Cigarette taxes and smoking during preg-

nancy. American Journal of Public Health, 91(11), 1851-1856.

28. USDHHS. How Tobacco Smoke Causes Disease: The Biology and Behavioral Basis
for Smoking-Attributable Disease: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta, GA:
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion,
O¢ ce on Smoking and Health, 2010.

29. Snoek, H. M., Sessink, N. Y., & Engels, R. C. (2010). Food choices of 4 to 6-year-
old overweight and nonoverweight children while role-playing as adults. Journal of
Family Psychology, 24(6), 779.

30. Yannakoulia, et al. (2008). Association between family divorce and children(cid:146)s BMI

and meal patterns: the GENDAI StUDy. Obesity, 16(6), 1382-1387.

31. Weitzman, M., Gortmaker, S., Walker, D. K., & Sobol, A. (1990). Maternal

smoking and childhood asthma. Pediatrics, 85(4), 505-511.

32. Wolfers, Justin (2006). Did Unilateral Divorce Laws Raise Divorce Rates? A
Reconciliation and New Results The American Economic Review, Vol. 96, No.
5, pp. 1802-1820

22

TABLES AND GRAPHS

23

Table 1Chronological Order of Adoption of the Unilateral Divorce Regulations Across the StatesNew Mexico1933Washington1973Alaska1935Minnesota1974Oklahoma1953Massachusetts1975Nevada1967Rhode Island1975Delaware1968Wyoming1977Kansas1969Wisconsin1978California1970South Dakota1985Iowa1970Utah1987Texas1970ArkansasAlabama1971District of ColumbiaFlorida1971IllinoisIdaho1971LouisianaNew Hampshire1971MarylandNorth Dakota1971MississippiOregon1971MissouriColorado1972New JerseyHawaii1972New YorkKentucky1972North CarolinaMichigan1972OhioNebraska1972PennsylvaniaArizona1973South CarolinaConnecticut1973TennesseeGeorgia1973VermontIndiana1973VirginiaMaine1973West VirginiaMontana1973Source: Gruber (2004)Unilateral DivorceDate of AdoptionStateStateUnilateral DivorceDate of AdoptionTable 2Variable2 18 years2 6 years7 18 years25   45 yearsBMI18.21 (0.06)15.86 (0.03)19.10 (0.08)Overweight (>85 percentile)0.15 (0.00)0.12 (0.00)0.16 (0.00)Obese (> 95 percentile)0.05 (0.00)0.04 (0.00)0.05 (0.00)Underweight I (< 5 percetile)0.06 (0.00)0.08 (0.00)0.06 (0.00)Underweight II (< 10 percetile)0.09 (0.000)0.11 (0.00)0.08 (0.00)Underweight III (< 25 percetile)0.24 (0.00)0.25 (0.01)0.24 (0.01)Exposure to UD (years)0.59 (0.06)0.53 (0.06)0.40 (0.06)0.67 (0.08)% with any exposure0.25 (0.02)0.26 (0.03)0.25 (0.02)0.16 (0.02)% with 1 50.25 (0.02)0.26 (0.03)0.24 (0.02)0.19 ( 0.02)% with 6 or more0.01 (0.00)0.00 (0.00)0.01 (0.00) 0.01 (0.00)Male0.50  (0.00)0.50 (0.01)0.51 (0.01)0.48 (0.00)Age10 (0.08)3 (0.03)12 (0.07)34 (0.13)White0.840.840.840.88Black0.140.150.140.10Divorced0.04 (0.00)Married0.82 (0.00)Separated0.02 (0.00)Obs6,7972,7673,9775,279Standard errors in parenthesesUD: Unilateral DivorceDescriptive Statistics24

Table 3ObeseOverUnder IUnder IIUnder III(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7)(8)(9)(10)(11)Dummies:1 5 years exposure to UD .18.15.19.190.270.280.010.01 0.01 0.05* 0.06(0.14)(0.34)(0.40)(0.40)(0.30)(0.31)(0.01)(0.03)(0.02)(0.05)(0.02)6 or more years of exposure to UD.804.99***4.99***4.99***2.36***2.39***0.060.26 0.12 0.15** 0.38**(0.85)(0.860)(0.86)(0.86)(0.61)(0.63)(0.08)(0.32)(0.08)(0.17)(0.07)State FENoYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYear FENoNoYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesRaceNoNoNoYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesAgeNoNoNoNoYesYesYesYesYesYesYesSexNoNoNoNoNoyesNoNoNoNoNoConstant18.2617.1217.1017.1015.9615.960.050.100.090.170.39Obs6,737The sample used is the NHANES I from 1971 1974. The sample is restricted to children between 2  18 years old. Columns (1) (5) display the estimates of theimpact of 1 5 years exposure to UD and 6 or more years of exposure to UD on child BMI. Column (1) includes only the constant variable. Column (2) includesstate fixed effects. Column (3) includes years fixed effects. Column (4) includes race dummies and Column (5), which is my baseline regression, includes agedummies. Column (6) displays estimates of the impact of 1 5 years exposure to UD and 6 or more years of exposure to the probability of being obese.Column (7) displays estimates of the impact of 1 5 years exposure to UD and 6 or more years of exposure to the probability of being overweight.  Columns (8) (10) display estimates of the impact of 1 5 years exposure to UD and 6 or more years of exposure to the probability of being underweight type I, type II andtype III. Columns (6) (10) includes state fixed effects, year fixed effects, race and age dummies. Standard errors in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1)BMIThe Impact of Unilateral Divorce on Child Weight(2  18 years)Table 4(1)(2)(3)DivorcedMarriedSeparatedDummies:1 5 years exposure to UD0.02 0.00 0.00(0.04)(0.05)(0.01)6 or more years of exposure to UD0.10* 0.080.09(0.05)(0.06)(0.07)State FEYesYesYesYear FEYesYesYesRaceYesYesYesAgeYesYesYesConstant 0.000.78 0.00Obs5,279The sample used is the NHANES I from 1971 1974. The sample is restrictedto adults in childbearing age (25 45 years old). Columns (1) (3) display theestimates of the impact of 1 5 years exposure to UD and 6 or more years ofexposure to UD on Marital Status. All regressions include state fixed effect,years fixed effects,  race and age dummies. In Column (1) the dependentvariable is Divorced. In Column (2) the dependent variable is Married. AndIn Column (3) the dependet variable is Separated. Standard errors inparentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1)The Impact of Unilateral Divorce on Marital Status(25   45 years)25

Table 5(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)BMIObeseOverUnder IUnder IIUnder IIIDummies:1 5 years exposure to UD0.390.020.02 0.01 0.08** 0.02(0.38)(0.02)(0.03)(0.03)(0.03)(0.06)6 or more years of exposure to UD3.85*** 0.030.87*** 0.03 0.08** 0.15**(0.44)(0.02)(0.07)(0.04)(0.04)(0.07)State FEYesYesYesYesYesYesYear FEYesYesYesYesYesYesRaceYesYesYesYesYesYesAgeYesYesYesYesYesYes15.92 0.010.030.160.150.35Observations3,977The sample used is the NHANES I from 1971 1974. The sample is restricted to children between 7  18 years old.Columns (1) (6) display the estimates of the impact of 1 5 years exposure to UD and 6 or more years ofexposure to UD on child BMI. All regressions include state fixed effects, year fixed effects, race and agedummies. The variable BMI refers to child BMI. The variable Obese is the probability of being obese.  Thevariable Over refers to the probability of being overwheight. The variables Under I, Under II and Under III,refers to the probability of being underwheight types I, I and III. Standard errors in parentheses (*** p<0.01,** p<0.05, * p<0.1)(7  18 years)The Impact of Unilateral Divorce on Child Weight26

Table 6(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)BMIObeseOverUnder IUnder IIUnder IIIExposed  0.01 0.01 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.13**(0.18)(0.02)(0.04)(0.03)(0.01)(0.06)State FEYesYesYesYesYesYesYear FEYesYesYesYesYesYesRaceYesYesYesYesYesYesAgeYesYesYesYesYesYesConstant17.250.120.230.060.060.29Obs1,696The Impact of Unilateral Divorce on Child WeightThe sample used is the NHANES I from 1971 1974. The sample is restricted tochildren between 2  18 years old. All regressions include state fixed effects,years effects  race and age dummies.Columns (1) (6) are restricted to childrenbetween 2 and 4 years old.  Columns (7) (12) are restricted to children between2 and 5 years old.  Columns (13) (18) are restricted to children between 2 and 6years old. The variable BMI refers to child BMI. The variable Obese is theprobability of being obese.  The variable Over refers to the probability of beingoverwheight. The variables Under I, Under II and Under III,  refers to theprobability of being underwheight types I, I and III.   Standard errors inparentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1)2 and 6 year27

Table 7(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)BMIObeseOverUnder IUnder IIUnder IIIExposed0.270.010.01 0.01 0.05** 0.06(0.30)(0.01)(0.03)(0.01)(0.02)(0.05)State FEYesYesYesYesYesYesYear FEYesYesYesYesYesYesRaceYesYesYesYesYesYesAgeYesYesYesYesYesYesConstant15.920.050.100.080.150.36Obs6,737The sample used is the NHANES I from 1971 1974. The sample is restricted tochildren between 2  18 years old. All regressions include state fixed effects,years effects  race and age dummies. Columns (1) (6) display the estimates ofbeing exposed to UD on child BMI. The variable BMI refers to child BMI. Thevariable Obese is the probability of being obese.  The variable Over refers to theprobability of being overwheight. The variables Under I, Under II and Under III,refers to the probability of being underwheight types I, I and III.  Standard errorsin parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1)The Impact of Unilateral Divorce on Child Weight(2 18 years)Table 8(1)(2)(3)Dummies:1 2 years exposure to UD0.30  (0.31)3 or more years of exposure to UD0.45  (0.40)1 3 years exposure to UD 0.28 (0.31)4 or more years of exposure to UD 0.48 (0.36)5 or more years of exposure to UD  2.06***(0.69)State FEYesYesYesYear FEYesYesYesRaceYesYesYesAgeYesYesYesObs6,135The sample used is the NHANES I from 1971 1974. The sample is restrictedto children between 2  18 years old. All regressions include state fixedeffects, years effects  race and age dummies. Column (1) displays theeffects of exposure between 1 2 years and 3 or more years to UD on childBMI. Column (2) displays the effects of exposure between 1 3 years and 4or more years to UD on child BMI. Column (3) displays the effects ofexposure between 1 4 years and 5 or more years to UD on child BMI. Theconstant variable is 15.96 for all specifications.  Standard errors inparentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1)The Impact of Unilateral Divorce on Child BMI(2 18 years)28

Table 9(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)BMIObeseOverUnder IUnder IIUnder IIIDummies:1 5 years exposure to UD0.320.010.01 0.02 0.06** 0.06(0.32)(0.01)(0.03)(0.01)(0.02)(0.05)6 or more years of exposure to UD2.31***0.060.25 0.12 0.15** 0.37**(0.64)(0.08)(0.32)(0.08)(0.07)(0.17)State FEYesYesYesYesYesYesYear FEYesYesYesYesYesYesRaceYesYesYesYesYesYesAgeYesYesYesYesYesYesConstant15.910.050.090.090.170.40Obs6,135The sample used is the NHANES I from 1971 1974. The sample is restricted to children between 2  18 years oldand exclude California state. All regressions include state fixed effects, years effects  race and age dummies.Columns (1) (6) display the estimates of the impact of 1 5 years exposure to UD and 6 or more years ofexposure to UD on child BMI (without California State). The depende variable in Column (1) is child BMI. Thedepende variable in Column (2) is probability of being obese. The depende variable in Column (3) is theprobability of being overwheight. The depende variables in Columns (4) (6) is the probability of beingunderwheight types I,I and III. Standard errors in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1)(2 18 years)The Impact of Unilateral Divorce on Child Weight (without California)Table 10Employed 4.001(5.674)Elementary 1.610(3.974)High School3.497(4.054)College0.387(5.546)Wage between 0 and $7000 8.294(7.104)Wage between $7050 and $14500 8.771(5.966)Wage between $15500 and $22050 44.13*(25.66)Wage between $22500 and $2705029.16(25.05)Observations51Note: Each line refers to an independet regressionStandard errors in parentheses*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1Test of Difference in Means(Treatted vs. Non Treated)