Month of Birth and Socioeconomic Outcomes of Adults: Evidence from Brazil 

 

Wilman J. Iglesias Pinedo1 
Bladimir Carrillo Bermudez2 

 
Abstract 
 
This study provides evidence of the relationship between the season of birth and the socioeconomic outcomes 
of  adults  in  Brazil.  We  find  that  individuals  born  during  the  summer  months  have  worse  health  outcomes, 
educational  attainment  and earnings compared with persons born in  other months. These results emphasize 
the importance of seasonal patterns in affecting environmental conditions at the time of birth and explaining 
the  children‟s  health  and  future  socioeconomic  outcomes  among  adults.  Our  results  may  have  some 
implications for public policy, because they suggest that seasonal variations in health at birth matter for later 
socioeconomic outcomes. Thus, the understanding of the seasonal deterioration in the birth health outcomes 
and  its  implications  may  be  useful  for  that  the  policy  interventions  focused  on  early-life  conditions  could 
effectively enhance the development of human capital among Brazilians. 
 
Key words: Fertility; Family planning; Human Capital Brazil 
 
 
Resumo 
 
Este estudo fornece evidências da relação entre a estação de nascimento e os resultados socioeconômicos de 
adultos  no  Brasil.  Nós  achamos  que  indivíduos  nascidos  durante  os  meses  de  Verão  apresentam  piores 
resultados de saúde, nível de escolaridade e rendimentos em comparação com as pessoas nascidas em outros 
meses.  Estes  resultados  reforçam  a  importância  de  padrões  sazonais  em  afetar  as  condições  ambientais  no 
momento  do  nascimento  e  explicando  a  saúde  das  crianças  e  futuros  resultados  socioeconômicos  entre  os 
adultos.  Nossos  resultados  podem  ter  algumas  implicações  para  a  política  pública,  porque  sugerem  que 
variações  sazonais  de  saúde  no  nascimento  são  importantes  para  resultados  socioeconômicos  posteriores. 
Assim,  a  compreensão  da  deterioração  sazonal  nos  resultados  de  saúde  no  nascimento  e  suas  implicações 
podem  ser  úteis  para  que  as  intervenções  políticas  voltadas  para  as  condições  do  início  da  vida  possam 
efetivamente melhorar o desenvolvimento do capital humano entre os brasileiros. 
 
Palavras-chave: Fertilidade; Planejamento familiar; Capital Humano; Brasil 
 
Área ANPEC: Economia Social e Demografia Econômica 
 
Classificação JEL: J13, J24, I13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                           
1 Universidade Federal de Viçosa. Email: wilman.pinedo@ufv.br 
2 Universidade Federal de Viçosa. Email: bladimir.bermudez@ufv.br 

1.  Introduction 
Several studies have investigated the relationship between season of birth and socio-economic outcomes 
in adulthood. These studies have documented that individuals born in certain months have higher educational 
attainment, better health conditions and higher earnings (Buckles; Hungerman, 2013; Do; Phung, 2008). To 
explain  this  seasonal  pattern,  the  literature  has  used  the  fetal  origin  hypothesis,  which  states  that  poor 
environmental  conditions  in  utero  have  persistent  health  effects  (ALMOND;  MAZUMDER,  2011; 
ALMOND, 2006; BARRECA, 2010). Since health is both a type of human capital and a contributor to other 
forms of human capital (BECKER, 2007), an implication of fetal origin hypothesis is that the period in the 
uterus  is  a  key  timing  where  are  shaped  future  abilities  and,  thereby,  the  earning  pathways  (ALMOND; 
CURRIE,  2011).  Thus,  it  has  been  argued  that  the  seasonality  of  birth  in  adult  outcomes  is  explained  by 
seasonal  patterns  in  nutrition  and  disease  conditions  in  utero.  In  the  seasons  with  higher  temperatures,  the 
spread of certain diseases may be favored, adversely affecting fetal health (BARRECA, 2010). Furthermore, 
in  some  countries,  agricultural  productivity  may  be  adversely  affected  in  certain  seasons  of  year  due  to 
weather conditions, which could lead to inadequate nutrition due to lower food production and less variety of 
diet. 

Naturally, alterative arguments have emerged to explain the seasonality in adult outcomes. It has been 
argued  that  the  families  can  planning  the  conception  of  their  children  based  on  cultural  patterns,  the 
involvement of the mother in agricultural activities, and the seasonality of marriages. To the extent to which 
the  high  socio-economic  status  families  are  likely  to  have  a  better  planning,  seasonal  patterns  in  adult 
outcomes may simply  reflect  the family background. There is  evidence consistent with this view.  Lam  and 
Miron  (1994)  show  that  in  summer  the  number  of  conceptions  is  lower  in  the  souther  U.S.  Panter-Brick 
(1996)  finds  empirical  evidence  suggesting  that  seasonality  in  the  number  of  pregnancies  is  explained  by 
seasonality in marriages, and marital disruptions related to the male outmigration in Nepal. More generally, 
Buckles and Hungerman (2013) show that infants that born at different times of the year in US are conceived 
by women with different socio-economic characteristics. Yet, there is no definitive consensus on the reasons 
why individuals born in certain months have better socio-economic outcomes in adulthood. Whether seasonal 
patterns in socio-economic outcomes are due to seasonality in environmental conditions or family planning, 
this  would  have  implications  for  the  debate  on  if  interventions  during  the  prenatal  period  are  more  or  less 
effective in increasing human capital. 

Most  of  the  evidence  documenting  a  relationship  between  season  of  birth  and  adult  outcomes  is 
focused  in  developed  countries.  Remarkably,  the  existing  studies  for  developing  countries  use  a  limited 
number of adult outcome measures and relatively small samples, which has limited the development of clear 
stylized facts. The question is of particular interest for developing countries. Early-life conditions may be a 
more  important  determinant  of  adult  outcomes  in  developing  countries  due  to  health  insults  are  more 
frequent, and the ability to remedy is more limited (CURRIE; VOGL, 2013). This suggests that seasonality 
patterns in adult outcomes are likely to be more pronounced in these countries. In addition, the analysis for 
developing countries may differ substantially due to differences in climatic conditions. Thus, to extrapolate 
estimates from developed countries could lead to less accurate policy designs 

This paper presents new evidence of the relationship between season birth and long-term outcomes in 
the Brazilian context. We explore a dimension of adult outcome that is prevalent in developing countries and 
has not been previously examined by the literature. Besides examining whether there is seasonality in socio-
economic outcomes such as education, wages, employment and height, we also investigated the existence of 
seasonal patterns in informal employment. In the context of high informality, employment status is unlikely 
to  be  a  good  measure  of  success  in  the  labor  market.  In  developing  countries  like  Brazil,  a  job  with  a 
registered contract and contribution to social security might be a more appropriate indicator of success in the 
labor  market  because  it  reflects  better  wages  and  greater  employment  stability.  We  also  explore  whether 
there  is  seasonality  in  height,  which  is  a  measure  directly  related  to  nutrition  and  health  conditions  during 
childhood.  Differently  from  many  previous  studies,  our  analysis  is  based  on  several  waves  of  a  nationally 
representative  survey  with  information  on  more  than  1.5  million  individuals,  which  allows  us  to  obtain  a 

large statistical power to detect any small effect. We also contribute to the literature by investigating potential 
mechanisms underlying the relationship between birth season and adult outcomes using natality data from a 
large  number  of  births  (about  32  millions  of  births).  In  particular,  we  investigate  whether  variations  in  the 
family background plays an important role. 

To  preview,  we  find  that  individuals  born  in  the  last  months  of  the  year  have  higher  educational 
attainment,  increased  earnings,  greater  height,  and  lower  likelihood  of  informal  employment.  We  then 
investigated  whether  these  results  are  consistent  with  seasonality  in  birth  outcomes,  which  would  provide 
evidence  of  pathways.  We  found  that  individuals  born  in  the  warm  months  are  more  likely  to  have  better 
birth outcomes (measured by birth weight, length of gestation period and APGAR score).3 In principle, these 
results suggest  that variations in environmental conditions  in utero may be an important  explanation of the 
relationship  between birth season and adult outcomes. However, our  findings suggest that this relation is not 
the entirety of the story.  Indeed, we found that individuals born in warmer months are likely to be conceived 
by mothers that are more educated, more likely to be married and less likely to be young. This suggests that 
family planning could also play a role.  

As  an  attempt  to  disentangle  these  two  channels,  we  investigated  whether  seasonal  patterns  in  birth 
outcomes  are  affected  when  maternal  characteristics  are  included  as  controls.  We  find  that  maternal 
characteristics  have  little  influence  on  the  seasonal  patterns  birth  outcomes.  This  motivates  our  preferred 
interpretation  that  variations  in  environmental  conditions  in  utero,  such  as  the  availability  of  food  and  the 
environment diseases, are the most important mechanism to explain seasonal patterns in adult outcomes. One 
implication of this is that part of inequalities in human capital and income may be explained by differences in 
the early health conditions. Thus, targeting interventions during the in utero period may contribute to reduce 
such inequalities.   

At  this  point,  we  should  emphasize  that  there  are  several  caveats  to  our  findings.  First,  it  could  be 
argued that poor environmental conditions in utero increase the rates of fetal death. If those surviving fetuses 
are the healthiest, then a selection bias could arise. Our main response to this concern is that to the extent that 
such  selection  bias  is  important,  it  will  lead  to  a  downward  bias  in  the  effect  of  birth  season  on  adult 
outcomes.  If  it  is  so,  our  results  showing  large  effects  would  become  even  more  telling.  Thus,  we 
conservatively interpret our estimates as lower bounds of the true effect of birth season on later outcomes in 
life. 

Second,  our  estimates  represent  the  effect  of  the  reduced  form  of  the  birth  season.  This  generates 
alternative  interpretations  to  our  findings,  and  even  though  they  have  little  empirical  support,  we  cannot 
completely rule out them. Third, although our results suggest that variations in environmental conditions seem 
to  play  an  important  role,  our  analysis  does  not  allow  us  to  identify  what  specific  type  of  environmental 
conditions are the most important. In particular, our analysis does not inform if the disease environment plays 
a more important role than variations in food production. Our approach provides only suggestive evidence of 
the  combined  effect  of  these  channels.  Fourth,  it  is  unclear  the  degree  of  external  validity  for  other 
developing countries. Taken together, our study is at least a clarion call for future research in this area.   

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. The following section presents a brief review of 
the mechanisms through which the season birth could be related to later outcomes in life. The third section 
describes the data used. The fourth presents the econometric model. The fifth section presents the empirical 
results. The sixth section presents empirical evidence on potential mechanisms. Finally, the seventh section 
concludes. 

 

2. Linkages between Month-of-Birth and Later-Life Outcomes  
 

                                                           
3 The APGAR test is a clinical test that is given to the newborn in which five parameters are assessed. The parameters evaluated 
are  muscle tone, respiratory effort, heart rate, reflexes and  skin color. The test provides  a total score between 0 and 10,  where a 
higher score means more healthy   

In  developing  countries,  literature  have  hypothesized  that  the  seasonal  patterns  in  later  health 
outcomes are due to seasonal changes in nutrition, temperature (rainy and dry seasons in tropical regions) and 
infectious diseases. In particular, Lokshin and Radyakin (2012) formulate and test four hypotheses that might 
explain the relationship between the month of birth and health outcomes of young children in  India: (i) the 
„nutrition-disease‟  hypothesis  which  attributes  this  variation  to  the  higher  prevalence  of  diseases  and 
malnutrition  during  the  rainy  season;  (ii)  the  „socio-economic‟  hypothesis  which  explains  seasonal 
differences  in  birth  for  different  socio-economic  groups;  (iii)  the  „elective  survival‟  hypothesis  which 
assumes the heterogeneity in the health composition of survived children; and (iv) the „unplanned pregnancy‟ 
hypothesis which associates the different seasonality of children‟s health to the variation in health outcomes 
for  planned  and  unplanned  children  (see  Lokshin  and  Radyakin,  2012,  and  the  references  therein).  Their 
results  indicate  that  higher  prevalence  of  malnutrition  and/or  wider  exposure  to  diseases  during  the  lean 
season is the most likely explanation for the observed pattern of variations in children‟s health by month-of-
birth.  An  important  implication  of  such  results  is  that  prenatal  and  postnatal  nutrition  and  the  disease 
environment are relevant inputs or mechanism for children‟s health outcomes. 

We  can  draw  from  the  four  hypotheses  of  Lokshin  and  Radyakin  (2012)  to  identify  the  main 
mechanisms  underlying  the  relationship  between  month-of-birth  and  outcomes  later  in  life.  We  extrapolate 
from these hypotheses to the potential channels through which the month of a individual‟s birth is correlated 
with his/her later outcomes: disease-nutrition linkages, the socioeconomic status mechanism, the survivorship 
in early life and the unplanned pregnancy mechanism. 
 
2.1 Disease-Nutrition Linkages 

 
A vast amount of research spanning many scientific fields has investigated the relationship between 
month-of-birth  and  health  outcomes,  morbidity  and  mortality.  Seasonality  literature  has  consistently  found 
that  early  exposure  to  infectious  disease  and/or  nutritional  deprivation  can  have  long  term  severe 
consequences  to  health.  The  absence  of  infectious  diseases  and  the  adequate  food  supplies  may  work  in 
synergy and is  crucial for the children‟s  growth (ALDERMAN;  GARCIA, 1994). This  channel  is  likely to 
operate  via  seasonal  patterns  of  birth  outcomes  (such  as  birth  weight  and  child  height),  i.e.,  associations 
between measures of  early-life health  and adult  outcomes.4Lokshin  and Radyakin  (2012)  find that  children 
born during the monsoon months have worse health outcomes than children born during the fall and winter 
months. Their results indicate that seasonal variations affect the environmental conditions at the date of birth 
in  India  and  determine  the  health  outcomes  later  in  life.  Given  that  seasonal  variation  of  the  disease 
environment as well as prenatal and postnatal nutrition play an important role in determining health outcomes 
in  early life (whether  in  utero or infancy)5, the health at  birth  can be related to  later life outcomes (health, 
future schooling,  employment and earnings).  In other words, “healthy children tend to  become healthy  and 
wealthy adults” (Almond and Currie, 2011). 

Most of the literature on this topic has focused on the developed nations of the world. Almond (2006) 
linked data on adult outcomes to data on the affected cohort by health shock of the 1918 Influenza Pandemic 
and  found  that  children  of  infected  mothers  were  more  likely  to  be  disabled  and  experienced  lower 
educational  attainment  and  wage.  Other  studies  find  similar  long-term  damage  for  prenatal  exposure  to 
pandemic influenza in Great Britain (KELLY, 2011), Switzerland (NEELSEN; STRATMANN, 2011), Brazil 
(NELSON,  2010),  United  States  (BROWN,  2011)  and  Taiwan  (LIN;  LIU,  2014).  In  particular,  Lin  (2011) 
used  geographic  variation  in  mortality  as  an  indicator  for  the  intensity  of  prenatal  influenza  exposure  in 
Brazil and found that affected population achieve fewer years of schooling, lower wages and likelihood to be 

                                                           
4 Reviews of the literature are in Lee et al(2006),Strand et al(2011), and Chodick et al.(2009). See also Currie and Schwandt 2013, 
and the references therein. For reviews of the literature in developing countries, see Currie and Vogl (2013). 
 
5 See Doblhammer and Vaupel(2001) and Lokshin and Radyakin (2012). 

employed.  Bleakley  (2010)  estimates  that  total  eradication  of  malarial  infections  increased  subsequent 
literacy and adult income but mixed results for years of schooling. 

A  number  of  recent  studies  examine  the  long-term  effects  of  nutrition  at  particular  critical  periods. 
Field  et  al.,  (2009)  examine  the  effect  of  fetal  exposure  to  iodine  supplementation  (a  prenatal  beneficial 
shock) in Tanzania and find large, robust and positive impact on educational attainment. Empirical evidence 
from  Guatemala  provides  strong  support  for  the  effect  of  children‟s  nutritional  supplements  in  stimulating 
high-level of cognitive ability and schooling attainment (BEHRMAN et al., 2009) and increasing wages by 
46%  (HODDINOTT  et  al.,  2008).  On  the  other  hand,  Almond  and  Mazumder  (2011)  found  evidence  that 
diurnal fasting during pregnancy (due to the Ramadan fast which is longer during summer months) increases 
the likelihood of adult disability with largely effects for mental/learning disabilities. In economics, research 
exploiting variations in infectious disease comprise seasonal variation in infections (COSTA; LAHEY, 2005) 
and  improvements  in  reducing  the  burden  of  infectious  disease  such  as  typhoid  and  measles  (CASE; 
PAXSON;  ISLAM,  2009).  In  particular,  Barreca  (2010)  examines  that  early-life  malaria  exposure  can 
account for as much as 25% of the difference in long-term educational attainment between malaria afflicted 
and non-afflicted cohorts born in the early 20th Century. Likewise, there is evidence of the possible effects of 
maternal stress on infant health (see, e.g.,Aizer et al., 2009). For instance, Stoecker(2010) estimates negative 
effects of extreme cold during pregnancy on adult test scores in vulnerable populations. 

Finally,  there  is  evidence  that  the  height  and  weight  (indicators  of  health  and  nutritional  status)  of 
individuals are influenced by their month of birth in Japan (Tanaka et al., 2007) in Poland (Shephard et al., 
1979; Kościński et al., 2004). As argued by some of the literature on this topic, adults who were born heavier 
or  taller  fare  better  on  a  range  of  cognitive  and  socioeconomic  outcomes  (see,  e.g.,  Steckel  2008;  Currie 
2009).6There is also evidence of the link between height and various measures of wellbeing and success in 
the  development  economics  literature  (CURRIE;  VOGL,  2013).  It  has  long  been  recognized  that  taller 
individuals  are  more  productive  for  being  stronger  and  healthier  (Haddad  and  Bouis  1991),  Thomas  and 
Strauss  (1997),  hold  jobs  of  higher  status  and,  on  average,  earn  more  than  other  workers  because  they  are 
smarter (CASE; PAXSON; ISLAM, 2009).7 
 
2.2 The Socioeconomic Status (SES) Mechanism 
 

Women  who  give  birth  in  different  times  of  year  are  likely  to  have  different  socioeconomic 
characteristics. In other words, the well known association between month of birth and adult outcomes may 
not be purely due to natural phenomena that take place after conception, but may be largely determined by 
differences in fertility patterns across socioeconomic groups. This seasonality pattern may play an important 
role  in  determining  the  correlation  between  children‟s  health  outcomes  and  their  months-of-birth.  A 
reasonably explanation for this link is the difference in endowments of the children born in certain seasons 
and who come from better-educated and/or wealthier families (Bronson 1995; Lokshin and Radyakin, 2012). 
Therefore, differences in long-term outcomes may be attributed to the fact that some individuals come from 
families with  favorable socioeconomic status.  During early-life, people coming from  higher socioeconomic 
status are likely to have more resources available for human capital development, and hence as adults, they 
are more likely to be selected into higher status occupations that require more advanced skills and by which 
they earn higher returns. On the other hand, it is possible that individuals living in wealthier households and 

                                                           
6In fact, birth weight is a little questioned proxy of the intra-uterine environment in order to retrieve the effects of early-life health 
on  adult  outcomes,  once  such  relationship  is  appropriately  controlling  for  family  background  characteristics  (Currie  and  Vogl, 
2013). 
 
7Other  papers  posit  that  height  affects  individual  achievement  through  self-esteem  (see,  e.g.,  Young  and  French  1996),  social 
dominance  (see,  e.g.,  Hensley1993),  or  discrimination  (see,  e.g.,  Magnusson,  Rasmussen  and  Gyllensten  2006).  Some  evidence 
from Phillipines (Haddad and Bouis, 1991), Mexico (VOGL, 2014), Brazil and Ghana (Thomas and Strauss, 1997; Schultz, 2003) 
indicates a strongly correlation between height and wagesin the context of developing economies. 

with  better-educated  mothers  have  privileged  health  outcomes  because  they  were  planned  to  be  conceived 
and born in a certain favorable months of the year. For instance, Darrow et al. (10) indicate that mothers with 
lower socioeconomic status tend to give birth during months with poorer average birth outcomes. Similarly, 
Lam et al. (9) documented large seasonality in nonwhite births compared to white ones. 

A  literature  survey  by  Buckles  and  Hungerman  (2013)  reviews  empirical  and  theoretical  work  and 
argues that the socioeconomic characteristics of women giving birth fluctuate systematically over the year in 
the  United  States.  In  particular,  Buckles  and  Hungerman  (2013)  provide  strong  evidence  that  controls  for 
family background characteristics may explain the relationship between quarter of birth and later health and 
professional  outcomes.  Other  studies  show  that  child  and  adult  height  are  associated  with  parental 
socioeconomic  status,  access  to  clean  water  and  sanitation  during  childhood  (See,  e.g.,  Thomas,  1994  and 
Checkley  et  al.,  2004).  Nonetheless,  the  explanation  of  the  mechanism  by  which  women  with  different 
characteristics  tend  to  give  birth  at  different  seasons  is  still  an  empirical  endeavor  (Lam  and  Miron  1994; 
Buckles  and  Hungerman  2013;  Currie  and  Vogl,  2013).  Finally,  several  papers  consider  the  effects  of 
economic  shocks  around  the  time  of  birth  on  fetal  health.  Here,  the  focus  tends  to  be  health  in  adulthood 
rather  than  human  capital.  Findings  in  this  last  field  are  less  consistent  than  in  the  studies  of  nutrition  and 
infection described in the previous section because shocks are more diffuse in terms of timing (Almond and 
Currie, 2011; Currie and Vogl, 2013). 
 
2.3 The Survivorship in Early Life 
 

in 

in  childhood  on  seasonal  differences 

Selective  mortality  constitutes  another  potentially  important  linkage  effect  of  the  survivorship  of 
children  at  birth  and 
later  outcomes.  Samuelson  and  
Ludvigsson(2001)pointed out that children that born and survive during the high-mortality season might be 
more  strong  and  would  have  better  outcomes  later  in  their  life.  To  the  extent  that  survival  of  a  child  is  a 
function of its health endowments at birth only stronger children born in high mortality seasons survive and 
the weaker ones die (Lokshin and Radyakin, 2012). For instance, the weight (as a proxy of health) of a child 
at birth influences his/her prospects for survival (see Rosenzweig and Schultz  (1982) for a survey).MOORE 
et al., (2004) show that birth during the annual hungry season strongly influences susceptibility to mortality 
of  young  adults 
in  Gambia  and  Bangladesh.  Using  adult  height  as  a  measure  of  health, 
Bozzoli,Deaton,Quintana-Domeque  (2009)  provide  evidence  in  support  of  the  positive  association  of  child 
mortality  and  adult  height  in  the  poorest  and  highest  mortality  countries  of  the  world.  Otherwise,  Deaton 
(2007)shows  that  in  Africa,  where  mortality  rates  are  high,  declines  in  child  mortality  are  associated  with 
decreased  height.  In  poorer  settings,  height  (as  a  proxy  of  health)  constitutes  an  input  that  reflects  healthy 
growth  in  childhood  and  promotes  indirectly  the  development  of  both  physical  and  cognitive  skills 
(CURRIE; VOGL, 2013). In this sense, the aforementioned findings suggest that mortality selection may be 
an  important  affect  in  determining  the  adult  outcomes.  Research  in  a  diversity  of  countries,  rich  and  poor, 
confirms this correlation (see e.g., Pathania 2008 for a survey). Yet, Currie and Vogl (2013) indicate that the 
likelihood  of  selective  mortality  hypothesis  presents  an  obstacle  to  detecting  a  relationship  between  early 
childhood  conditions  and  future  outcomes  due  to  the  selection  biases  introduced  by  changes  in  the 
distribution of survivors. 
 
2.4 The Planned Pregnancy Mechanism 
 

The  observed  differences  in  later  outcomes  attributed  to  seasonality  of  birth‟s  month  may  also  be 
linked  through  the  family  planning.  This  effect  may  be  due  to  the  parents‟  believes.  If  parents  believe  that 
certain  months  are  auspicious  for  their  children  to  be  born  in,  then  they  would  plan  their  pregnancies  to 
delivery during those months in  order to  improve their children‟s health outcomes (Lokshin and  Radyakin, 
2012). Thus, family planning may be one key mechanism leading not  just to  the observed fertility  patterns 
but the outcomes in later life. The survey paper by Do and Phung (2008) observes that differences in health 

and education outcomes of individuals in Vietnam can be explained by their dates of births.  Do and Phung 
(2008) found that birth cohorts in auspicious years according to Vietnamese astrology are significantly larger 
than in other year. They concluded that the children born in the favorable dates of birth are more likely to be 
wanted or planned by their parents and hence benefiting from more favorable conditions for enhanced human 
development. Because the fertility planning might play a role in explaining the differences in later outcomes, 
disadvantaged health status can be explained by the fact that children born during inauspicious months would 
more  likely  be  a  result  of  unplanned  pregnancies  (KOST;  LANDRY;  DARROCH,  1998).  In  addition, 
Lokshin and Radyakin (2012) rejected the hypothesis that the higher proportion of unplanned births during 
the monsoon season could be explain the observed variation in children‟s anthropometrics across the months 
of the year. That is, seasonal differences in children‟s health in India are not the result of the differences in 
health outcomes for planned and unplanned children (LOKSHIN; RADYAKIN, 2012). 
 

3. Data 

This  study  uses  data  from  different  sources.  To  investigate  the  relationship  between  month  of  birth 
and  employment,  wages,  and  educational  attainment,  we  use  data  from  Pesquisa  Nacional  por  Amostra  de 
Domicilios  (PNAD).  To  explore  the  seasonality  of  birth  in  height  during  adulthood,  we  use  data  from 
Pesquisa de Orçamentos Familiares. To empirically investigate the origins of the seasonality of birth in adult 
outcomes,  we  use  microdata  on  birth  certificates  provided  by  the  Ministry  of  Health.  We  describe  each  of 
these data below. 

3.1 Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicilios - PNAD 

The  PNAD  is  a  nationally  representative  survey  of  Brazilian  households  and  is  conducted  more  or 
less  annually  since  1971  by  the  Brazilian  Census  Bureau  (Instituto  Brasileiro  de  Geografia  e  Estatistica, 
IBGE).  The  survey  is  not  longitudinal  and,  thus,  it  is  based  on  resampling  and  not  necessarily  the  same 
households are surveyed. The survey investigates the employment history and educational  attainment of all 
respondents. Importantly, the survey provides information on the month of birth of each respondent. In this 
study, we use data from ten waves of the PNAD (2001-2011)8. In total, there are 3,897,444 observations.  We 
limit the analysis to individuals between 20 and 65 years of age, representing about 58% of all observations. 
We  also  exclude  observations  of  individuals  who  reported  no  information  on  the  birth  month  (about  of 
1.5%). Our final basic sample consists of 2,218,348 observations. 

From the data of the PNAD, we investigated whether birth seasonality in employment, hourly wage, 
informal employment, years of schooling and illiteracy. For analysis of wage, we drop those individuals who 
reported a wage higher than 50,000 Brazilian Reais9 in order to mitigate the influence of outliers10. Likewise, 
we  also  excluded  those  individuals  who  reported  information  on  the  number  of  hours  worked.  To  create 
proxies  for  informal  employment,  we  use  the  definitions  suggested  by  Henley,  Arabsheibani,  andCarneiro 
(2009).  Specifically,  we  use  two  definitions  of  informal  employment.  In  the  first  definition,  informal 
employment  is  defined  as  individual  employment  status  comprising  the  categories  of  employed  without 
possession  of  a  signed  labor  card  or  a  registered  labor  contract,  household  worker  without  a  signed  labor 
card, own-account work or self-employment, unpaid worker, worker in production for own consumption, and 
worker  in  construction  for  own  use.  In  the  second  definition,  informal  employment  is  defined  through 
membership  of  a  social  security  institute  or  contribution  to  social  security  institutes  (social  protection 
coverage) in any job during the reference week. Table 1 presents summary statistics of the variables used. 

                                                           
8 The PNAD was not performed for 2010. 
9 This is equivalent to US$ 15,661.2. 
10 Hourly wages are adjusted for inflation using the consumer price index. Wages are at constant prices of 2013. 

3.2 Pesquisa de Orçamentos Familiares - POF 

We  use  data  from  the  last  waves  of  the  POF,  which  was  also  conducted  by  the  Brazilian  Census 
Bureau between May 2008 and May 2009. The survey aimed to provide information on the household budget 
composition  and  on  population‟s  life  conditions  as  to  measure  the  structures  of  consumption,  expenditures 
and income sources. Information on anthropometric measures, such as height, was also collected from each 
member  in  the  household  during  the  period  of  the  interview.  The  sampling  of  POF  is  part  of  the  group  of 
complex  surveys  which  involves  the  use  of  three  types  of  probability  samples  (simple  random  sampling, 
stratified sampling and cluster sampling). Firstly, census sectors, which are geographical areas defined in the 
Brazilian 2000 Demographic Census,  were selected to  form  a  chief sample used by  IBGE in  all household 
surveys of the bureau. These sectors were then divided in strata by a geographical and statistical stratification 
method11. Secondly, census sectors were sampled from each stratum and formed a subsample used to select 
the 55,970 households. In total, there are 206.482 observations. We excluded those individuals for whom it 
was  not  collected  height  measurement  (about  of  18,773  individuals).  As  with  the  PNAD,  we  limit  the 
analysis to those between 20 and 65 years old. We also exclude individuals who reported no information on 
the month of birth. The final sample consists of 103,385 observations. A statistical summary of all variables 
used from the POF is presented in the Table 2.  

3.3 Natality Files 

From  the  Brazilian  Health  Ministry,  birth  certificate  microdata  are  publicly  available  through  the 
National System of Information on Birth Records (NSIBR). The NSIBR provides information about the date 
of birth, birth weight, APGAR score, and length of gestation. Information on the characteristics of mothers 
such as age, educational attainment and marital status are also available in the NSIBR. We use these data to 
test whether birth seasonality in birth outcomes and maternal characteristics, which would provide evidence 
on the causes of birth seasonality in adult outcomes. Then, we obtained these data for the period 2002-2012 
within  all  municipalities  in  Brazil.  Our  basic  sample  consists  of  32,492,779  birth  records.  The  sample  size 
varies through each analysis due to the presence of missing values in some variables. 

To explore seasonality in birth weight, we use the log of birth weight and a binary variable indicating 
whether the infant was born at low weight (<2,500 gr). For the APGAR, we use a variable indicating whether 
the newborn presented a low Apgar score (less than 8). For the length of the gestation period, we constructed 
a  dummy  variable  indicating  whether  the  infant  was  born  prematurely,  defined  as  less  than  38  weeks 
gestation.  For  the  analysis  of  maternal  characteristics,  we  construct  binary  variables  for  low  education 
(defined  as  zero  years  of  schooling),  married  and  teenage  mother.  Table  3  presents  descriptive  statistics  of 
the variables used. 

4. Econometric Model 

4.1. Theoretical framework 
 

Our  empirical  strategy  is  conceptually  simple.  To  correlate  the  role  of  month  of  birth  on  an  adult‟s 
outcomes,  we  rely  on  a  simple  statistical  framework  of  Currie  and  Volg  (2013)  that  proposes  human 
development as the link between early-life outcomes and adult achievement. Let y be an adult outcome (e.g., 
wages or employment), let x be an anthropometric measure (e.g., birth weight or Apgar score), and let z be an 
index (of the early-life conditions or childhood environment) determining x and y. In particular, z may reflect 
both  genetic and non-genetic factors. Furthermore, assume that the reduced-form  production functions of  x 
and y can be expressed as: 
                                                           
11 For more details on POF stratification method see the publication “Despesas, rendimentos e condições de vida” of IBGE (IBGE, 
2010a). 

 

 

                  

                  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

[1] 

[2] 

 
where  εx  and  εy  are  the  error  terms  for  the  production  function  of  x  and  y,  respectively.  It  is  observed  that 
adult and early-life outcomes are linearly  related with  z. Since there is  no accurate measure of  z, we might 
correlate theoretically y with x to understand approximately about the parameters in equations [1] and [2]: 
 

                     

 

 

 

[3] 

 

According to  Currie and Volg  (2013), the probability limit  of the slope  coefficient (byx) in  equation 

[3] is given by 

         

  
  

 

 

 
 
  
 
   
  

  

 

 

 

 

 [4] 

     [  ] and    

  increases relative to the component of the variance of x explained by z (  

 
     [  ]. A simple implication of the expression [4] is that byx is decreasing in the 
where   
effect  of  the  early-life  environment  on  birth  outcomes  (  )  and  increasing  in  the  effect  of  the  early-life 
environment on adult outcomes (  ). On the other hand, if the residual in equation [2] has zero variance, then 
    is equivalent to IV estimator with z as an instrument for x in order to estimate equation [3]. Nevertheless, 
 ), the slope 
to the extent that   
coefficient (byx) decreases because x turns out a “noisier signal” of z (Currie and Volg, 2013). In developing 
country, there are two reasons to expect byx to be higher: (1) early-life conditions are more variable and (2) 
are worse in average (see Currie and Volg, 2013, p. 6-7). Thus, the inputs or initial endowments that promote 
healthy  growth  in  childhood  also  encourage  the  development  of  outcomes  later  in  life.  As  noted  above, 
several studies in a variety of settings (developed and developing countries) confirm such correlation. Given 
the paucity of longitudinal data following individuals in developing countries from birth into adulthood, we 
focus on seasonality in order to explore the adult outcomes correlates indirectly of birth outcomes and family 
background in Brazil. 
 
4.2. Empirical Implementation 
 

   

We turn to the empirical specification of the model and introduce the indexes  a and b for adult and 
birth outcomes, respectively. First, we examine month-of-birth‟s impact on adult outcomes. This relationship 
can be estimated as: 
 
                                                   
 
where Outcomea represents adult outcomes which include (1) years of schooling (2) the percent of illiterate 
individuals (3) the percent of individuals with employment (3) log of average wages and (4) the percent of 
individuals without a formal employment; M indicates a set of 11 dummy variables for month of birth (with 
January omitted); L denotes the fixed-effects of municipality; S represents fixed-effects of Federal Unity; Y 
indicates  year-of-birth  fixed-effects;  X  indicates  demographic  control  variables;  εb  is  noise  term.  The 
demographic controls include dummies for white and women. 

[5] 

 

 

 

Second, we argue that the association between birth outcomes and the month of birth captures aspects 
of the early-life endowments and experience. To assess the magnitudes of the seasonal effects, we estimate 
the aforementioned relationship as: 
 

                                             

 

 

 

[6] 

 
where Outcomeb is either represents (1) birth outcomes which include (a) birth weight (b) low birth weight 
(c) Apgar score and (d) preterm birth or (2) family background characteristics which include the fraction of 
children  born  to  (a)  mothers  with  a  low  level  of  schooling  (b)  mothers  with  a  high  level  of  schooling  (c) 
married mothers and (d) teenage mothers; M, L, S and Y are defined above; εb is the error term. 

Finally,  we  consider  to  what  extent  the  relationship  between  month  of  birth  and  birth  outcomes  is 
accounted for by variation in maternal and family background characteristics of children born throughout the 
year. we estimate: 
 

             

      

             

       

       

          

 

 

 

[7] 

 
where Z contains controls for family background characteristics including dummies for mother having a low 
level  schooling,  married  mother  and  teenage  mother.  It  is  feasible  to  test  whether  family  background 
 ) in 
characteristics drive these seasonal relationships by comparing the month-of-birth coefficients (  and   
[6]  and  [7].  Following  Buckles  and  Hungerman  (2013),  the  inclusion  of  controls  for  family  characteristics 
would  not  change  the  estimates  of  the  month-of-birth  coefficients  (β)  under  two  conditions:  (1)  if  family 
characteristics are orthogonal to month-of-birth or (2) if they have no direct impact on birth outcomes, i.e., 
the  coefficients  ρb  in  equation  [7]  are  zero.  If  neither  condition  is  met,  the  exclusion  of  maternal 
characteristics will lead to inconsistent estimates of    in equation [6]. Otherwise, if one of these conditions 
is satisfied, then equation [6] is correctly specified and its estimation will be both consistent and efficient due 
to the fact that the estimation would exclude the redundant variables added into equation [7]. 
 

5. Empirical results 

Main Results 

The  first  step  of  the  investigation  consists  of  looking  at  if  the  month  of  birth  is  associated  with  the 
adult  outcomes.  Table  4  presents  the  results  of  the  specification  [5]  estimated  using  dummies  for 
municipality, state and year-of-birth. We run the regressions using years of schooling, illiteracy, logarithm of 
wages,  and  formal  and  informal  employment  as  a  dependent  variables.  The  regressions  are  for  cohorts  for 
adults  aged  between  20  and  65.  Robust  standard  errors  clustered  by  primary  sampling  unit  are  reported  in 
brackets.  The  sample  sizes  and  R2's  of  the  regressions  are  shown  in  the  table.  For  years  of  schooling  in 
column  (1),  January  is  the  month  with  the  lowest  level  of  schooling,  and  the  peak  is  in  November.  The 
column  (2)  shows  that  a  person  born  in  January  are  more  likely  to  be  illiterate  than  other  persons.  The 
estimates  in  column  (3)  show  a  statistically  insignificant  effect  of  seasonality  on  the  probability  of  being 
employed. In the logged wages regression can be observed that wages for those born in January are lower on 
average than  other individuals. The probability of having an  informal  employment is  estimated in columns 
(5) and (6). The difference between these columns lies in the informal employment definition. Although not 
all the coefficients are statistically significant, especially among estimated coefficients in column (6), we find 
similar seasonal patterns in the likelihood of being informal employee across the months of birth. Based on 
the results of these columns, there is evidence of  significant seasonal pattern on the probability of informal 
labor participation. Specifically, we find that adults born in January look different from other adults: they are 
more likely to be an informal employee. The last three columns estimate [5] where the outcome of interest is 
height. The most coefficients on month-of-birth dummies in these regressions are insignificant, providing us 
with no evidence for differentiating between the impacts of height on adult outcomes. 
 

Table  5  shows  the  coefficients  of  the  linear  regressions  of  [5]  for  adult  outcomes  by  gender:  years  of 
schooling, illiteracy, logarithm of wages, and formal and informal employment. The effect of the month-of-
birth  persists  when  we  run  the  regressions  by  gender  and  control  for  municipality,  state  and  year-of-birth. 
Given  that  the  estimation  is  based  on  the  PNAD,  robust  standard  errors  are  clustered  at  primary  sampling 
unit. In particular, the results in columns (1) and (2) confirm that November is the month with adults having 
the  highest  level  of  schooling,  and  individuals  born  in  January  obtain  lower  level  of  schooling  on  average 
than  other  adults.  Because  all  of  the  coefficients  in  columns  (3)  and  (4)  are  negative,  individuals  born  in 
January have more likelihood of being illiterate on average than those born in other months of the year. The 
next pair of columns, (5) and (6), reports the results from a linear probability regression on the likelihood that 
an  adult  has  an  employment.  There  is  no  clear  pattern  in  the  seasonality  of  having  an  employment  in  the 
analysis by gender. For the other following two regressions on wages in columns (7) and (8), the statistically 
significant  coefficients  indicate  that  men  born  in  the  January  obtain  fewer  earnings  on  average  than  other 
men while results for women exhibit the opposite pattern. The last four columns of Table 5 show a seasonal 
pattern for men in the likelihood of having an informal employment which is similar to that general pattern 
found  in  Table  4.  Results  for  women  indicate  that  the  coefficients  for  month-of-birth  dummies  in  this 
regression  are  insignificant,  providing  us  with  no  evidence  for  seasonal  pattern  in  female  informal 
participation in the labor market. 
 
6. Mechanism 
 
6.1. Month of Birth and Health Outcomes Mechanism 
 

While our main concern is with the relationship between adult outcomes and date of birth, it is useful 
to  examine  the  seasonality  in  birth  outcomes  in  order  to  understand  the  mechanisms  that  may  explain  the 
seasonal variation in  such long-term  outcomes.  The estimates  of equation [6]  can be seen in  the regression 
results in Table 6. This table presents month dummy variables from regressions on birth weight (column (1)), 
fraction of low birth weight (column (2)), 5 minute Apgar score (column (3)), low Apgar score (column (4) 
and  preterm  birth  (column  (5)).  In  all  regressions  the  omitted  month  is  January.  Results  are  based  on  the 
NSIBR. The number of observations and R2‟s for each regression is shown in the table. Regressions include 
dummies for municipality, state and year-of-birth, and robust standard errors clustered by Federative Unit are 
reported  in  brackets.  Not  surprisingly,  most  of  the  month  of  birth  dummies  is  highly  significant  in  all 
regressions. For the first pair of columns, (1) and (2), December and January are the months with the worse 
birth outcomes, and the peak is in September. The next two columns look at the Apgar score indicating that 
children born in January lower scores compared with children born during other months of the year. Relative 
to  January,  children  born  in  other  months  have  better  health  outcomes  in  terms  of  fraction  of  premature 
births, with  the largest  negative differences showing up in  September and October. Premature infants  have 
lower capability for development of human capital because they are at greater risk for cerebral palsy, delays 
in  development,  and vision and hearing problems. Overall, results in  Table  6 depict clear seasonal patterns 
that are highly persistent across months of birth   
 
6.2. The SES Mechanism  

 
Table 7 present the results from estimating equation [6] on the second set of birth outcomes: fraction 
of children born to  mothers with  a low level  of schooling, mothers with  a high level  of schooling,  married 
mothers  and  teenage  mothers.  Regressions  include  dummies  for  municipality,  state  and  year-of-birth,  and 
robust  standard  errors  clustered  by  Federative  Unit  are  reported  in  brackets.  For  the  two  first  columns,  the 
estimates  suggest  that  January  is  the  month  with  the  lowest  SES  mothers.  However,  columns  (3)  and  (4) 
show that children born in January  are less likely to  be born to teenage mothers or unmarried mothers. An 

implication  of  these  results  is  that  there  is  evidence  of  seasonal  changes  in  the  characteristics  of  women 
giving birth throughout the year in Brazil.  

To  test  the  socioeconomic  status  mechanism,  we  estimate  the  equation  [7]  controlling  for  the 
mother‟s characteristics. The results are presented in Table  8. It is important to note that, the magnitude of 
the  effect  of  month  of  birth  is  still  predictive  even  after  family  background  controls  are  included.  These 
control variables are, overall, statistically significant and have the expected sign indicating that differences in 
birth  outcomes  may  be  indirectly  driven  by  family  background  characteristics.  But  clearly  variation  in  the 
underlying the environmental conditions around the month of birth of a person in Brazil play a crucial role in 
explaining differences in later outcomes for those born at different times of year. The coefficients estimated 
for month-of-birth dummies show that children born in December and January obtain lower birth weight on 
average than other children; these results are similar in magnitude to those shown in Table 6. Furthermore, a 
roughly comparison between the results for month-of-birth dummies in Table 7 and 8 shows that, in general, 
 ) remain substantially equal by adding controls for family characteristics. 
these effects (coefficients    and   
In other words, controlling for family background does not reduce these estimates for all the month-of-birth 
dummies.  Taken  at  face  value,  we  can  conclude  that  our  empirical  results  provide  no  support  of  the 
socioeconomic mechanism.  These results suggest that the other channels  that  we were not  able to properly 
capture (i.e., survivorship in early life and planned pregnancy mechanism) are not likely to account for effect 
of  month-of-birth  on  later  outcomes  within  families  in  Brazil.  As  discussed  above,  this  implication  seems 
consistent with the mechanism in which early-life conditions may be a more important determinant of adult 
outcomes in developing countries due to health insults are more frequent, and the ability to redress is more 
limited. 

 

7. Conclusions 

 
A  growing  literature  in  economics  holds  that  the  month  of  a  person‟s  birth  is  associated  with  later 
socioeconomic outcomes. In this paper, we use data from PNAD, POF and NSIBR to explore the relationship 
between the month-of-birth and socioeconomic outcomes of adults in Brazil. The innovation in our approach 
is  to  exploit  several  waves of  a nationally representative survey with  information  on more than 1.5 million 
individuals,  which  allows  us  to  obtain  a  large  statistical  power  to  detect  any  small  effect.  In  particular,  we 
investigate  the  potential  mechanisms  underlying  the  relationship  between  birth  season  and  adult  outcomes 
using  natality  data  from  a  large  number  of  births  (about  32  millions  of  births).  We  find  that  overall,  being 
born in December and January decreases years of schooling and wages, and increases the likelihood of being 
illiterate and having an informal employment. Seasonality of birth outcomes estimations deliver comparable 
results, which induces us to claim that such differences in socioeconomic outcomes among adults are due to 
the higher solar radiation during this period favors the increase in temperatures and precipitation. During the 
“lean  season”  in  Brazil  (period  December-January-February)  there  is  a  wider  exposure  to  diseases.  Thus, 
fertility pattern, fetal development during conception and birth outcomes may be affected by  excess rainfall 
that can saturate the soil damaging to certain types of culture, and generate disorders at the time of harvest 
and  agricultural  practices.  In  terms  of  health  outcomes,  high  levels  of  humidity  and  rain,  providing  the 
occurrence  of  colds  or  viruses  (e.g.,  influenza,  dengue)  influence  the  future  human  capital  development. 
Overall,  seasonal  pattern  in  environmental  conditions  in  utero  may  be  an  important  explanation  of  the 
relationship between birth season and adult outcomes.  

However,  our  findings  are  not  conclusive  about  the  mechanism  through  which  seasonal  factors 
explain the variations in outcomes later in life. In fact, we found that individuals born in heater months are 
likely  to  be  conceived  by  mothers  that  are  more  educated,  more  likely  to  be  married  and  less  likely  to  be 
young. But we tested the hypothesis that seasonal patterns in birth outcomes are affected by characteristics of 
the mothers and concluded that family background play a less relevant explicative role. 

Our  results  may  have  some  implications  for  public  policy,  because  they  suggest  that  seasonal 
variations in health at birth matter for later socioeconomic outcomes, and that adequate early-life conditions 
might be effective in fighting the seasonal deterioration in birth outcomes. Yet, the effectiveness of a specific 
intervention is a subject for future research. 

It  is  also  important  to  highlight  an  important  limitation  in  the  scope  of  our  findings.  Though  our 
approach exploits richer data, the results may not be directly related. The main reason for this lies in the fact 
that  there  is  a  paucity  of  good  longitudinal  data  following  individuals  from  birth  into  adulthood.  Further 
study  of  the  effects  of  seasonal  patterns  in  health  at  birth  on  socioeconomic  outcomes  among  adults  is  an 
important area for future research. 

 

References  

AIZER, A.; STROUD, L.; BUKA, S. Maternal stress and child well-being: Evidence from siblings. 
Unpublished manuscript, Brown University, Providence, RI, 2009.  

ALDERMAN, H.; GARCIA, M. Food Security and Health Security: Explaining the Levels of Nutritional 
Status in Pakistan. Economic Development and Cultural Change, v. 42, n. 3, p. 485–507 CR  – Copyright 
&#169; 1994 The University, 1 abr. 1994.  

ALMOND, D. Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long-Term Effects of In Utero Influenza Exposure in 
the Post 1940 U.S. Population. Journal of Political Economy, v. 114, n. 4, p. 672–712, ago. 2006.  

ALMOND, D.; CURRIE, J. Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis. The journal of economic 
perspectives : a journal of the American Economic Association, v. 25, n. 3, p. 153–172, 2011.  

ALMOND, D.; MAZUMDER, B. Health Capital and the Prenatal Environment: The Effect of Ramadan 
Observance During Pregnancy. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, v. 3, n. 4, p. 56–85, 1 
out. 2011.  

BARRECA, A. I. The Long-Term Economic Impact of In Utero and Postnatal Exposure to Malaria. Journal 
of Human Resources , v. 45 , n. 4 , p. 865–892, 21 set. 2010.  

BECKER, G. S. Health as human capital: synthesis and extensions. Oxford Economic Papers , v. 59 , n. 3 , 
p. 379–410, jul. 2007.  

BEHRMAN, J. et al. The Impact of Nutrition During Early Childhood on Education Among 
Guatemalan Adults. [s.l.] PIER Working Paper No. 06, 2009.  

BLEAKLEY, H. Malaria Eradication in the Americas: A Retrospective Analysis of Childhood Exposure. 
American economic journal. Applied economics, v. 2, n. 2, p. 10.1257/app.2.2.1, abr. 2010.  

BOZZOLI, C.; DEATON, A.; QUINTANA-DOMEQUE, C. Adult height and childhood disease. 
Demography, v. 46, n. 4, p. 647–669, 2009.  

BROWN, R. The 1918 US influenza pandemic as a natural experiment, revisitedDuke University. 
Conference paper. Anais...2011 

CASE, A.; PAXSON, C.; ISLAM, M. Making sense of the labor market height premium: Evidence from the 
British Household Panel Survey. Economics Letters, v. 102, n. 3, p. 174–176, mar. 2009.  

CHODICK, G. et al. Seasonality in Birth Weight: Review of Global Patterns and Potential Causes. Human 
Biology, v. 81, n. 4, p. 463–477, 1 ago. 2009.  

COSTA, D. L.; LAHEY, J. N. PREDICTING OLDER AGE MORTALITY TRENDS. Journal of the 
European Economic Association, v. 3, n. 2-3, p. 487–493, 5 abr. 2005.  

CURRIE, J. Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: Socioeconomic Status, Poor Health in Childhood, and Human 
Capital Development. Journal of Economic Literature, v. 47, n. 1, p. 87–122, mar. 2009.  

CURRIE, J.; SCHWANDT, H. Within-mother analysis of seasonal patterns in health at birth. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences , v. 110 , n. 30 , p. 12265–12270, 23 jul. 2013.  

CURRIE, J.; VOGL, T. Early-Life Health and Adult Circumstance in Developing Countries. Annual Review 
of Economics, v. 5, n. 1, p. 1–36, jan. 2013.  

DEATON, A. Height, health, and development. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , v. 104 
, n. 33 , p. 13232–13237, 14 ago. 2007.  

DO, T.; PHUNG, T. Superstition, Fertility Timing and Human Development. New York: World Bank. 
Unpublished, 2008.  

DOBLHAMMER, G.; VAUPEL, J. W. Lifespan depends on month of birth. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences , v. 98 , n. 5 , p. 2934–2939, 27 fev. 2001.  

DOUGLAS ALMOND. Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long‐Term Effects of In Utero Influenza 
Exposure in the Post‐1940 U.S. Population. Journal of Political Economy, v. 114, n. 4, p. 672–712, 1 ago. 
2006.  

FIELD, E.; ROBLES, O.; TORERO, M. Iodine Deficiency and Schooling Attainment in Tanzania. 
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, v. 1, n. 4, p. 140–169, 1 out. 2009.  

HADDAD, L. J.; BOUIS, H. E. The impact of nutritional status on agricultural productivity: wage evidence 
from the Philippines. Oxford bulletin of economics and statistics, v. 53, n. 1, p. 45–68, 1991.  

HENLEY, A.; ARABSHEIBANI, G. R.; CARNEIRO, F. G. On Defining and Measuring the Informal 
Sector: Evidence from Brazil. World Development, v. 37, n. 5, p. 992–1003, maio 2009.  

HENSLEY, W. E. Height as a measure of success in academe. Psychology: A Journal of Human 
Behavior, v. 30, n. 1, p. 40–46, 1993.  

HODDINOTT, J. et al. Effect of a nutrition intervention during early childhood on economic productivity in 
Guatemalan adults. The Lancet, v. 371, n. 9610, p. 411–416, 8 fev. 2008.  

KELLY, E. The Scourge of Asian Flu: In utero Exposure to Pandemic Influenza and the Development of a 
Cohort of British Children . Journal of Human Resources , v. 46 , n. 4 , p. 669–694, 21 set. 2011.  

KOŚCIŃSKI, K.; KRENZ-NIEDBAŁA, M.; KOZŁOWSKA-RAJEWICZ, A. Month-of-birth effect on 
height and weight in Polish rural children. American Journal of Human Biology, v. 16, n. 1, p. 31–42, 1 
jan. 2004.  

KOST, K.; LANDRY, D. J.; DARROCH, J. E. The Effects of Pregnancy Planning Status on Birth Outcomes 
and Infant Care. Family Planning Perspectives, v. 30, n. 5, p. 223–230, 1 set. 1998.  

LEE, S. J.; STEER, P. J.; FILIPPI, V. Seasonal patterns and preterm birth: a systematic review of the 
literature and an analysis in a London‐based cohort. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics & 
Gynaecology, v. 113, n. 11, p. 1280–1288, 2006.  

LIN, M.-J.; LIU, E. M. Does in utero exposure to Illness matter? The 1918 influenza epidemic in Taiwan as a 
natural experiment. Journal of Health Economics, v. 37, n. 0, p. 152–163, set. 2014.  

LOKSHIN, M.; RADYAKIN, S. Month of Birth and Children‟s Health in India. Journal of Human 
Resources , v. 47 , n. 1 , p. 174–203, 21 dez. 2012.  

MAGNUSSON, P. K. E.; RASMUSSEN, F.; GYLLENSTEN, U. B. Height at age 18 years is a strong 
predictor of attained education later in life: cohort study of over 950 000 Swedish men. International 
Journal of Epidemiology , v. 35 , n. 3 , p. 658–663, 1 jun. 2006.  

MOORE, S. E. et al. Comparative analysis of patterns of survival by season of birth in rural Bangladeshi and 
Gambian populations. International Journal of Epidemiology , v. 33 , n. 1 , p. 137–143, 1 fev. 2004.  

NEELSEN, S.; STRATMANN, T. Long-Run Effects of Prenatal Influenza-Exposure: Evidence from 
Switzerland. 2011.  

NELSON, R. E. Testing the Fetal Origins Hypothesis in a developing country: evidence from the 1918 
Influenza Pandemic. Health Economics, v. 19, n. 10, p. 1181–1192, 1 out. 2010.  

PANTER-BRICK, C. Proximate determinants of birth seasonality and conception failure in Nepal. 
Population Studies, v. 50, n. 2, p. 203–220, 1996.  

PATHANIA, V. The long run impact of drought at birth on height of women in rural India. Job Market 
Paper, Dept of Economics, University of California: Berkeley. vikram. pathania. googlepages. 
com/vikram_jm_paper2, accessed in February, 2008.  

ROSENZWEIG, M. R.; SCHULTZ, T. P. The behavior of mothers as inputs to child health: the determinants 
of birth weight, gestation, and rate of fetal growth. In: Economic aspects of health. [s.l.] University of 
Chicago Press, 1982. p. 53–92.  

SAMUELSSON, U.; LUDVIGSSON, J. Seasonal variation of birth month and breastfeeding in children with 
diabetes mellitus. Journal of Pediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, v. 14, n. 1, p. 43–46, 2001.  

SCHULTZ, T. P. Wage rentals for reproducible human capital: evidence from Ghana and the Ivory Coast. 
Economics & Human Biology, v. 1, n. 3, p. 331–366, 2003.  

SHEPHARD, R. J. et al. Season of Birth and Variations in Stature, Body Mass, and Performance. Human 
Biology, v. 51, n. 3, p. 299–316, 1 set. 1979.  

STECKEL, R. H. Biological Measures of the Standard of Living. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 
v. 22, n. 1, p. 129–152 CR  – Copyright &#169; 2008 American Econo, 1 jan. 2008.  

STOECKER, C. Chill Out, Mom: The Long Run Impact of Cold Induced Maternal Stress In Utero. 
[s.l.] Mimeo, 2010.  

STRAND, L. B.; BARNETT, A. G.; TONG, S. The influence of season and ambient temperature on birth 
outcomes: A review of the epidemiological literature. Environmental Research, v. 111, n. 3, p. 451–462, 
abr. 2011.  

TANAKA, H. et al. Correlation of month and season of birth with height, weight and degree of obesity of 
rural Japanese children. The Journal of Medical Investigation, v. 54, n. 1,2, p. 133–139, 2007.  

THOMAS, D.; STRAUSS, J. Health and wages: Evidence on men and women in urban Brazil. Journal of 
Econometrics, v. 77, n. 1, p. 159–185, mar. 1997.  

VOGL, T. S. Height, skills, and labor market outcomes in Mexico. Journal of Development Economics, v. 
107, p. 84–96, 2014.  

YOUNG, T. J.; FRENCH, L. A. Height and perceived competence of U.S. presidents. Perceptual and 
Motor Skills, v. 82, n. 3, Pt 1, p. 1002, 1996.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 1. Summary Statistics PNAD 

TABLES 

 

Observations 

Mean 

Standar Deviation 

Minimum 

Maximum 

1 
0 
0 
0 
0 

17 
1 
1 
1 
1 

4.557063 
.2937139 
.4540604 
.4999173 
.4984379 
.9375414 
.4996098 
.4998343 
.2748052 
.2639904 

2248646 
2248575 
2248646 
1588913 
1588900 
1449182 
2248646 
2248646 
2218348 
2218348 
2218348 
2218348 
2218348 
2218348 
2218348 
2218348 
2218348 
2218348 
2218348 
2218348 

Years of Schooling 
Iliteracy 
Employment 
Informal Employment (1) 
Informal Employment (2) 
Wages, Logged 
Women 
White 
January 
February 
March 
April 
May 
June 
July 
August 
September 
October 
November 
December 
Illiteracy is defined as the ability to read and write; wages are pre-tax wage and salary income over weeks worked and deflated using the producer price index (IPP), base 2013.  Logged 
wages reports the log of average wages (<16.213 dollars per  year);  informal employment (1)  is defined as individual employment status comprising the categories of employed without 
possession of a signed labor card or a registered labor contract, household worker without a signed labor card, own-account work or self-employment, unpaid worker, worker in production 
for  own  consumption,  and  worker  in  construction  for  own  use;  informal  employment  (2)  is  defined  through  membership  of  a  social  security  institute  or  contribution  to  social  security 
institutes (social protection coverage) in any job during the reference week for persons 10 years or older. 

8.435924 
.0953617 
.7093543 
.5091001 
.4605055 
1.634923 
.5197529 
.5128769 
.0822894 
.0753718 
.0855308 
.0828138 
.0871185 
.0857286 
.084581 
.0869148 
.0860079 
.0860173 

.2756007 
.2820087 
.279963 
.2782573 
.2817102 
.2803758 
.2803896 
.269926 
.2689663 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 

-5.706079 

8.628225 

.0785061 

.27967 

.07912 

Table 2. Summary Statistics POF 

 

Height 
Women 
White 
January 
February 
March 
April 
May 
June 
July 
August 
September 
October 
November 
December 
Height is defined as <250 centimeters. 
 

Observations 

1.05e+08 
1.24e+08 
1.23e+08 
1.23e+08 
1.23e+08 
1.23e+08 
1.23e+08 
1.23e+08 
1.23e+08 
1.23e+08 
1.23e+08 
1.23e+08 
1.23e+08 
1.23e+08 
1.23e+08 

Table 3. Summary Statistics NSIBR 

Mean 

164.7713 
.5069173 
.4847608 
.0819006 
.075427 
.083716 
.0816127 
.0860752 
.0821648 
.0880556 
.0861138 
.0854457 
.0885585 
.0801124 
.0808175 

Standar Deviation 

9.478115 
.4999522 
.4997677 
.2742133 
.2640791 
.2769614 
.2737738 
.2804751 
.2746157 
.2833758 
.280532 
.2795438 
.2841054 
.2714672 
.2725547 

Minimum 

47.2 

Maximum 

199.5 

0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 

Minimum 
3.970292 

Maximum 
9.148465 

 

Observations 

Mean 

Standar Deviation 

Birth Weight, Logged 
Low Birth Weight 
Apgar Score 
Low Apgar Score 
Preterm 
Male 
Low Schooling 
Married Mother 
Teenage Mother 
January 
February 
March 
April 
May 
June 
July 
August 
September 
October 
November 
December 
Birth weight is measured in grams, Low birth weight is defined as <2500 grams, the Apgar score is a five-minute Apgar score, the low Apgar score is defined as a five-minute Apgar score 
<8, and preterm is defined as a birth of a baby at less than 37 weeks gestational age. Family controls include a dummy for mother having a low level schooling (years of schooling<12), a 
dummy for having a married mother and a dummy for having a teenage mother (age≤20). 

32364790 
32364790 
30476420 
30476420 
32010916 
32492779 
31682515 
31891265 
32469257 
32492779 
32492779 
32492779 
32492779 
32492779 
32492779 
32492779 
32492779 
32492779 
32492779 
32492779 
32492779 

8.046245 
.0874875 
9.283852 
.0293995 
.0750807 
.5120755 
.0210641 
.3608989 
.2684565 
.0832783 
.0798597 
.0918384 
.0878685 
.0899749 
.0844955 
.0842608 
.0819518 
.0822069 
.0800997 
.0759174 
.0782482 

.2120483 
.2825481 
.9031416 
.1689236 
.2635215 
.4998542 
.1435981 
.4802613 
.4431564 
.2763024 
.2710758 
.2887977 
.2831036 
.2861457 
.2781294 
.2777785 
.2742912 
.2746797 
.2714475 
.2648659 
.2685617 

1 
10 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 

0 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 

 

Table 4. Month of birth and Adult Outcomes: Results from the PNAD and the POF 

  

  

Month of Birth: 
February 

 
March 

 
April 

 
May 

 
June 

 
July 

 
August 

 
September 

 
October 

 
November 

 
December 

 
 
Observations 
R-Squared 
Demographic Controls 

Municipality Dummies 

Year-of-birth Dummies 

Years of  
Schooling 

Illiteracy 

Employment 

Wages,  
Logged 

Informal  

Employment 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

0.103 

 

-0.0078 

 

[0.0160]*** 

[0.000992]*** 

0.127 

[0.0155]*** 

0.121 

[0.0158]*** 

0.0783 

[0.0163]*** 

-0.00272 
[0.0158] 

0.106 

-0.00646 

[0.000970]*** 

-0.00719 

[0.00101]*** 

-0.00392 

[0.00101]*** 

-0.00175 
[0.00105]* 
-0.00825 

[0.0153]*** 

[0.000987]*** 

0.0356 

[0.0162]** 

0.0849 

[0.0154]*** 

0.0965 

-0.00565 

[0.00101]*** 

-0.00771 

[0.00102]*** 

-0.00781 

[0.0155]*** 

[0.00101]*** 

0.137 

-0.01 

[0.0165]*** 

[0.000988]*** 

0.078 

-0.00402 

[0.0152]*** 

[0.00102]*** 

2218348 

 

2218280 

 

0.176 
Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

0.107 
Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

-0.000298 
[0.00163] 
0.00251 
[0.00160] 
0.000567 
[0.00161] 
0.000122 
[0.00166] 
0.000965 
[0.00161] 
0.00227 
[0.00155] 
-0.0000914 
[0.00158] 
-0.000213 
[0.00168] 
0.00184 
[0.00161] 
0.00106 
[0.00169] 
0.00169 
[0.00167] 

2218348 

 

0.123 
Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

 

0.00906 

 

-0.00525 

 

-0.00622 

[0.00372]** 

0.0151 

[0.00375]*** 

0.0142 

[0.00405]*** 

0.0112 

[0.00402]*** 

-0.00578 
[0.00411] 
0.00464 
[0.00416] 
-0.00841 

[0.00404]** 

-0.00438 
[0.00406] 
-0.00244 
[0.00377] 
0.000199 
[0.00397] 
-0.00654 
[0.00405] 

1430229 

 

0.173 
Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

[0.00215]** 

-0.00748 

[0.00214]*** 

-0.00416 
[0.00221]* 
-0.00465 

[0.00213]** 

-0.00186 
[0.00218] 
-0.00336 
[0.00215] 
-0.000221 
[0.00206] 
-0.0024 
[0.00211] 
-0.00442 

[0.00211]** 

-0.00418 
[0.00221]* 
-0.00152 
[0.00227] 

1567056 

 

0.077 
Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

[0.00210]*** 

-0.00718 

[0.00208]*** 

-0.00457 

[0.00205]** 

-0.00364 
[0.00213]* 
-0.000925 
[0.00214] 
-0.00324 
[0.00215] 
0.000686 
[0.00204] 
-0.00146 
[0.00199] 
-0.0032 
[0.00206] 
-0.00372 
[0.00214]* 
-0.000241 
[0.00222] 

1567043 

 

0.091 
Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

All 

(7) 

  

-0.0828 
[0.170] 
0.058 
[0.181] 
0.249 
[0.183] 
0.154 
[0.174] 
0.0469 
[0.199] 
0.000699 
[0.176] 
0.129 
[0.176] 
0.0317 
[0.174] 
-0.104 
[0.165] 
0.227 
[0.158] 
-0.0359 
[0.196] 

Height 

Males 

Females 

(8) 

(9) 

 

-0.08 
[0.242] 
-0.208 
[0.268] 
0.365 
[0.283] 
-0.0396 
[0.264] 
-0.112 
[0.260] 
-0.319 
[0.250] 
0.154 
[0.258] 
-0.161 
[0.254] 
-0.294 
[0.263] 
-0.0125 
[0.250] 
-0.106 
[0.257] 

 

-0.0866 
[0.241] 
0.262 
[0.254] 
0.131 
[0.231] 
0.297 
[0.225] 
0.154 
[0.253] 
0.246 
[0.248] 
0.0722 
[0.248] 
0.158 
[0.228] 
0.0584 
[0.214] 

0.43 

[0.229]* 
0.0126 
[0.269] 

104855569 

 

49757861 

 

55097708 

 

0.476 
Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

0.164 
Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

0.123 
Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

State Dummies 
Source: Author's elaboration based on the results of this paper. 
Notes: Results from columns (1) to (6) are based on PNAD and from (7) to (9) are based on POF.  Demographic Controls contains a dummy for women and a dummy for white in all columns. Robust standard errors in 
brackets are clustered at Primary Sampling Unit from columns (1) to (6) and at Sample Sector from columns (7) to (9). Illiteracy is defined as the ability to read and write; wages are pre-tax wage and salary income over 
weeks  worked  and  deflated  using  the  producer  price  index  (IPP),  base  2013.  Logged  wages  reports  the  log  of  average  wages  (<16.213  dollars  per  year);  informal  employment  in  the  sixth  column  (5)  is  defined  as 
individual employment status comprising the categories of employed without possession of a signed labor card or a registered  labor contract, household worker without a signed labor card, own-account work or self-
employment, unpaid worker, worker in production  for own consumption, and worker in construction for own use;  informal  employment  in the seventh column (6) is defined through  membership of a social  security 
institute or contribution to social  security  institutes (social protection coverage)  in any  job during the reference week  for persons 10  years or older; Height  is defined as <250 centimeters. Each column  is a  separate 
regression; the number of observations and the R-squared are shown in the table. The omitted month is January.* P<0.1; ** P<0.05; P<0.01. 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Table 5. Month of birth and Adult Outcomes by Gender: Results from the PNAD 

 
 

 
 
Month of Birth: 
February 

 
March 

 
April 

 
May 

 
June 

 
July 

 
August 

 
September 

 
October 

 
November 

 
December 

Years of Schooling  

Illiteracy 

Employment 

Wages, Logged 

Definition 1 

Definition 1 

Informal Employment 

Male 

1 

Female 
2 

Male 

3 

Female 
4 

Male 

5 

Female 
6 

Male 

7 

Female 
8 

Male 

9 

Female 
10 

Male 

11 

Female 
12 

0.123 

0.0867 

 

-0.00834 

 

-0.00732 

 

[0.0240]*** 

[0.0213]*** 

[0.00154]*** 

[0.00129]*** 

0.129 

0.129 

-0.00843 

-0.00474 

[0.0222]*** 

[0.0210]*** 

[0.00144]*** 

[0.00127]*** 

0.134 

0.111 

-0.00902 

-0.00558 

[0.0239]*** 

[0.0210]*** 

[0.00150]*** 

[0.00132]*** 

0.0933 

0.0657 

-0.00623 

[0.0232]*** 

[0.0212]*** 

[0.00146]*** 

-0.00809 
[0.0230] 

0.102 

0.00607 
[0.0223] 

0.111 

-0.00241 
[0.00150] 
-0.0096 

-0.00178 
[0.00134] 
-0.00136 
[0.00138] 

-0.007 

[0.0225]*** 

[0.0207]*** 

[0.00152]*** 

[0.00128]*** 

0.0385 

[0.0227]* 

0.089 

0.0352 
[0.0215] 
0.0827 

-0.00727 

-0.00422 

[0.00149]*** 

[0.00136]*** 

-0.0093 

-0.00615 

[0.0227]*** 

[0.0210]*** 

[0.00153]*** 

[0.00132]*** 

0.0961 

0.0967 

-0.00843 

-0.00713 

[0.0231]*** 

[0.0202]*** 

[0.00149]*** 

[0.00133]*** 

0.159 

0.12 

-0.0126 

-0.00772 

[0.0231]*** 

[0.0227]*** 

[0.00143]*** 

[0.00135]*** 

0.106 

0.0571 

-0.00699 

[0.0227]*** 

[0.0213]*** 

[0.00154]*** 

-0.00143 
[0.00132] 

-0.00397 

 

[0.00201]** 
-0.000765 
[0.00184] 
-0.00346 
[0.00199]* 
-0.00193 
[0.00189] 
0.00112 
[0.00178] 
0.000537 
[0.00187] 
-0.00308 
[0.00185]* 
-0.00294 
[0.00188] 
0.000698 
[0.00187] 
-0.00177 
[0.00204] 
-0.00174 
[0.00188] 

 

0.00337 
[0.00255] 
0.00565 

0.0141 

 
[0.00502]*** 

0.0214 

[0.00253]** 

[0.00496]*** 

0.00458 

0.0231 

[0.00241]* 

[0.00525]*** 

0.00233 
[0.00264] 
0.00085 
[0.00251] 
0.00408 

0.0148 

[0.00540]*** 

-0.00355 
[0.00521] 

0.0106 

[0.00241]* 

[0.00529]** 

0.00277 
[0.00256] 
0.00253 
[0.00267] 

0.0031 

[0.00251] 
0.00397 
[0.00255] 
0.00497 

[0.00251]** 

-0.00295 
[0.00520] 
0.00299 
[0.00517] 
0.00335 
[0.00505] 
0.00547 
[0.00531] 
0.00155 
[0.00508] 

 

0.00254 
[0.00630] 
0.00707 
[0.00589] 
0.00134 
[0.00629] 
0.00549 
[0.00601] 
-0.00785 
[0.00638] 
-0.0045 
[0.00629] 
-0.0162 

[0.00626]*** 

-0.0152 

-0.00879 

 
[0.00277]*** 

-0.00948 

[0.00276]*** 

-0.00657 

[0.00281]** 

-0.00647 

[0.00280]** 

-0.00322 
[0.00271] 
-0.00566 

[0.00284]** 

-0.00433 
[0.00266] 
-0.00606 

[0.00659]** 

[0.00279]** 

-0.0109 

[0.00646]* 
-0.00692 
[0.00619] 
-0.0172 

[0.00654]*** 

-0.00764 

[0.00279]*** 

-0.00422 
[0.00284] 
-0.00396 
[0.00296] 

 

-0.000924 
[0.00355] 
-0.00501 
[0.00333] 
-0.00119 
[0.00352] 
-0.0022 
[0.00325] 
-0.000323 
[0.00353] 
-0.000317 
[0.00337] 
0.00518 
[0.00333] 

0.0022 

[0.00334] 
-0.000314 
[0.00324] 
-0.00439 
[0.00358] 
0.00142 
[0.00350] 

 

-0.0101 

[0.00269]*** 

-0.0102 

[0.00268]*** 

-0.00778 

[0.00264]*** 

-0.00599 

[0.00273]** 

-0.00454 
[0.00263]* 
-0.00586 

[0.00282]** 

-0.00315 
[0.00260] 
-0.00464 
[0.00264]* 
-0.00715 

[0.00269]*** 

-0.00583 

[0.00277]** 

-0.00467 
[0.00284] 

 

-0.00159 
[0.00350] 
-0.00355 
[0.00332] 
-0.000533 
[0.00342] 
-0.000438 
[0.00321] 
0.00349 
[0.00338] 
0.000245 
[0.00336] 
0.00564 

[0.00327]* 

0.00251 
[0.00320] 
0.00194 
[0.00323] 
-0.00119 
[0.00340] 
0.00512 
[0.00349] 

 

 

 

 

 

1157570 

1060710 

1157602 

1060746 

1060746 

0.183 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

0.172 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

 
 
Observations 
R-Squared 
Demographic Controls 
Municipality Dummies 
Year-of-birth Dummies 
State Dummies 
Source: Author's elaboration based on the results of this paper. 
Notes: Demographic Controls contains a dummy for white. Robust standard errors clustered at primary sampling unit in brackets. Illiteracy is defined as the ability to read and write; wages are pre-tax wage and salary 
income over  weeks worked and deflated using the producer price  index (IPP), base 2013. Logged wages reports the log of average wages (<16.213 dollars per  year);  informal  employment  in the sixth column (5)  is 
defined as individual employment status comprising the categories of employed without possession of a signed labor card or a registered labor contract, household worker without a signed labor card, own-account work 
or  self-employment,  unpaid  worker,  worker  in  production  for own  consumption,  and  worker  in  construction  for own  use;  informal  employment  in  the  seventh  (6)  column  is  defined  through  membership  of  a  social 
security  institute  or  contribution  to  social  security  institutes  (social  protection  coverage)  in  any  job  during  the  reference  week  for  persons  10  years  or  older.  Each  column  is  a  separate  regression;  the  number  of 
observations and the R-squared are shown in the table. The omitted month is January.* P<0.1; ** P<0.05; P<0.01. 

847593 
0.194 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

582636 
0.142 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

894182 
0.078 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

672874 
0.075 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

672869 
0.083 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

894174 
0.099 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

0.050 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

0.108 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

0.044 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

0.11 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

1157602 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 6. Infant Health Outcomes by Month of Birth: Results from the NSIBR 

 
  
Month of Birth: 
February 

 
March 

 
April 

 
May 

 
June 

 
July 

 
August 

 
September 

 
October 

 
November 

 
December 

 
Observations 
R-Squared 
Municipality Dummies 

 

Year-of-birth Dummies 

Birth Weight,  

Logged 

(1) 

Low Birth  

Weight (<2500) 

(2) 

 

0.000544 
[0.000463] 
0.000697 
[0.000635] 

0.00116 

[0.000581]* 

0.00120 

[0.000642]* 

0.00129 

[0.000675]* 

0.00135 

[0.000777]* 

0.000945 
[0.000711] 

0.00432 

[0.000712]*** 

0.00207 

[0.000501]*** 

0.000744 

[0.000233]*** 

-0.00211 

[0.000260]*** 

32364790 

 

0.004 
Yes 

Yes 

 

-0.00132 

[0.000588]** 

-0.00286 

[0.000715]*** 

-0.00362 

[0.000623]*** 

-0.00369 

[0.000708]*** 

-0.00367 

[0.000664]*** 

-0.00352 

[0.000746]*** 

-0.00206 

[0.000774]** 

-0.00667 

[0.000705]*** 

-0.00376 

[0.000557]*** 

-0.00268 

[0.000287]*** 

0.000446 

[0.000210]** 

32364790 

 

0.001 
Yes 

Yes 

Apgar  
Score 

(3) 

 

0.00536 

[0.000924]*** 

0.00806 

[0.00106]*** 

0.0101 

[0.00138]*** 

0.0107 

[0.00115]*** 

0.0133 

[0.00132]*** 

0.0145 

[0.00211]*** 

0.0107 

[0.00152]*** 

0.0184 

[0.00152]*** 

0.0171 

[0.00218]*** 

0.0109 

[0.00190]*** 

0.0121 

[0.00193]*** 

30476420 

 

0.027 
Yes 

Yes 

Low Apgar  
Score (<8) 

(4) 

 

-0.000859 

[0.000254]*** 

-0.00113 

Preterm 

(5) 

 

-0.000982 
[0.000687] 
-0.00545 

[0.000219]*** 

[0.000719]*** 

-0.00178 

-0.00518 

[0.000231]*** 

[0.000726]*** 

-0.00176 

-0.00607 

[0.000274]*** 

[0.000742]*** 

-0.00210 

-0.00462 

[0.000268]*** 

[0.000769]*** 

-0.00203 

-0.00511 

[0.000254]*** 

[0.000728]*** 

-0.00190 

-0.00293 

[0.000308]*** 

[0.000593]*** 

-0.00291 

-0.00959 

[0.000392]*** 

[0.000602]*** 

-0.00220 

-0.00615 

[0.000437]*** 

[0.000539]*** 

-0.00143 

-0.00427 

[0.000447]*** 

[0.000598]*** 

-0.00147 

[0.000400]*** 

30476420 

 

0.002 
Yes 

Yes 

-0.000715 
[0.000753] 

32010916 

 

0.006 
Yes 

Yes 

State Dummies 
Source: Author's elaboration based on the results of this paper. 
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at Federative Unit in brackets. Birth weight is measured in grams, Low birth weight is defined as <2500 grams, the Apgar score is a five-minute 
Apgar score, the low Apgar score is defined as a five-minute Apgar score <8, and preterm is defined as a birth of a baby at less than 37 weeks gestational age. Each column is a separate 
regression; the number of observations and the R-squared are shown in the table. The omitted month is January.* P<0.1; ** P<0.05; P<0.01. 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Table 7. Month of Birth and Family Background: Results from the NSIBR 

 
  

Month of Birth: 
February 

 

 
March 

 
April 

 
May 

 
June 

 
July 

 
August 

 
September 

 
October 

 
November 

 
December 

High Schooling  

(1) 

0.00121 

[0.000565]** 

0.00149 

[0.000702]** 

0.000228 
[0.000528] 
-0.000447 
[0.000515] 
0.000227 
[0.000512] 

0.00229 

[0.000675]*** 

0.00173 

[0.000818]** 

0.00667 

[0.000804]*** 

0.00611 

[0.00118]*** 

0.00284 

[0.000726]*** 

0.00615 

[0.000513]*** 

Low Schooling 

Married Mother 

Teenage Mother 

(2) 

(3) 

 

-0.000881 

[0.000304]*** 

-0.00141 

[0.000418]*** 

-0.00154 

[0.000419]*** 

-0.00185 

[0.000537]*** 

-0.00194 

[0.000558]*** 

-0.00220 

[0.000660]*** 

-0.00201 

[0.000582]*** 

-0.00296 

[0.000748]*** 

-0.00307 

[0.000766]*** 

-0.00339 

[0.000840]*** 

-0.00385 

[0.000834]*** 

 

0.000166 
[0.000960] 
-0.00148 
[0.000875] 
-0.00279 

[0.00114]** 

-0.00616 

[0.00130]*** 

-0.00797 

[0.00138]*** 

-0.00863 

[0.00137]*** 

-0.00983 

[0.00131]*** 

-0.00611 

[0.00152]*** 

-0.00258 
[0.00188] 
-0.00597 

[0.00127]*** 

-0.00314 

[0.00145]** 

 

(4) 

-0.000934 
[0.000779] 
0.0000505 
[0.000813] 
0.000554 
[0.00110] 
0.00133 
[0.00116] 
0.00326 

[0.00130]** 

0.00256 

[0.00102]** 

0.00394 

[0.00103]*** 

0.00165 
[0.00103] 
-0.00145 
[0.000876] 
-0.00232 

[0.000837]** 

-0.00390 

[0.000645]*** 

 

31682515 

 
 
Observations 
R-Squared 
Municipality Dummies 
Year-of-birth Dummies 
State Dummies 
Source: Author's elaboration based on the results of this paper. 
Notes:  Robust  standard  errors  clustered  at  Federative  Unit  in  brackets.  Each  column  is  a  separate  linear-probability  regression,  where  second  column  (1)  is  a  regression  on  dummy  for 
mother  having  a  high  level  of  schooling  (years  of  schooling≥12),  third  column  (2)  is  a  regression  on  dummy  for  mother  having  a  low  level  schooling  (years  of  schooling<12),  fourth 
column (3) is a regression on dummy for having a married mother, fifth column (4) is a regression on dummy for having a teenage mother (age≤20). The number of observations and the 
R-squared are shown in the table. The omitted month is January.* P<0.1; ** P<0.05; P<0.01. 

0.014 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

0.022 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

0.030 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

0.016 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 

32469257 

31682515 

31891265 

 

 

 

 

Table 8. Maternal Characteristics and Birth Outcomes: Results from the NSIBR 

 
  
Month of Birth: 
February 

 
March 

 
April 

 
May 

 
June 

 
July 

 
August 

 
September 

 
October 

 
November 

 
December 

 
  
Family Controls: 
Low School Degree 

 
Married Mother 

 
Teenager Mother 

 
Observations 
R-squared 

Birth Weight, 

 Logged 

(1) 

 

0.000551 
[0.000443] 
0.000742 
[0.000640] 

0.00118 

[0.000560]** 

0.00125 

[0.000616]* 

0.00141 

[0.000668]** 

0.00149 

[0.000753]* 

0.0011 

[0.000693] 

0.00441 

[0.000680]*** 

0.00196 

[0.000479]*** 

0.000777 

[0.000282]** 

-0.0022 

[0.000283]*** 

 
 

-0.0125 

[0.00194]*** 

0.00997 

[0.000697]*** 

-0.0253 

[0.00131]*** 

31202595 

0.008 

Low Birth  

Weight (<2500) 

(2) 

 

-0.00131 

[0.000558]** 

-0.00283 

[0.000723]*** 

-0.00359 

[0.000614]*** 

-0.00368 

[0.000693]*** 

-0.0037 

[0.000683]*** 

-0.00362 

[0.000728]*** 

-0.00216 

[0.000754]*** 

-0.00669 

[0.000691]*** 

-0.00361 

[0.000532]*** 

-0.00272 

[0.000333]*** 

0.000567 

[0.000239]** 

 
 

0.0235 

[0.00232]*** 

-0.0113 

[0.000756]*** 

0.013 

[0.00103]*** 

31202595 

0.002 

Apgar  
Score 

(3) 

 

0.00559 

[0.000910]*** 

0.008 

[0.00107]*** 

0.0101 

[0.00135]*** 

0.0109 

[0.00125]*** 

0.0134 

[0.00139]*** 

0.015 

[0.00208]*** 

0.0113 

[0.00147]*** 

0.0186 

[0.00141]*** 

0.0169 

[0.00206]*** 

0.0111 

[0.00179]*** 

0.0122 

[0.00185]*** 

 
 

-0.0391 

[0.0168]** 

0.0569 

[0.00615]*** 

-0.0344 

[0.00259]*** 

29534908 

0.029 

Low Apgar 
 Score (<8) 

(4) 

 

-0.000868 

[0.000238]*** 

-0.00112 

[0.000209]*** 

-0.00183 

[0.000226]*** 

-0.00174 

[0.000286]*** 

-0.00207 

[0.000265]*** 

-0.00204 

[0.000246]*** 

-0.0019 

[0.000293]*** 

-0.00288 

[0.000375]*** 

-0.00211 

[0.000416]*** 

-0.00138 

[0.000426]*** 

-0.0014 

[0.000375]*** 

 
 

0.0116 

[0.00132]*** 

-0.0044 

[0.000396]*** 

0.00558 

[0.000413]*** 

29534908 

0.003 

Preterm 

(5) 

 

-0.00099 
[0.000671] 
-0.00551 

[0.000742]*** 

-0.00521 

[0.000711]*** 

-0.00616 

[0.000744]*** 

-0.00461 

[0.000777]*** 

-0.00517 

[0.000721]*** 

-0.00296 

[0.000590]*** 

-0.00953 

[0.000618]*** 

-0.00603 

[0.000548]*** 

-0.00424 

[0.000632]*** 

-0.000557 
[0.000796] 

 
 

0.00492 
[0.00316] 
-0.00234 

[0.000677]*** 

0.00859 

[0.000553]*** 

30933273 

0.007 

Yes 

Municipality Dummies 
Year-of-birth Dummies 
State Dummies 
Source: Author's elaboration based on the results of this paper. 
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at Federative Unit in brackets. Birth weight is measured in grams, Low birth weight is defined as <2500 grams, the Apgar score is a five-minute 
Apgar score, the low Apgar score is defined as a five-minute Apgar score <8, and preterm is defined as a birth of a baby at less than 37 weeks gestational age. Family controls include a 
dummy  for  mother having a  low  level schooling (years of schooling<12), a dummy  for  having a  married  mother and a dummy for having a teenage  mother (age≤20). Each column  is a 
separate regression; the number of observations and the R-squared are shown in the table. The omitted month is January.* P<0.1; ** P<0.05; P<0.01. 

Yes 
Yes 

Yes 
Yes 

Yes 
Yes 

Yes 
Yes 

Yes 
Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

 

 

