A Linked Emissions Trading Scheme under alternative scenarios: implications for Europe and 

Brazil 

 

Thais Diniz Oliveira1  

Centre for Environmental Research Innovation and Sustainability (CERIS), Institute of Technology Sligo, Ireland 

São Paulo School of Economics, Fundação Getúlio Vargas, São Paulo, Brazil. 

Angelo Costa Gurgel 

Steve Tonry 

Centre for Environmental Research Innovation and Sustainability (CERIS), Institute of Technology Sligo, Ireland 

 

ABSTRACT 
The Paris Agreement has recently highlighted the importance of international cooperation through carbon pricing, 
as well as the need for support from developed and developing countries to tackle climate change. With Emissions 
Trading  Schemes  (ETS)  emerging  in  developed  and  developing  regions  around  the  world,  linking  these  systems 
may become a future option. This raises the question as to the appropriateness of bilateral ETS linkages between 
developed  and  developing  regions.  Based  on  discussions  of  carbon  pricing  in  Brazil,  this  paper  investigates  the 
impact of a sectoral ETS covering electricity and energy-intensive sectors using a global economy-wide model, the 
EPPA6.  Additionally,  we  simulate  a  link  with  a  developed  region,  Europe,  under  five  alternative  ETS  design 
scenarios.  We  find  that  a  sectoral  ETS  linkage  results,  for  both  participants,  in  more  significant  emissions 
reductions,  a  technological  substitution  towards  alternative  energy,  and  losses  in  GDP  and  welfare  where  a 
stringent  cap  is  imposed.  The  appropriate  ETS  design  to  seize  mitigation  opportunities  cost-effectively  for  both 
regions  includes  a  less  stringent  cap  for  Brazil,  the  introduction  of  revenue  recycling  for  the  production  of 
alternative  energy  and,  in  the  long-term,  the  banking  of  permits.  As  Brazil  presents  an  importer  profile  of 
allowances in the short run, and becomes an exporter to Europe by 2050, this design would  concurrently provide 
emissions reductions and, to a certain extent, improve the cost effectiveness of the ETS linkage in the long-term.  
 
RESUMO 
O  Acordo  de  Paris  recentemente  ressaltou  a  importância  da  cooperação  internacional  através  da  precificação  de 
carbono,  assim  como  a  necessidade  de  suporte  dos  países  desenvolvidos  e  em  desenvolvimento  para  enfrentar  o 
problema  das  mudanças  climáticas.  Com  a  Esquemas  de  Comércio  de  Emissões  (ECE)  emergindo  em  regiões 
desenvolvidas e em desenvolvimento em todo o mundo, integrar tais sistemas pode se tornar uma opção no futuro. 
Isto levanta a questão sobre ser apropriado uma integração bilateral de ECE entre as regiões desenvolvidas e em 
desenvolvimento. Baseado nas discussões de precificação de carbono no Brasil, esse paper investiga os impactos de 
um  ECE  setorial  cobrindo os  setores  de eletricidade  e  indústrias energointensivas  usando  um  modelo  econômico 
global, o EPPA6. Além disso, simulamos a integração com o mercado de uma região desenvolvida, a Europa, sob 
cinco  cenários  com  diferentes  arranjos  de  ECE.  Verificou-se  que  uma  integração  de  ECE  setorial  resulta,  para 
ambos  participantes,  em  significative  redução  de  emissões,  em  uma  substituição  tecnológica  por  energias 
alternativas, e perdas de PIB e bem-estar onde um limite de emissões rigoroso é imposto. O arranjo de ETS mais 
apropriado  para  aproveitar  as  oportunidades  de  mitigação  de  maneira  custo-efetiva  para  ambas  regiões  inclue 
adotar  uma  meta  menos  ambiciosa  para  o  Brasil,  introduzir  reciclagem  das  receitas  na  produção  de  energia 
alternativa e, no longo prazo, admitir a poupança de permissões. Como o Brasil apresenta um perfil importador de 
permissões  no  curto  prazo,  e  se  torna  exportador  para  Europa  até  2050,  esse  arranjo  poderia  simultaneamente 
reduzir emissões e, em certa medida, melhorar a custo-efetividade da integração do ECE no longo prazo.  
 
KEY WORDS: Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS), linkage, EU ETS, Brazil, EPPA6 
 
ANPEC AREA: Economia Agrícola e do Meio Ambiente 
 
JEL classification: D58, Q48, Q58 
 

                                                           
1

Corresponding 

Ireland.  
Email addresses: thais.dinizoliveria@mail.itsligo.ie (T.D.Oliveira), angelo.gurgel@fgv.br (A.C.Gurgel), tonry.steve@itsligo.ie  
(S.Tonry). 

Technology 

Institute 

author 

Sligo, 

Sligo, 

Lane, 

Ash 

at: 

of 

 

1 

1  INTRODUCTION 

Linkage  of  national  climate  policies  is  increasingly  gaining  relevance  in  the  climate  policy 
architecture, especially after the provisions introduced by the Paris Agreement. Article 6 of the agreement 
provides  the  foundation  for  carbon  pricing  at  international  level  to  comply  with  Nationally  Determined 
Contributions  (NDCs).  Although  not  explicitly  mentioned  as  “Emissions  Trading”,  the  agreement 
envisages the use of “internationally transferred mitigation outcomes” to achieve significant progress on 
emissions mitigation.  

In  light  of  that,  developing  countries  are  encouraged  to  also  take  action  with  the  support  of 
developed  countries.  In  the  past,  developing  countries  had  been  involved  in  climate  change  mitigation 
through flexibility mechanisms, as hosts of Clean Development Mechanism (CDM)2 projects, or in some 
cases, by committing to voluntary  reduce emissions. Recently, a nationwide Chinese Emissions Trading 
Scheme (ETS) has been launched, and the Korean ETS has been operating since 2015.  

Carbon trading is likely to become even more common post-2020, as further countries plan, or at 
least  investigate  the  potential  for  ETS  adoption3.  As  a  result,  linkages  have  the  potential  to  develop 
among participants in the future.  

To date, a small number of the active national and subnational carbon markets are involved in, or 
are open to the concept of, ETS linkages. Examples include the California, Quebec and Ontario link (the 
Western Climate Initiative, WCI) and the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) in the northeast of 
the USA. The European Union Emissions Trading Scheme (EU ETS), the largest and most consolidated 
system in the world, displays willingness to link with other compatible systems, which means other ETS 
systems  with  similar  environmental  integrity  and  system  architecture  could  potentially  link.  There  is 
currently  a  Norway-EU  linkage,  which  also  regulates  the  aviation  sector.  Literature  in  this  regard 
underlines  potential  opportunities  from  the  use  of  market-based  instruments  in  a  framework  of 
international cooperation, since aggregate emissions reductions are achieved at a lower cost (Bodansky et 
al., 2014, Burtraw et al., 2013).  

In this research, linking occurs exclusively through cap-and-trade schemes set up at the country-
level. Under this approach, the marginal abatement costs are equalised among regulated jurisdictions so 
that  there  are  greater  abatement  options  available.  As  a  consequence,  the  system  with  a  higher  pre-link 
carbon  price  benefits  as  it  can  buy  cheaper  allowances,  whereas  the  system  with  a  lower  pre-link  price 
gains  as  a  result  of  higher  abatement  and  the  sale  of  allowances.  Besides  contributing  to  greater  cost-
efficiency,  linking  ETS  systems  can  increase  market  liquidity  and  potentially  lower  the  risk  of  carbon 
leakage.  

Some aspects  need to  be considered when deciding on linking,  for instance, existing  differences 
on the level of ambition, the ETS design and regulatory rules, potential domestic distributional impacts, 
and political support. Rather than enhance environmental effectiveness, a bilateral link where the relative 
stringency of targets or the design features of the ETS differ among participants, may impair the climate 
policy.  Although  engaging  in  linkage  demonstrates  the  effort  to  establish  comparable  caps  and  attract 
political support, it can also signalise that lower ambition is acceptable or that there is a loss of national 
regulatory  control.  Furthermore,  distributional  impacts  associated  with  financial  transfers  from  trading 
may be an additional issue.  

Several studies have been carried out in order to evaluate linking with the EU ETS, including the 
possibility of linking with non-EU schemes such as South Korea, China, Australia and California. Some 
of  these  studies  investigated  the  effects  of  sectoral  ETS  linkage  under  different  circumstances.  For 
instance, Gavard et al (2016) modelled a sectoral ETS on electricity and energy-intensive industries in the 
EU, the US and China, simulating autarky and linkage scenarios. Hübler et al. (2014) assessed a Chinese 
ETS  regulating  energy-intensive  industries,  electricity,  heat,  petroleum  and  coal  products  considering  a 

                                                           
2 In  the  Kyoto  Protocol,  a  number  of  Certified  Emissions  Reductions  (CERs)  were  issued  for  each  project  approved,  mostly 
implemented  in  China,  India  or  Brazil.  The  CERs  generated  by  investing  in  these  projects  could  be  traded  in  the  existing 
carbon markets of developed countries. This was the case for the EU ETS.  
3 Mexico, Egypt and  Vietnam  have announced their plans to implement a  national ETS that could be linked to others  in the 
mid-term to long-term.  
 

2 

 

potential cooperation with the EU ETS. Results from these studies showed an increased adoption of low 
carbon  technologies,  a  lower  international  leakage  and  generally,  a  greater  degree  of  acceptance  from 
developing countries to participate in the carbon market set by developed countries.  

The  framework  introduced  as  part  of  this  paper  considers  linkage  implications  of  a  hypothetical 
Brazilian  ETS  with  a  similar  sectoral  coverage  to  the  aforementioned  studies.  Among  developing 
countries,  Brazil  has  taken  on  a  pioneering  position  when  it  comes  to  commitments  to  mitigate  climate 
change. With approximately 3% of global emissions in 2014, Brazil agreed to  reduce emissions by 37% 
and  43%  of  2005  levels  by  2025  and  2030  respectively,  in  addition  to  a  commitment  to  stop  illegal 
deforestation.  

Notwithstanding  the  relatively  low  carbon  intensity  of  the  energy  mix,  Brazil  still  relies  on  the 
production and consumption of fossil fuels, which has the potential to hinder a genuine carbon mitigation 
towards sustainable levels. Therefore, climate policies aimed at energy-related sectors are required to help 
achieve national climate goals, as they correspond to approximately 36% of total emissions.  

The Brazilian government has been supporting, in association with the World Bank - Partnership 
for  Market  Readiness  (PMR),  a  comprehensive  group  of  studies  based  on  carbon  pricing  for  the  post-
2020  period 4.  Despite  that,  Brazil  has  not  yet  defined  or  even  decided  on  whether  to  implement  a 
domestic ETS. However, the arrangements for market instruments in the Paris Agreement may encourage 
Brazil to design a carbon trading system. By taking the lead, Brazil may encounter new opportunities for 
climate cooperation with developed systems, with the EU ETS being a potential candidate. This is due to 
the fact the EU ETS displays a willingness to link with other compatible systems, which means that other 
ETS systems with a similar environmental integrity and system architecture could be a potential trading 
partner. 

The  implications  of  such  proposals  have  to  date  not  been  investigated  as  carbon  pricing  and 
related linkages have just emerged as a reasonable alternative  for developing countries. This is reflected 
by  the  late  incorporation  of  climate  issues  into  the  Brazilian  domestic  agenda,  that  is,  the  secondary 
relevance  given  to  environmental  issues  in  light  of  other  political  national  priorities.  Additionally,  it 
demonstrates  that  developing  countries  are  envisioning  financial  opportunities  from  ETS  systems.  The 
expected benefits of accessing the market and joining a linkage are related to the exporter role developing 
countries would presumably assume (Somanathan, 2008).  

In  this  context,  this  paper  conducts  a  two-fold  investigation  and  examines  the  proposed  climate 
policy, that is, a linkage between the EU ETS - the largest and most consolidated system in the world  - 
with  a  proposed  non-EU  scheme  –  a  Brazilian  ETS  (Bra-ETS),  using  environmental  (emissions  and 
energy) and economic impacts as evaluation criteria. The study measures potential costs and benefits of 
implementing a sectoral ETS linkage, which exclusively regulates CO2 emissions from energy intensive 
industries and the electricity sector under alternative scenarios; as well as verifying whether the EU ETS 
may serve as a model for the Bra ETS.  

By employing a dynamic-recursive computable general equilibrium model of the global economy 
- the EPPA6, this study fills the existing gap in the literature, augmenting previous studies (Domingues et 
al.,  2014;  Feijó  and  Porto  Jr.,  2009;  França,  2012;  Gurgel,  2012;  Gurgel  and  Paltsev,  2014;  Henriques, 
2010; Lucena et al., 2015; Rathmann, 2012; Silva and Gurgel, 2012; Wills and Lefvre, 2012).  

The paper is organised in the following way. In Section 2, we introduce the EPPA6 model and an 
overview of the scenarios. Section 3 exhibits the main modelling results for the proposed ETS linkage, in 
the  light  of  different  ETS  design  scenarios.  In  assessing  if  the  evaluation  criteria  are  achieved,  the 
investigation provides suggestions on the most appropriate ETS features in case of climate coordination. 
Section 4 offers concluding remarks and policy implications.  

 
 
 

                                                           
4 The  legal  principle  for  implementing  market-based  mechanisms  to  emissions  mitigation  has  been  previously  set  up  in  the 
National  Climate  Change  Plan  (or  PNMC  in  Portuguese)  under  Articles  4  and  6,  even  though  there  is  a  lack  of  detailed 
information on the market regulation.  

3 

 

1.  MODELING FRAMEWORK  

The analysis of this paper extends the Economic Projection and Policy Analysis (EPPA) model in 
its most recent version - EPPA65 (Chen et al., 2015). The modeling is set up to represent a hybrid climate 
policy approach, with emphasis on sectoral ETS trading.  

 

2.1. Characteristics of the EPPA model 

The  EPPA6  model  is  a  dynamic-recursive  computable  general  equilibrium  (CGE)  model 
developed  by  the  MIT  Joint  Program  on  the  Science  and  Policy  of  Global  Change.  The  model  was 
developed as a nonlinear complementarity problem in the General Algebraic Modelling System (GAMS) 
programming  language  (Brooke  et  al.,  1998),  using  the  syntax  of  the  MPSGE  (Mathematical 
Programming System for General Equilibrium) algorithm developed by Rutherford (1999).  

EPPA6 is solved for a sequence of global market equilibrium considering "myopic" expectations 
of  economic  actors  that  provides  a  representation  of  the  global  economy  (Chen  et  al.,  2015).  This 
assumption in EPPA means that current period investment, savings, and consumption decisions are made 
on the basis of prices in each 5 year period (Paltsev et al., 2007). As a CGE model, EPPA6 can represent 
the  global  production  and  consumption  of  various  sectors  of  each  regional  economy  and  the  associated 
greenhouse  gas  emissions  (GHG),  being  interconnected  to  other  regions  through  international  trade. 
Additionally, it is  able to  incorporate  emissions constraints on regions,  gases or sectors within different 
policy arrangements.  

The model considers a long run simulation horizon (2010-2100). It is solved at 5 yearly intervals. 
By projecting scenarios of world economic development and emissions trends, it enables analysis of the 
economic impact of mitigation and energy policies as well as welfare and equity measures. It was adopted 
in this policy analysis to answer the questions posed with regard to the sectoral ETS applied in a hybrid 
framework, and thereafter, the international cooperation in the period 2020-2050.   

In  each  of  these  periods,  there  are  production  functions  in  all  sectors  that  describe  the  use  of 
primary factors (capital, labour, and energy resources) and energy and intermediate inputs for producing 
goods  and  services  for  each  country  or  region.  The  level  of  consumption  is  modelled  through  a 
representative  agent6 that  seeks  to  maximise  utility  by  choosing  how  to  allocate  its  income  from  factor 
payments  (wages,  capital  earnings,  resource  rents)  across  consumption  or  savings  (Gurgel  and  Paltsev, 
2014; Henry et al., 2015). The government is a passive entity, which finances government consumption, 
and transfers with revenue from taxes paid by households and producers. Deficits and surpluses generated 
return to consumers as lump sum transfers.   

Production  sectors  transform  primary  factors  and  intermediate  inputs  into  goods  and  services  in 
order to maximise profits, given the available technology and market prices. Producers receive payment 
in  return  from  supplying  those  products  to  domestic  or  foreign  agents.  Similar  to  other  CGE  models, 
EPPA6  uses  nested  Constant  Elasticity  of  Substitution  (CES)  with  several  inputs  in  order  to  specify 
preferences and production technologies. International trade is accommodated via Armington assumption 
(Armington,  1969),  with  the  exception  of  crude  oil,  being  a  homogeneous  good.  All  markets  reach  a 
simultaneous equilibrium when zero-profit, market-clearing and income  balance  conditions  are satisfied 
in the static part of the model.  

The  dynamics  of  the  model  are  determined  by  exogenous  factors  (GDP  projections  for  BAU 
growth, labor endowment growth, factor-augmented productivity growth, autonomous energy efficiency 
improvement  (AEEI)  and  natural  resources  assets)  and  endogenous  factors  (savings,  investment 7 and 
fossil fuel resource depletion) (Chen et al., 2015).  

This version is calibrated using the Global Trade Analysis Project Version 8 (GTAP 8) database, 
with  a  benchmark  year  of  2007  (Narayanan  et  al.,  2012).  The  GTAP  dataset  comprises  a  detailed 
representation  of  national  and  regional  input-output  structure,  which  includes  bilateral  trade  flows  in 
goods  and  services,  intermediate  inputs  among  sectors  and  taxes  or  subsidies  imposed  by  governments 
                                                           
5 Free public version is available at: https://globalchange.mit.edu/research/research-tools/human-system-model/download . 
6 EPPA6 accounts  for three economic agents: consumers (households), producers  and government. Households own primary 
factors, offer these to producers and receive income from the services provided (wages, capital earnings and resource rents). 
7 Savings and consumption are represented in the household’s utility function by an aggregated Leontief approach.  

4 

 

(Dimaranan and McDougall, 2006; Aguiar et al., 2016). In Table 1, data is aggregated into 18 regions, 14 
sectors  and  14  technologies  for  generating  low  carbon  energy.  EPPA6  also  incorporates  additional  data 
sources  on  energy  use  (IEA,  2012),  energy  consumption  (IEA,  2012),  CO2  emissions  related  to  cement 
production (Boden et al., 2010) and CO2 emissions related to land use change (Riahi et al., 2007).   
 
Table 1 - Aggregation of regions, sectors and backstop technologies in EPPA6 

Regions 

 
United States (USA) 
Canada (CAN) 
Mexico (MEX) 
JAPAN (JPN) 
Australia and New 
Zealand (ANZ) 
Europe (EUR) 8 
Eastern Europe (ROE) 
Russia (RUS) 
East Asia (ASI) 
South Korea (KOR) 
Indonesia (IDZ) 
China (CHN) 
India (IND) 
Brazil (BRA) 
Africa (AFR) 
Middle East (MES) 
Latin America (LAM) 
Rest of Asia (REA) 

Sectors 

Agriculture 

Crops (CROP) 
Livestock (LIVE) 
Forestry (FORS) 
 

Non-Agriculture 

Food production (FOOD) 
Services (SERV) 
Energy-intensive (EINT) 
Other industry (OTHR) 
Transport (TRAN) 
Ownership of Dwellings 
(DWE) 
 
 

Energy supply 

Coal (COAL) 
Crude oil (OIL) 
Refined oil (ROIL) 
Gas (GAS) 
Electricity (ELEC) 
 

“Backstop” Technologies 

and production factors 

 
First generation biofuels (bio-
fg) 
Second generation biofuels 
(bio-oil) 
Oil shale (synf-oil) 
Synthetic gas from coal (synf-
gas) 
Hydrogen (h2) 
Advanced nuclear (adv-nucl) 
IGCC w/ CCS (igcap) 
NGCC (ngcc) 
NGCC w/ CCS (ngcap) 
Wind (wind) 
Bio-electricity (bioelec) 
Wind power combined with 
bio-electricity (windbio) 
Wind power combined with 
gas-fired power (windgas) 
Solar generation (solar) 
 

Factors of production 

Labor 
Capital 
Natural Resources 
Land 

Source: Based on Chen et al. (2015).  

 
Scenarios  of  climate  policy  are  forecasted  based  on  the  model  theoretical  assumptions  and  are 
driven by economic  growth, which in  turn results from  savings and investments  as well as productivity 
improvement  in  labor,  energy  and  land  which  are  exogenously  specified  (Gurgel  and  Paltsev,  2014; 
Octaviano et al., 2016). The higher the growth in gross domestic product (GDP) and income levels, the 
greater the demand for goods produced by each sector. This ultimately leads to higher production costs, 
as these goods use finite natural resources in the production cycle.  

A constraint on emissions alters the relative economics of technologies as advanced technologies 
become available cost-effectively and compete with traditional energy technologies on an economic basis. 
ETS  simulations  with  EPPA6  have  a  solution  in  which  the  least-cost  abatement  is  achieved  for  each 
sector and type of emission, and prices are equilibrated if emissions trading is allowed.  

In  this  case,  as  a  result  of  limiting  emissions,  a  shadow  value  of  the  applied  constraint  is 
calculated. This is interpreted as a price obtained under the potential permit market in the ETS. Modelling 
the  proposed  sectoral  ETS  required  adjusting  the  model  to  allow  sector-specific  permits  trading  at 
international level. Further details on EPPA6 may be found in Chen et al. (2015).  

                                                           
8 The European Union (EU-27) plus Croatia, Norway, Switzerland, Iceland and Liechtenstein.  

5 

 

2.2. Sectoral ETS and mitigation objectives 

In earlier UNFCCC sessions, the main involvement developing countries had with carbon markets 
was  through  the  Clean  Development  Mechanism  (CDM),  being  project  hosts  without  binding  pledges. 
Conversely, in the Paris Agreement both developed and developing regions affirmed long-term mitigation 
goals.  

Brazil  has  committed  to  reduce  emissions  by  37%  and  43%  of  2005  levels  by  2025  and  2030 
respectively. For modelling purposes, the mitigation target is projected to rise 2% per 5-year period up to 
2050, when a 50% reduction of the 2005 emission levels is achieved in the Brazilian ETS and non-ETS 
sectors.  The  only  disregarded  sectors  in  the  mitigation  applied  target  are  land  use  change  and 
deforestation.  Given  that  these  sectors  represent  a  relatively  high  share  of  total  Brazilian  emissions, 
controlling  emissions  from  those  sectors  would  automatically  prevent  other  sectors  from  broadening 
mitigation effort to comply with national climate targets. 

Although  there  is  no  explicit  reference  to  any  intention  of  setting  up  a  market-based  policy, 
irrespective  of  whether  a  cap-and-trade  system  or  a  carbon  tax,  the  PNMC  does  allow  the  use  of  these 
instruments.  This  paper therefore proposes an ETS design for Brazil which  could  facilitate linking  with 
other  schemes.  The  ETS  design  was  defined  to  mimic  the  EU  ETS,  serving  as  a  realistic  prototype  for 
other planned systems.  

The restrictions on emissions represent the regulation stringency. The same sectoral and emissions 
coverage as the EU ETS are applied to Brazil so that both systems regulate electricity generation (ELEC) 
and energy intensive industry sectors (EINT), and only CO2 emissions are subject to the absolute cap. The 
ETS sectors are assumed to be allocating tradable allowances between them9. There is no specified limit 
on the amount of sectoral permits that can be traded.  

For  the  European  system  we  applied  the  emission  reduction  linear  factor  of  1.74%  per  annum 
from  2013-2020 and 2.2% from  2021-2030 as already specified for the EU ETS10. From 2030 onwards 
the mitigation target  is  assumed to  increase by 1% per  year until  it reaches  a target  representing  a  73% 
reduction of 2005 levels by 2050. In the modelling exercise no distinction is made on the EU ETS phases, 
the bank of unused oversupply of carbon allowances or the existence of the New Entrants Reserve (NER 
300 programme).  

Additionally, a supplementary policy is included by means of a hypothetical (endogenous) carbon 
tax on the remaining non-ETS sectors. It was included to mimic other domestic abatement measures and 
to  avoid  carbon  leakage  from  ETS  to  non-ETS  sectors.  This  tax  prevents  carbon  emissions  in  those 
sectors from exceeding BAU levels and reflects the aggregate marginal abatement costs (MACs) of these 
sectors.  The  tax  is  generated  by  the  model  in  order  to  induce  each  sector  to  cut  emissions  by  the  same 
national percentage target.  

All other regions in the model follow the same hybrid market approach domestically, with the CO2 
constraints  being  in  line  with  their  pledges  under  the  Paris  Agreement  from  2020-2030,  based  on  the 
information available on the UNFCCC website11. From 2030 onwards, targets were estimated following 
the same average mitigation effort as officially committed for the Paris Agreement period.  

The approach of imposing a sectoral  carbon tax on non ETS sectors may not be realistic, but an 
ETS  alone  is  unlikely  to  allow  a  country  to  achieve  its  Paris  emissions  reduction  targets.  The  sectoral 
carbon  tax  captures  in  a  simplified  way  the  several  alternative  sectoral  measures  a  country  may  use  to 
mitigate emissions, given the current limitations in bringing all sectors into an ETS system.  
 

 
                                                           
9 EPPA6 model assumes GHG permits are allocated as an endowment to the representative agent, who sell permits to sectors 
and consumers. It may be though as an auction mechanism, where revenue accrues as a lump sum transfer to families.  
10 The limitation of using the EU ETS targets is that we could not incorporate the EU commitment to reduce emissions  of 40% 
of 1990 levels by 2030 in the model. Instead, the EU achieves approximately 38% of 2005 levels.  
11 Since  EPPA6  is  aggregated  into  regions  and  pledges  are  determined  at  a  national  level,  the  mitigation  goals  were  defined 
taking  into  consideration  the  most  representative  country  in  the  region  where  data  is  available  or  the  average  of  the  pledges 
committed.   

6 

 

2.3. Scenarios 

The EU ETS and the proposed BRA ETS are considered from three perspectives: the Business as 
Usual  scenario  (BAU)  without  any  mitigation  policy,  a  domestic  ETS,  and  a  sectoral  linked  ETS.  In 
addition, we simulated five different scenarios to compare the effects of linking a Brazilian sectoral ETS 
to  the  EU  ETS.  In  all  trading  scenarios,  allowances  flow  from  the  region  with  the  cheapest  abatement 
cost, thereby equalising prices and guaranteeing a cost-effective policy.  

Scenarios  are  summarised  in  Table  2  and  include:  i)  a  linked  system  with  no  flexibility 
arrangements,  (i.e.  no  banking  or  revenue  recycling);  ii)  a  link  considering  a  lower  ambition  for  Brazil 
based on the same framework12; iii) a linkage in which banking of allowances over periods is possible (it 
permits  to  shift  reductions  to  a  lower-cost  time  period) 13 ;  iv)  a  link  with  revenue  recycled  to  the 
production of renewable energy for Brazil14; and finally, v) a linked system without active market-based 
instruments in other regions and no flexibility rule applied to Brazil and Europe.  

 

Table 2 - Scenarios summary 

Scenarios 

No-policy 
Bra-ETS 
EU-ETS 

Carbon constraint on emissions from 

regulated sectors 

no mitigation policy applied 

a sectoral Brazilian ETS 
a sectoral European ETS 

Bra-EU-Trade 

a Bra-EU link, no banking, no revenue recycling 

Bra-EU-Ambition 

a Bra-EU link with reduced mitigation ambition 

for Brazil, no banking, no revenue recycling 

Bra-EU-Banking 

a Bra-EU link that allows only banking 

Bra-EU-Rev-RW 

a Bra- EU link with revenue recycled into the 

production of renewables in Brazil 

Hybrid 

approach in 
other regions 

(without 
trading) 

No 
Yes 
Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Bra-EU-Only 

a Bra-EU link, no banking, no revenue recycling 

No 

  

2.  RESULTS  

 
Emissions  from  the  sectoral  ETS  are  presented  in  Figure  1  and  carbon  prices  are  displayed  in 
Figure  2. Overall  abatement costs of the  climate policy for  regulated sectors are  affected by the carbon 
price,  whether  in  autarky  or  in  a  linked-ETS  situation.  The  difference  is  that  sectoral  trading  leads  to  a 

                                                           
12 To  calculate  a  reduced  mitigation  for  Brazil  we  considered  that  emissions  from  deforestation  are  zero,  as  promised  in  the 
NDC. Therefore, we reduced the target by the same percentage as the share of deforestation in total emissions, that is, 27.5%.  
13 To allow the banking of allowances to be included in the ETS design, the carbon price trajectory was controlled  in order to 
reproduce  a  price  that  increases  at  a  constant  real  interest  rate.  This  is  in  accordance  with  the  Hotelling  model  for  the 
economics of exhaustible resources (Hotelling, 1931). The EPPA6 model considers the interest rate of long term equilibrium to 
be 4% per year.  
14 Revenue  recycling  is  introduced  into  the  model  in  order  to  generate  a  reduction  of  taxes,  which  is  similar  to  providing  a 
subsidy. The aim is to induce a wider adoption of low-carbon technologies by making the final price of this energy artificially 
less expensive.   

7 

 

carbon  price  equalisation  between  the  jurisdictions  involved,  eliminating  marginal  abatement  cost 
divergences. In the absence of an international carbon trading system (Bra-ETS scenario), emissions from 
power  and  energy-intensive  industries  in  Brazil  are  98.6  and  120  million  tonnes  in  2030  and  2050, 
respectively. This is equivalent to 74.3 and 119.6 million tonnes less than NO-POLICY emissions for the 
same period, with a corresponding CO2 price of US$202.4/tCO2 in 2030 and US$304.9/tCO2 in 2050.  
 
Figure 1 -CO2 emissions from the sectoral ETS in Brazil and Europe 

300

250

200

 
2

O
C

 
t

150

M

100

50

0

No-
policy
Bra-ETS

Bra-EU-
Trade
Bra-EU-
Ambition
Bra-EU-
Banking
Bra-EU-
Rev-RW
Bra-EU-
Only

2500

2000

 
2

1500

O
C

 
t

M

1000

500

0

No-policy

EU-ETS

Bra-EU-
Trade

Bra-EU-
Ambition

Bra-EU-
Banking

Bra-EU-
Rev-RW

Bra-EU-
Only

(a) Brazil 

(b) Europe 

Under the ETS constraint and without climate cooperation, sectoral emissions in the EU ETS are 
1.16 and 0.4 billion tons of CO2 in 2030 and 2050. In this scenario, carbon permits cost US$139.3/tCO2 
and US$1379.7/tCO2, respectively. This ETS price is endogenously derived and strongly impacted by the 
model  representation  regarding  macroeconomic  assumptions,  availability  and  costs  of  backstop 
technologies,  uncertainties  and  other  modelling  characterisation.  Mitigation  in  the  long-term  would, 
indeed,  require  an  increasing  carbon  price  to  discourage  intensive  reliance  on  carbon-based  energy 
sources (Edenhofer et al., 2009). Previous projections using different models and ETS design estimate a 
carbon price ranging between 120 and 1200 €/tCO2 in 2050 to meet the climate goals (Peñasco and Del 
Río, 2015; EU, 2016).  

If  trading  is  allowed  between  Brazil  and  Europe,  the  carbon  price  is  equalised  across  the  two 
systems  at  US$143.4/tCO2  and  US$141.5/tCO2  in  2030  of  the  Bra-EU-Trade  and  Bra-EU-Rev-RW 
scenarios. These linking  prices are almost  pegged to  the EU’s autarky price of US$139.3/tCO2 in 2030, 
given  its  sheer  size  relative  to  Brazil’s  (in  terms  of  volume  of  covered  emissions),  thereby  making 
marginal  abatement  costs  not  much  lower  than  in  Europe.  Brazilian  sectoral  emissions  in  the 
aforementioned  linkages  are  122  and  99.7  million  tonnes  in  the  Bra-EU-Trade  and  Bra-EU-Rev-RW 
scenarios,  and  those  from  the  EU  ETS  are  1135.3  and  1157.6  million  tonnes  in  2030,  a  reduction  of 
37.3% and 36.1% in BAU emissions, respectively.  

Linking  Bra-ETS  with  the EU-ETS  makes  a tonne of  CO2 cheaper  to  Brazil  than obtaining  it at 
domestic level by 2030. For instance, the minimum cost of carbon possible is achieved when only Brazil 
and  Europe  commit  to  mitigation  (US$135.1/tCO2)  or  either  if  Brazilian  ambition  is  lowered 
(US$139.2/tCO2). From 2035 onwards, carbon prices in a linked situation are higher for Europe relative 
to autarky. This is understandable as the carbon price in the EU-ETS case is  greater than in  all Bra-EU 
scenarios.  

 
 
 
 
 

 

8 

Figure 2 - CO2 prices under different scenarios  

 
2

O
C

t
/

$
S
U

1500
1200
900
600
300
0

Bra-ETS

EU-ETS

Bra-EU-Trade

Bra-EU-Ambition

2020

67.0

51.7

53.6

50.9

Bra-EU-Banking

117.3

Bra-EU-Rev-RW

Bra-EU-Only

39.7

47.5

2030

202.4

139.3

143.4

139.2

173.6

141.5

135.1

2040

232.6

391.4

369.5

350.7

257.0

250.5

353.0

2050

304.9

1379.7

882.0

857.2

380.4

869.6

841.7

 

 
To  date,  carbon  prices  have  remained  persistently  low  in  the  EU  ETS  since  it  was  launched, 
roughly  hovering  between  €4  and  €10  euros  during  the  current  third  trading  phase 15.  This  price  is 
considered  to  be  very  low  to  promote  significant  incentive  for  polluters  to  undertake  necessary 
investments  in  low-carbon  technologies,  to  drive  low-carbon  innovation  but  also  to  cost-effectively 
achieve  proposed  mitigation,  particularly  in  a  context  of  persistent  supply  imbalance  of  carbon  permits 
16(Kollenberg and Taschini, 2016).  

Further,  these  low  carbon  prices  are  far  below  most  estimates  of  the  social  costs  of  carbon 
(Anthoff  and  Tol,  2011;  Foley  et  al.,  2013)  as  well  not  being  at  a  meaningful  level  to  drive  deep 
decarbonisation. As such, sectoral emission reductions and resulting carbon prices in this simulation are 
coherent  with  the  intended  internalisation  of  the  costs  of  pollution,  although  a  rise  in  the  EU’s  carbon 
price is uncertain to predict, at least in the short term.  

From  the  climate  perspective,  aggregate  emission  reductions  are  a  major  indicator  of 
environmental benefits.  In a combined framework, Brazil and Europe account  for  a  significant share of 
carbon  emitted  globally,  i.e.  3%  of  total  emissions  and  5.4%  of  power  sector  and  energy  intensive 
industry emissions. From the simulations, the joint emission reductions in the linked system are greater if 
potential  revenues  are  recycled  back  to  the  production  of  renewables  in  Brazil,  particularly  in  the  long 
term, representing a 48% reduction compared to the No-Policy scenario. The advantage of this scenario is 
that  distributional  implications  from  the  ETS  implementation  in  Brazil  can  be,  to  a  certain  extent, 
addressed or at least partially compensated.  

Similar  aggregated  mitigation  of  the  sectoral  ETS  is  observed  if  the  ETS  linkage  is  designed 
without the use of flexible mechanisms or climate policies in other regions, with the level of emissions in 
both cases being 47% lower than the No-Policy  scenario. This indicates that the positive environmental 
effects realised in Brazil and Europe, of adopting an integrated price-based climate policy, do not depend 
on commitments from other regions.  

Results also  highlight  that  inter-temporal  permit  trading  appears to provide strong incentives for 
early  action,  but  at  the  risk  of  surrendering  additional  allowances  in  the  future.  In  other  words,  it  may 
create an over-allocation in subsequent periods and therefore, limited reductions. In fact, it demonstrated 

                                                           
15 In  general,  this  continuous  downtrend  has  ensued  from  the  economic  recession  and  renewables-promoting  policies  that 
contributed  to  a  decrease  in  permit  demand  as  well  as  low  capacity  of  the  system  to  respond  to  changes  in  economic 
circumstances (Kollenberg and Taschini, 2016; Grosjean et al., 2014; Ellerman et al., 2015).   
16  After  incurring  volatile  prices  and  windfall  profits,  regulators  started  reviewing  the  system  so  as  to  strengthen  the 
functioning  of  the  EU  ETS,  for  example,  by  addressing  the  oversupply  problem.  For  that,  EU  regulators  proposed  a  “back 
loading”,  that  is,  a  reduction  on  the  number  of  allowances  available  in  the  market  through  near-term  auctions,  whereas  the 
quantity  removed  is  later  on  reintroduced.  Another  reform  incorporated  was  the  implementation  of  the  Market  Stability 
Reserve (MSR) in an attempt to create a system more resilient to supply-demand imbalances.  

9 

 

the ability to foster carbon price stability over the period, being mostly indicated for the period 2040-2050 
when resulting carbon prices are very high in other linking scenarios.  

If trading is allowed between the Brazilian sectoral ETS and the European system, Brazil displays 
a net importer profile of carbon permits in the first two decades, as displayed in Figure 3, in the form of 
positive  values.  Financial  transfers  from  the  Brazilian  covered  sectors  to  Europe  range  from  US$0.2  to 
US$3.4  billion  in  the  2020-2030  period,  corresponding  to  approximately  23.4,  14.7,  9.2,  1.1  and  22.8 
million tonnes of CO2 imported in 2030 according, respectively, to the Bra-EU-Trade, Bra-EU-Ambition, 
Bra-EU-Banking, Bra-EU-Rev-RW and Bra-EU-Only scenarios.  
 
Figure 3 -Total financial transfers of CO2 permits (in 2007 US$ billion)  

10

0

-10

-20

 

n
o

i
l
l
i

-30

b

 

$
S
U

-40

-50

-60

-70

2020

2030

2040

2050

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

A long-term linkage with a developed system such as the EU ETS implies to Brazil an emissions 
reduction of  approximately 60% compared to  autarky,  totalling on average 70 million  tonnes less in  all 
linking scenarios. The only exception is the Bra-EU-Banking link, in which there is just a 23% decrease 
in  ETS  emissions  relative  to  Bra-ETS.  In  this  case,  permits  are  mostly  supplied  by  Brazil,  since 
abatement  options  or  technological  alternatives  to  mitigate  become  more  available  there,  thereby 
receiving between US$1.9 and US$20.2 billion in 2040 and US$10.6 and US$64.2 among the simulated 
scenarios in 2050.  

From the scenarios analysed, an inter-jurisdiction pattern can be detected, i.e. emissions reductions 
are  transferred  from  Europe  to  Brazil  by  2030  and  thenceforward  the  inverse  takes  place,  with 
international trading generating monetary flows to Brazil. This is aligned to the literature, which generally 
portrays Europe as  a buyer of emissions in carbon markets of either developed (Dellink  et al., 2014) or 
developing countries linkages (Gavard et al., 2013; Gavard et al., 2016; Doda and Taschini, 2016).  

This  trading  pattern  reveals  some  important  insights  about  linking  under  the  modelled 
circumstances.  It  suggests  the  level  of  ambition  plays  an  important  role  towards  defining  winners  and 
losers  from  the  link,  since  Brazil  and  Europe’s  commitments  are,  at  first,  very  alike.  Even  though  the 
literature recommends the harmonisation of mitigation targets, accommodating developing countries into 
a linked-system of similar rigid  commitments  to a  developed country may  further unequal distribution, 
being  therefore  politically  difficult  to  support  in  those  countries.  Further  issues  may  arise  from  an 
economic perspective, not just from the method of allocating allowances, i.e. via auctioning, but also in 
view  of  the  overall  increase  in  electricity  prices  induced  by  the  ETS  policy,  which  is  detrimental  to 
consumers.  Hence,  it  affects  overall  direct  economic  effects  and  other  general  equilibrium  impacts, 
assessed here by welfare and GDP.  

Welfare  is  a  macroeconomic  indicator  to  express  the  level  of  prosperity  of  economic  agents.  In 
EPPA6,  it  is  equivalent  to  variations  in  consumption  levels,  which  translate  both  income  and  relative 
price changes of the representative consumer, as an indicator for the induced change in utility. Additional 
economic cost of the sectoral ETS trading is evaluated in relation to impacts on GDP, that encompasses 

10 

 

directly  net  export  value  (exports  minus  imports)  and  investments.  These  macroeconomic  results  are 
reported as percentage changes between policy scenarios and the No-Policy scenario.  

According to Figure 4, sharing the carbon constraint improves GDP and welfare in Brazil since it 
lowers  the  cost  of  the  policy  domestically  and  hence,  the  price  to  be  paid  by  the  economic  agents. 
However, welfare reductions are lower than GDP’s, although losses are very similar among the simulated 
scenarios.  In  the  2020-2030  horizons,  the  Bra-ETS  presents  the  deepest  decline  of  GDP  and  welfare, 
approximately  4.2%  and  2.5%,  respectively.  This  occurs  due  to  the  fact  that  the  covered  sectors  face 
higher  abatement  costs  as  a  result  of  the  deep  mitigation  assumed  for  Brazil  by  203017.  Moreover,  the 
electricity sector is relatively low-carbon, and as a result has limited opportunities to cut emissions.  
 
 Figure 4 -Changes in GDP and welfare in relation to BAU in (a) Brazil and (b) Europe 
 

GDP 

Welfare 

1%

0%

-1%

-2%

-3%

2020

2030

2040

2050

2020

2030

2040

2050

(a) 

2020

2030

2040

2050

 

 

0%

-2%

-4%

-6%

-8%

-10%

(a) 

2020

2030

2040

2050

 

 

(b) 

(b) 

                                                           
17 However, it does not consider reductions from land use change and deforestation, very representative sectors of the Brazilian 
total emissions. 

11 

 

0%

-1%

-2%

-3%

-4%

-5%

-6%

0%

-1%

-2%

-3%

-4%

-5%

-6%

-7%

Conversely, if the link is agreed so that Brazil assumes a lower level of mitigation, economic costs 
drop  and  welfare  losses  are  the  smallest  by  2030.  Yet  mitigation  costs  are  the  lowest  when  carbon 
revenues are reinvested back into alternative technologies, namely the production of renewable energy in 
the Brazilian economy. In the long term, GDP losses range between 2.7% and 5.5%, being less negatively 
impacted  in  the  Bra-EU-Ambition  and  Bra-EU-Rev-RW  scenarios  by  2050.  Compared  to  No-Policy 
levels,  welfare  is  highly  impacted  by  a  domestic  ETS  or  a  linked  system  in  which  allowances  can  be 
banked over periods. Again, whether or not other regions commit, a linkage with basic ETS design yields 
the same  costs for the economy  and society to  meet  the mitigation target  in  the long term.  However, if 
Europe agrees with a lower ambition, Brazil benefits by a 0.5% gain in welfare.  

Potential  revenues  along  with  the  prospects  of  associated  cost  savings  can  be  a  very  attractive 
condition  for  Brazil  to  agree  on  the  link.  However,  considering  that  the  Brazilian  electricity  sector  is 
already  significantly  decarbonised,  with  alternative  energy  comprising  51%  of  total  energy  used,  the 
challenge  is  to  move  further  towards  increasing  the  share  of  low-carbon  sources  that  can  compete  with 
fossil fuel-based power, especially if carbon emitters face an appropriate  carbon price.  In fact,  Brazil is 
explicitly keen to strengthen its share of renewable energy in the energy mix, as stated in the NDC for the 
Paris Agreement.   

Policies  that  place  a  price  on  carbon  are  important  drivers  for  the  adoption  of  environmentally 
friendly technologies as well as being a stimulus for low-carbon innovation (Dechezleprêtre et al., 2016). 
Therefore, it tends to enhance substitution from a polluting economy towards a more decarbonised one by 
altering  the  demand  for  fossil  fuels,  thereby  changing  the  energy  use  profile.  Figure  5  (a)  shows  the 
Brazilian energy mix, which includes primary and alternative energy use for 2030 and 2050. In the energy 
mix, hydro and oil predominate in Brazil, corresponding to approximately 40% and 30% of total energy, 
respectively, in the simulated scenarios. Total use of energy is, on average, 10.7 EJ in 2030 and 12 EJ in 
2050. 
 
Figure 5 -Energy profile of (a) Brazil and (b) Europe in 2030 and 2050 

 

18

15

12

 
J
E

9

6

3

0

Gas

Oil

Coal

Wind and
solar

Hydro

Nuclear

Bioenerg
y

 

2030 

(a)   

 

18

15

12

 
J
E

9

6

3

0

 

2050 

Gas

Oil

Coal

Wind and
solar

Hydro

Nuclear

Bioenergy

(a) 

 

12 

100

80

60

 
J
E

40

20

0

 

100

80

60

 
J
E

40

20

0

Gas

Oil

Coal

Wind and
solar

Hydro

Nuclear

Bioenergy

Gas

Oil

Coal

Wind and
solar

Hydro

Nuclear

Bioenergy

(b) 

 

(b) 

 

As the sectoral ETS progresses over time, the relevance of low carbon technologies becomes even 
more  evident  relative  to  fossil  fuel-based  primary  energy.  For  instance,  the  share  of  coal  decreases  by 
69%  in  the  Bra-EU-Trade  and  Bra-EU-Only  scenarios,  with  a  further  decrease  of  73%  when  flexible 
arrangements are incorporated into the system (i.e. banking or revenue recycling), and with a decrease of 
70%  if  Brazil  is  less  ambitious  in  2030.  Nevertheless,  in  this  first  decade,  the  Bra-ETS  promotes  the 
deepest substitution towards low-carbon energy, with an alternative energy share increase to 64% of the 
energy  mix,  which  is  primarily  due  to  the  effort  required  to  meet  the  mitigation  target  without  any 
cooperation.  

Among  all  policy  scenarios  simulated,  whereas  hydroelectricity  power  in  Brazil  faces  an 
increment of approximately  13%, renewables (wind and solar) rise more than 6000% in  relation  to  No-
Policy in 2030. Proportionally, this is still a small amount of electricity since it corresponds, on average, 
to only 0.09 EJ of the 6.5 EJ of alternative energy in the scenarios. The use of revenue recycling in Brazil 
is  fundamental,  particularly  because  it  supports  the  decarbonisation  of  the  energy  sector  the  most. 
Similarly, the long term effect is driven by a lower demand for fossil-fuels, where primary energy use is 
between  3.4  EJ  and  5  EJ  in  the  policy  scenarios,  instead  of  9.3  EJ  without  any  mitigation  target.  The 
greatest substitution effect is verified in the Bra-EU-Rev-RW in 2050. 

The European energy mix relies heavily on oil, gas, coal and nuclear energy, as depicted in Figure 
5 (b).  If there is  no climate policies implemented, Europe uses  a total  of  82 EJ in  2030, where primary 
energy  corresponds  to  61.9  EJ  and  low-carbon  technologies  account  for  only  25%  of  the  total. 
Technological changes are prompted by the EU ETS but linking to Brazil extends the energy substitution 
effect by 2030. Although fossil fuel energy still prevails, there is a growth in alternative energy by 10% in 
the  EU-ETS,  Bra-EU-Trade  and  Bra-EU-Rev-RW  scenarios,  and  12%,  13%  and  18%  in  the  Bra-EU-
Banking, Bra-EU-Only and Bra-EU-Ambition scenarios relative to No-Policy in 2030.  

Under the proposed sectoral design, linkage enhances technological changes  in Europe so that in 
the  long  term  there  is  a  substitution  effect  towards  low-carbon  sources.  Among  them,  bioenergy  and 
renewables  use  surpasses  the  increase  in  hydro  and  nuclear.  On  the  other  hand,  the  greatest  reductions 
occur  in  coal  and  gas  use.  Fossil-fuel  substitution  is  more  pronounced  in  autarky,  where  alternative 
energy represents 72% of the energy profile, with the share of oil being the smallest amongst scenarios.  

Results suggest that the linking of an emerging sectoral ETS from  a developing country, such as 
Brazil, to an established scheme such as the EUETS, can to a certain extent lead to welfare benefits for 
the  involved  jurisdictions.  The  linkage  modelled  in  this  paper  underlines  that  an  international  ETS  that 
recycles  revenue  from  trading  towards  renewable  energy  production  would  be  the  most  cost-effective 

 

13 

option  in  terms  of  economic  performance  and  effects  on  welfare.  Moreover,  a  trade  deal  with  less 
ambitious mitigation goals implemented in Brazil yields a more cost-effective option.  

 

3.  CONCLSIONS 
 

International cooperation through carbon pricing has become an important framework to address 
climate  change,  as  highlighted  in  the  Paris  Agreement.  In  light  of  that,  both  developed  and  developing 
regions  are  encouraged  to  adopt  market  measures  in  the  future,  with  flexibility  to  determine  the  role 
carbon prices play in the policy mix. With the number of Emissions Trading Schemes increasing around 
the world, the question of whether these schemes should be linked is relevant.  

Experience shows that an ETS aggregating all sectors is still technically unfeasible. Since Brazil is 
still  discussing  the  implementation  of  carbon  pricing  mechanisms,  we  made  assumptions  on  the  ETS 
design features in line with the EU ETS characteristics, as it is the most consolidated system. To comply 
with the NDC, we applied a sectoral ETS regulating electricity and energy-intensive sectors along with a 
supplementary policy on non-ETS  sectors,  in  order to  mimic abatement  in those sectors, and to  prevent 
leakage.  To  evaluate  competitiveness  issues  associated  with  carbon  leakage  towards  other  regions,  we 
implemented two scenarios, one whereby that same hybrid policy is applied to other jurisdictions of the 
model, and the other where no hybrid policy is applied. Results indicate that there is no material impact to 
the  linkage  in  this  instance,  irrespective  of  whether  or  not  climate  policies  are  implemented  in  other 
jurisdictions.  

This  research serves as a basis to  evaluate ETS  policy proposals  among  consolidated  systems  in 
developed  regions  and  emerging  sectoral  ETS  from  developing  countries.  We  consider  Europe,  as  a 
candidate to link with Brazil due to historical and economic relations. Our simulations include an autarky 
scenario  for  Brazil  and  Europe  in  addition  to  five  linkage  scenarios  (Bra-EU-Trade,  Bra-EU-Ambition, 
Bra-EU-Banking, Bra-EU-Rev-RW, Bra-EU-Only). 

Results demonstrate that differences in  carbon prices are eliminated through the link,  and Brazil 
benefits  from  a  lower  carbon  price  if  it  links  to  Europe  in  the  2020-2030  period.  In  this  case,  carbon 
prices  equalise  at  approximately  US$140/tCO2.  The  highest  price  among  linked  scenarios  in  2030  is 
US$173/tCO2,  corresponding  to  the  ETS  design  where  allowances  can  be  banked  and  carried  forward 
over periods. Conversely, Europe is better off in the 2035-2050 horizon, as trading with Brazil allows to 
share  a  carbon  price  of  approximately  US$882/tCO2,  55%  lower  than  in  the  EU  ETS  alone,  and  to 
comprise a wider abatement effort.  

However,  the  costs  for  meeting  the  climate  obligations  through  trading  in  both  regions  are  still 
very  high,  at  US$840/  tCO2 on  average  by  2050.  Although  this  could  facilitate  emissions  reductions,  it 
implies  large  effects  in  terms  of  GDP  and  welfare,  particularly  for  Europe.  In  the  context  of  expected 
price increases, it is worthwhile to consider banking, at least in the long run, to hedge against this future 
price  change.  Compared  to  other  scenarios,  GDP  and  welfare  losses  are  lower,  5.4%  and  8.3%  lower 
respectively  by  2050.  Another  alternative  is  to  include  revenue  recycling  in  the  ETS  design,  since  it 
reduces the most negative economic effects in Europe, approximately 0.2% and 3.5% of GDP loss, and 
1.3% and 6.3% of welfare loss in 2030 and 2050, respectively.  

The observed significant costs of the policy result from the stringency level of targets adopted in 
both entities. The level of effort required for Brazil to achieve the proposed climate commitments appear 
to be higher than in Europe up to 2030. Results from the Bra-EU-Ambition give a clear example on this. 
When the link is negotiated to accept lower mitigation targets in Brazil, GDP declines 3.2% and 3.7% in 
2030 and 2050 respectively, whereas welfare decreases by 1.9% in 2030 but grows 0.4% in 2050. Similar 
effects  occur  in  the  Bra-EU-Rev-RW  scenario,  where  there  is  a  smaller  reduction  in  both  GDP  and 
welfare levels, 2.9% and 2% in 2030, and 2.7% and 0.5% in 2050, respectively.  

In  this  investigation,  the  difference  in  stringency  of  ETS  targets  between  a  developed  and 
developing region implies different trading patterns over the period. From 2020-2030 Brazil assumes an 
importer-oriented  profile,  with  payments  for  allowances  accruing  to  Europe  of  approximately  US$3 
billion.  Thereafter,  Brazil  becomes  a  net  exporter  of  allowances,  which  is  aligned  to  the  literature,  i.e. 

 

14 

developing  countries  pursuing  a  permit  exporter  pattern.  Under  this  perspective,  transfers  from  Europe 
total more than US$60 billion.  

To a certain extent, this financial flow compensates the early costs incurred during the linkage. At 
the same time, it is environmentally effective, due to the high abatement levels achieved, along with the 
fossil-fuel substitution effect it triggers in both countries, as evidenced in the paper.  

In future policy iterations, the link could envisage the incorporation of additional sectors, such as 
land use change, and other Greenhouse Gases (GHGs), particularly if one jurisdiction presents a relatively 
decarbonised  energy  mix,  such  as  Brazil.  Once  the  sectoral  ETS  progressively  mitigates  emissions,  the 
focus will shift increasingly towards reducing emissions from other sectors. Thereupon, strengthening the 
climate package with domestic carbon taxes to curb emissions outside the ETS is rather necessary as well 
as  regulatory  and  technology  policies  to  enhance  innovation,  or  to  compensate  those  sectors 
disproportionately affected. These additional factors are relevant for further analysis.  

Through this paper we contribute to the literature by showing that, linking an existing developed 
ETS  system  to  a  developing  country  emerging  ETS  system,  can  promote  mitigation  cost-effectively, 
whilst curbing emissions and changing energy use patterns if the correct ETS design is implemented. The 
approach  modelled  does  not  consider  the  costs  or  benefits  associated  with  avoiding  climate  change, 
climate  adaptation,  or  for  other  policies  to  support  technological  change  at  the  intra-industry  level. 
However,  it  does  configure  a  first  approximation  on  how  developing  countries  could  design  their  ETS, 
and  incorporate  carbon pricing  and trading arrangements, with  the aim of reducing emissions  in  as cost 
effective a fashion as possible. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
The  authors  acknowledge  the  financial  support  for  this  work  provided  by  the  National  Council  for 
Scientific and Technological Development of Brazil (CNPq).  
 

REFERENCES  

Anthoff,  D.,  Tol,  R.,  2011.  The  Uncertainty  about  the  Social  Cost  of  Carbon:  A  Decomposition 
Analysis Using FUND. Climate change, vol. 117 (3).  

Armington, P., 1969. A Theory of Demand for Products Distinguished by Place of Production. Staff 
Papers (International Monetary Fund), vol. 16 (1), pp. 159-178. 

Aguiar, A., Narayanan, B., McDougall, R., 2016. An  Overview  of  the GTAP  9  Data  Base. Journal of 
Global Economic Analysis, vol 1 (1), pp. 181-208. 

Bodansky,  D.,  Hoedl,  S.A.,  Metcalf,  G.,  Stavins,  R.,  2014.  Facilitating  Linkage  of  Heterogeneous 
Regional, National, and Sub-National Climate Policies Through a Future International Agreement. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Project on Climate Agreements. 
 
Boden,  T.A.,  Marland,  G.,  Andres,  R.J.,  2010.  Global,  Regional,  and  National  Fossil-Fuel  CO2 
Emissions.  Carbon  Dioxide  Information  Analysis  Center,  Oak  Ridge  National  Laboratory,  U.S. 
Department of Energy, Oak Ridge, Tenn., USA, 2010. 
 
Brooke, A., Kendrick, D., Meeraus, A., Raman, R., 1998. GAMS A Users Guide. GAMS Development 
Corporation, Washington D.C. 
 
Burtraw,  D.,  Palmer,  K.,  Munnings,  C.,  Weber,  P.,  Woerman,  M.,  2013.  Linking  by  Degrees: 
Incremental Alignment of Cap-and-Trade Markets. RFF Discussion Paper 13-04, 2013. 
 

 

15 

Chen,  H.,  Paltsev,  S.,  Reilly,  J.M.,  Morris,  J.F.,  Babiker,  M.H.,  2015.  The  MIT  EPPA6  Model: 
Economic  Growth,  Energy  Use,  and  Food  Consumption.  Report:  no.  278.  Cambridge,  MA:  MIT  Joint 
Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change.  
 
Dellink,  R.B.,  Jamet,  S.,  Chateau,  J.,  Duval,  R.,  2014.  Towards  Global  Carbon  Pricing:  Direct  and 
Indirect Linking of Carbon Markets. OECD Environmental Working Paper No.20.  
 
Dimaranan,  B.V.,  Mcdougall,  R.A.,  2006.  Guide  to  the  GTAP  Data  Base.  In:  Dimaranan,  ed.,  Global 
Trade, Assistance, and Production: The GTAP6 Data Base. Center for Global Trade Analysis, Purdue 
University, West Lafayette.  
 
Doda,  B.,  Taschini,  L.,  2016.  Carbon  dating:  When  is  it  beneficial  to  link  ETSs?  Centre  for  Climate 
Change Economics and Policy, Working Paper No. 234. 
  
Domingues, E.P., Magalhães, A.S, Carvalho, T.S., 2014. Política industrial e os  custos de redução de 
emissões de Gases de Efeito Estufa. Prêmio CNI de Economia.  
 
Edenhofer, O., Carraro, C., Hourcade, J.C, Neuhoff, K., Luderer, G., Flachsland, C., Jakob, M., Popp, A., 
Steckel,  J.,  Strohschein,  J.,  Bauer,  N.,  Brunner,  S.,  Leimbach,  M.,  Lotze-Campen,  H.,  Bosetti,  V.,    de 
Cian, E., Tavoni, M., Sassi, O., Waisman, H., Crassous-Doerfler, R., Monjon,  S., Dröge, S., van Essen, 
H.,  del  Río,  P.,  Türk,  A.,  2009.  The  Economics  of  Decarbonization.  Report  of  the  RECIPE  project. 
Potsdam-Institute for Climate Impact Research: Potsdam. 
 
Ellerman, D., Valero, V., and Zaklan, A., 2015. An Analysis of Allowance Banking in the EU ETS. EUI 
Working Paper RSCAS 2015/29. 
 
European  Commission  (EU),  2016.  EU  Reference  Scenario  2016  –  Energy,  transport  and  GHG 
emissions - Trends to 2050.  
 
Frankhauser, S., Hepburn, C., 2010. Designing carbon markets. Part I: Carbon markets in time. Energy 
Policy, v. 38, p. 4363 – 4370. 
 
Feijó, F. F., Porto Júnior, S. S., 2009.  Protocolo  de  Quioto  e  o  bem–estar  econômico  no  Brasil: uma 
análise utilizando equilíbrio geral computável. Análise Econômica, João Pessoa, v. 27, n. 51, p. 127- 154. 
 
França,  F.P.,  2012.  Impactos  econômicos  de  políticas  climáticas  no  Brasil,  nos  EUA  e  UE.  126p. 
Dissertação  (Mestrado  em  Economia  Aplicada)  –  Faculdade  de  Economia,  Administração  e 
Contabilidade de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto. 
 
Foley,  D.,  Rezai,  A.,  Taylor,  L.,  2013.  The  social  cost  of  carbon  emissions:  Seven  propositions.  
Economics Letters, vol. 121 (1), pp. 90-97.  
 
Gavard,  C.,  Winchester,  N.,  Paltsev,  S.,  2016.  Limited  trading  of  emissions  permits  as  a  climate 
cooperation mechanism? US–China and EU–China examples. Energy Economics 58, 95–104. 
 
Gavard,  C.,  Winchester,  N.,  Paltsev,  S.,  2013.  Limited  sectoral  trading  between  the  EU  ETS  and 
China. MIT JPSPGC, Report 249.  
 
Grosjean, G., Acworth, W., Flachsland, C., and Marschinski, R., 2014.  After  monetary policy,  climate 
policy: is delegation the key to EU ETS reform? Climate Policy, 1:1–25. 
 

 

16 

Gurgel,  A.  C.,  2012.  Impactos  da  economia  mundial  de  baixo  carbono  sobre  o  Brasil.  Anais  da 
ANPEC. 
 
Gurgel, A. C., Paltsev, S., 2014. Costs of reducing GHG emissions in Brazil. Climate Policy, v. 14, p. 
209 - 223. 
 
Henriques,  JR.  M.F.,  2010.  Potencial  de  redução  de  emissão  de  gases  de  efeito  estufa  pelo  uso  de 
energia no setor industrial brasileiro. Tese de Doutorado, COPPE/PPE. 
 
Hübler, M., Voigt, S., Löschel, A., 2014. Designing an emissions trading scheme for China: An up-to-
date climate policy assessment. Energy Policy 75, 57–72. 
 
Hotteling, H., 1931. The  Economics  of  Exhaustible  Resources. Journal of Political Economy, vol. 39, 
No. 2, pp. 137-175 
 
International Energy Agency (IEA), 2012. World Energy Outlook. International Energy Agency, Paris, 
France. 
 
Kollenberg,  S.,  Taschini,  L.,  2016.  Emissions  trading  systems  with  cap  adjustments.  Centre  for 
Climate Change Economics and Policy, Working Paper No. 219. 
 
Lucena,  A.  F.P,  Clarke,  L.,  Schaeffer,  R.,  Szklo,  A.,  Rochedo,  P.R.R.,  Nogueira,  L.P.P.,  Daenzer,  K., 
Gurgel, A., Kitous, A., Kober, T., 2015. Climate policy scenarios in Brazil: A multi-model comparison 
for energy. Energy Economics, vol. 56, pp. 564-574.  
 
Narayanan,  G.,  Badri,  T.,  Hertel,  W.,  Walmsley,  T.L.,  2012.  GTAP  8  Data  Base  Documentation. 
Chapter  1:  Introduction.  Center  for  Global  Trade  Analysis,  Department  of  Agricultural  Economics, 
Purdue University, March. 
 
Octaviano, C., Paltsev, S., Gurgel, A., 2016. Climate change policy in Brazil and Mexico: Results from 
the MIT EPPA model. Energy Economics, vol. 56, pp. 600-614.  
 
Paltsev, S., Reilly, J.M., Jacoby, H.D., Gurgel, A.C., Metcalf, G.E., Sokolov, A.P., Holak, J.F., 2007. An 
Assessment  of  U.S.  Cap-and-Trade  Proposals.  Working  Paper  13176.  Cambridge,  Massachusetts: 
National Bureau of Economic Research, June 2007. 
 
Peñasco, C., Del Río, P., 2015.  The  evolving EU  ETS  carbon  price. Issue paper for the Towards2030 
project. Dialogue on a RES policy framework for 2030.  
 
Rathmann, R., 2012. Impactos da  adoção de metas de redução de emissão  de gases de efeito estufa 
sobre  a  competitividade  de  setores  industriais  energointensivos  do  Brasil.  Tese  de  Doutorado 
apresentada ao Programa de Planejamento Energético, COPPE/UFRJ, para obtenção do título de Doutor 
em Ciências do Planejamento Energético. 
 
Riahi,  K.,  Grübler,  A.,  Nakicenovic,  N.,  2007.  Scenarios  of  long-term  socio-economic  and 
environmental development under climate stabilization. Technological Forecasting and Social Change 
74(7), 887–935, 2007. 
 
Rutherford, T. F., 1999. Applied general equilibrium modeling with MPSGE as a GAMS subsystem: 
an  overview  of  the  modeling  framework  and  syntax.  Computational  economics  Kluwer  academic 
publishers: 14, 1-46. 
 

17 

 

Silva,  J.  G,  Gurgel,  A.  C.,  2012.  Impactos  econômicos  de  cenários  de  políticas  climáticas  para  o 
Brasil. Pesquisa e Planejamento Econômico, v. 42, n. 1. 
 
Somanathan, E., 2008. What do we expect from an International Climate Agreement? A perspective from 
a low-income Country.  Policy Brief, Harvard Project on Climate Agreements, Belfer Center, December 
2008. 
 
Wills,  W.,  Lefevre,  J.,  2012.  The  impact  of  a  carbon  tax  over  the  Brazilian  economy  in  2030  - 
IMACLIM:  the  hybrid  CGE  model  approach.  In:  ISEE  2012  Conference  –  Ecological  Economics  and 
Rio+20:  Challenges  and  Contributions  for  a  Green  Economy,  2012,  Rio  de  Janeiro.  Greening  the 
Economy – Measuring green growth. 

 

 

 

18 

