Resumo		

Título:	Free‐Riding	in	Procurement	Design	
	
Autor:	Klenio	Barbosa	
Afiliação:	Escola	de	Economia	de	São	Paulo	–	Fundação	Getúlio	Vargas																																	
(EESP‐FGV)	
	
Área	ANPEC:	Área	8	‐	Microeconomia,	Métodos	Quantitativos	e	Finanças	
	
Apesar	de	contratos	de	baixa	potência	não	fornecerem	os	incentivos	corretos	para	
reduzir	custo,	a	evidência	empírica	mostra	que	eles	são	frequentemente	usados	tanto	
em	licitações	públicas	quanto	privadas.	Este	trabalho	mostra	que	contratos	de	baixa	
potência	surgem	em	equilíbrio	devido	a	existência	do	problema	do	carona	no	desenho	
de	licitações	quando	a	empresa	contratada	possui	economias	de	escopo/escala	quando	
trabalhando	para	diversos	contratantes.	Um	contratante,	que	individualmente	oferece	
contratos	de	licitação	para	o	contratante,	não	plenamente	internaliza	o	fato	que	ao	
oferecer	contratos	de	alta	potência	está	incentivando	a	redução	de	custos	em	outras	
atividades	do	contratante.	Entretanto,	ele	internaliza	todos	os	custos	associados	a	tal	
esquema	de	incentivo.	Uma	vez	que	o	benefício	privado	de	contratos	de	alta	potência	é	
menor	que	o	seu	benefício	privado,	contratantes	oferecerão	contratos	com	menor	
potência	em	equilíbrio.	O	modelo	prediz	que	quanto	maior	o	número	de	atividades	que	
um	contratante	exerce	para	diferentes	contratantes,	menor	é	a	potência	dos	contratos	
de	licitações.	Além	disso,	leis	que	obrigam	compradores	a	utilizarem	a	contratos	de	
preço	fixo	podem	ser	de	aumento	de	bem‐estar.	
	
Palavras	‐Chaves:	Licitações;	Spillover;	Múltiplos		Compradores;	Efeito	Carona;	
Contratos	de	Baixa	Potência	
	
Low‐powered	contracts	do	not	provide	proper	incentives	to	reduce	cost;	still	empirical	
studies	show	that	they	are	quite	pervasive	in	public	and	private	procurement.	This	
paper	argues	that	low‐powered	contracts	arise	due	to	a	free‐riding	problem	when	the	
contractor	enjoys	economies	of	scope	working	for	different	buyers		due	to	learning‐by‐
doing.	A	buyer,	offering	a	procurement	contract	to	the	contractor,	does	not	fully	
internalize	that	higher‐powered	incentives	provide	cost	reduction	in	the	contractor's	
activities,	benefiting	other	buyers.	As	a	result,	buyers	offer	lower‐powered	contracts	
than	what	would	be	designed	by	cooperative	buyers.	Strikingly,	the	higher	the	
contractor's	benefits	from	economies	of	scope/scale	are,	the	lower	the	power	of	the	
procurement	contracts	will	be.	In	addition,	laws	which	force	buyers	to	award	fixed‐price	
contracts	can	be	welfare‐enhancing.	
	
Key	Words:	Procurement;	Spillover;	Multibuyers;	Free‐Riding;	Low‐powered	Contracts.	
		
Classificação	JEL:	H57;	H83;	L24.	

Abstract:	

Free-Riding in Procurement Design∗

Klenio Barbosa†

July, 2014

Abstract

Low-powered contracts do not provide proper incentives to reduce cost; still empirical

studies show that they are quite pervasive in public and private procurement. This paper

argues that low-powered contracts arise due to a free-riding problem when the contractor

enjoys economies of scope working for diﬀerent buyers due to learning-by-doing. A buyer,

oﬀering a procurement contract to the contractor, does not fully internalize that higher-

powered incentives provide cost reduction in the contractor’s activities, beneﬁting other

buyers. As a result, buyers oﬀer lower-powered contracts than what would be designed

by cooperative buyers. Strikingly, the higher the contractor’s beneﬁts from economies of

scope/scale are, the lower the power of the procurement contracts will be. In addition,

laws which force buyers to award ﬁxed-price contracts can be welfare-enhancing.

JEL: H57; H83; L24.

Key Words: Procurement; Spillover; Multibuyers; Free-Riding; Low-powered Contracts.

∗I would like to thank Fran¸cois Salani´e for insightful guidance and detailed suggestions, and Micael Castan-
heira, Jacques Cr´emer, Jeon Doh-Shin, Philippe Gagnepain, Bruno Julien, Georg Kirchsteiger, Patrick Legros,
Pepita Miquel-Florensa, Humberto Moreira, Bernard Salani´e, Wilfried Sand-Zantman and Stephane Straub
for valuable discussions and suggestions. I am also grateful to Malin Arve, Bruno Aurichio, Juan Felipe Bernal,
Pierre Boyer, Alexandre Carbonnel, Vin´ıcius Carrasco, Luciano Dias, Jos´e Fajardo, Felipe Fernandes, Bruno
Funchal, Alex Gershkov, Dominik Grafenhofer, Christian Gollier, Pedro Hemsley, Sergei Izmalkov, C¸ agatay
Kayi, Rohit Lamba, Gabriel Madeira, Leonardo Rezende, Raquel Sampaio, Ji Shen, Arilton Teixeira and
Alex White for very helpful comments. Many thanks also to all seminar participants at HIM Trimester Pro-
gram on Mechanism Design (Bonn), Toulouse School of Economics, ECARES (Brussels), FUCAPE (Vit´oria),
IBMEC-Rio (Rio de Janeiro), IPEA (Rio de Janeiro), FEA-USP (S˜ao Paulo). The usual disclaimer applies.

†Sao Paulo School of Economics - FGV. klenio.barbosa@fgv.br

1

Introduction

Public and private transactions are governed by procurement contracts. They represent a large

fraction of total economic activity, and are used to purchase goods and services. The value

of public procurement transactions in EU countries is about 16 percent of their GDP, while

in the United States it is around 20 percent. In the private sector, the value of transactions

is even larger and is steadily increasing, due to the current trend towards outsourcing all

non-core business activities.1

A typical procurement contract speciﬁes a reimbursement fraction a ∈ [0, 1] of the contrac-
tor’s monetary expenditures C and a ﬁxed fee b, which are paid by the buyer to the contractor.

They jointly characterize the buyer’s net transfer T to the contractor, which usually takes a

linear2 form T = b + aC. In particular, when the reimbursement fraction a is equal to 0, the

contracts are called ﬁxed-price contracts. Whereas, when a is equal to 1, they are cost-plus

contracts.

According to the fraction of costs borne by the buyer a, the contracts are classiﬁed in:
high-powered contracts, a = 0; and low-powered contracts, a ∈ (0, 1]. In the high-powered
contracts, the contractor is the total residual claimant for any cost saving, thereby having

incentives to engage in cost reduction activities. By contract, in the low-powered contracts,

the contractor does not have proper incentives to reduce cost since costs are partially or totally

reimbursed by the buyer.

Despite the fact that low-powered contracts do not provide right incentives to reduce cost,

empirical studies show that they are quite pervasive in public and private procurement. For

instance, Bajari, McMillan and Tadelis (2008) document that 43 percent of the contracts

within private ﬁrms in the US building construction industry are cost-plus. Gagnepain and

Ivaldi (2002) show that 24 percent of the contracts in the French communities public trans-

portation industry are cost-plus. Based on this evidence, a natural question arises: Why are

1See Dimitri, Piga and Spagnolo (2006), and Bajari and Tadelis (2006) for more details about the relevance

of public and private procurement.

2Real-world contracts are often linear, but some have nonlinear features such as a ceiling on transfers from
the buyer or a guarantee that the contractor will not lose money. Laﬀont and Tirole (1993) describe in details
other complex procurement contracts, and Chiappori and Salani´e (2000) provide a survey on such complex
contracts.

1

low-powered procurement contracts commonly used in these industries?

The paper shows that low-powered contracts arise in equilibrium due to a free-riding prob-

lem in procurement design when a contractor (agent) has economies of scale/scope working

for several buyers (principals), thereby enjoying positive externalities when providing goods

or services (activities) for diﬀerent buyers. The economies of scale/scope analyzed in this

paper can be illustrated by the case of a certain company (i.e., contractor) which has several

branches, and each of them engages in new methods to reduce cost and/or increase produc-

tivity. In this context, the economies of scale/scope take place when a new method developed

by one of the branches reaches other parts of the company, through, for instance, spillover.

Consequently, the whole company beneﬁts from methods developed by any of its branches.3

In a nutshell, low-powered contracts emerge in equilibrium because a buyer, when designing

a procurement contract to an activity provider, does not fully internalize that eliciting higher-

powered incentives induces cost reduction in the contractor’s activities, which beneﬁts other

buyers. However, he internalizes all costs associated to such incentive scheme. Because buyer’s

private beneﬁt of higher-powered contracts is lower than the public one, buyers oﬀer lower-

powered contracts that would be oﬀered by cooperative buyers.

To understand the main ideas of this paper, consider an industry with several risk neutral

buyers (principals) who all individually demand an activity from a single risk averse contractor

(agent). The contractor faces risks and incurs production costs when performing activities.

However, he can reduce costs by making eﬀort, which is not observed by the buyers (moral

hazard). The contractor also beneﬁts from economies of scale/scope (i.e., positive externality)

when performing activities for diﬀerent buyers, which is represented by a spillover from the

technology: a contractor, when making an eﬀort to reduce cost in a certain activity for one

of the buyers, also enjoys cost reduction in activities for other buyers.

Each buyer designs a procurement contract that minimizes his own expenditures when

contracting out an activity. As such, he faces a trade oﬀ between risk-sharing and incentives

to reduce cost. On the one hand, when oﬀering a high-powered incentive scheme, a buyer

makes the contractor more residual claimant, thereby increasing the contractor’s exposure to

3This paper will give further detailed examples about the kind of economies of scale/scope is presented in

the model.

2

risk.4 On the other hand, a high-powered incentive scheme induces the contractor to exert

high eﬀort, thereby reducing activity’s costs. By solving this trade-oﬀ, buyers choose the

power of the procurement contracts.

When the contractor beneﬁts from economies of scale/scope, a free-riding eﬀect is added

to that trade-oﬀ. A buyer does not internalize all the beneﬁts of eliciting high eﬀort: high-

powered incentive scheme also induces the contractor to reduce cost in other activities, thereby

reducing other buyer’s expenditures. Due to the public good feature of eliciting eﬀort, in

equilibrium buyers oﬀer excessively low-powered contracts.

Two assumptions of the model are crucial to generate this free-riding eﬀect: the same

contractor performs activities for diﬀerent buyers, and the contractor’s economies of scale/sope

in performing several activities. So, one may wonder if those two ingredients are present in

the industries where low-powered contracts are pervasive: US building construction industry

and French communities public transportation industry.

Empirical evidence suggests that those ingredients do exist in those industries. For in-

stance, Bajari, McMillan and Tadelis (2008) show that 60 percent of contracts in the North-

ern California construction industry are done by the same ﬁrm. Gagnepain and Ivaldi (2002)

show that 29 percent of the French urban transportation market belongs to one ﬁrm.5 Based

on these ﬁndings, it seems that there is some supporting evidence that the same contractor

performs activities for diﬀerent buyers in those industries.

Empirical studies testing the existence of economies of scale/scope, or even the existence of

positive externalities within diﬀerent activities in the building and public urban transportation

industry are quite scarce.6 However, Gagnepain and Ivaldi (2008) provide some evidence on

the existence of such economies of scope/scale in the French transportation industry showing

4Indeed, it leads the risk averse contractor to demand high monetary compensation to perform the activity.
5Gagnepain and Ivaldi (2002) document that VIA-GTI Company owns 29 % of the French market share,
whereas other big companies like TRANSDEV and CGEA own, respectively, 15 % and 14 %. Market shares
refer to the whole market, including Paris, Lyon, and Marseilles, the biggest cities of France.

6A set of empirical studies documents the existence of those economies and positive externalities in multi-
product ﬁrms in other industries. Monteverde and Teece (1982), for instance, show that the existing positive
externalities in the automobile production process, generated by nontransferable know-how and speciﬁc skills,
explains the vertical structure of the US automobile industry. Additionally, Kim (1985) presents evidence on
scale economies in multi-product ﬁrms in the US water sector. Furthermore, Fraquelli, Piacenza and Vannoni
(2004) document the presence of scope and scale economies in multi-services providers of public utilities (gas,
water and electricity) in Italy.

3

that contractors have engineer teams in each city which are responsible for research develop-

ment in quality control, maintenance, and eﬃciency, whose new methods and procedures can

be used by the entire company.

Some examples in those industries may also illustrate the kind of economies of scale/scope

presented in this paper.

In the public transportation industry, the spillover of new re-

pairing methods and procedures inside Veolia Transportation Company describes well such

economies.7 For instance, when Veolia’s mechanic team develops a new method for repair-

ing its light rail in Lyon, part of this knowledge is reached by Veolia’s mechanic team in

Nice, where Veolia also provides the same kind of public transportation. Similarly, the Gran-

ite Construction example illustrates those economies in the building construction industry:

when Granite’s design team develops a new procedure on project design for working in San

Francisco, its project team in San Diego will also learn this new procedure.8

This paper provides some empirical implications describing under which circumstances

low-powered contracts should be more frequently used.

In particular, it shows that cost-

plus contracts are more likely to be pervasive in industries in which a contractor beneﬁts

from positive externality for running diﬀerent activities (economies of scale/scope) than in

industries in which this eﬀect is nonexistent.

In addition, it predicts that the higher the

number of activities that a contractor performs for diﬀerent buyers, the more likely cost-plus

contracts are used.

In this paper, excessively low-powered incentive contracts arise as an ineﬃcient allocation

due to a free-riding problem. One may wonder if there is any policy that can be designed in

order to improve the social allocation. The paper shows that when the number of activities

performed by the same contractor for diﬀerent buyers is suﬃciently high, it is optimal for

buyers to commit to rules that bind them to oﬀer ﬁxed-price contracts rather than choosing

individually their own contracts. This policy recommendation is contrary to Bajari and Tadelis

(2001)’s policy recommendation which suggests that laws forcing the US public entities to

award ﬁxed-price contracts by competitive bidding should be withdrawn from FAR (Federal

7Veolia Transportation is a leader in the transportation industry, and the largest private provider of multiple

modes of transportation in the world.

8The Granite Construction Company is the leader of the 2005 and 2006 California Construction annual

ranking of the largest general contractors in California.

4

Acquisition Rules).

(cid:4) Related Literature. A set of papers in the literature has analyzed the widespread use
of cost-plus contracts in the US building construction and in the French urban transporta-

tion industry.9 Bajari and Tadelis (2001), for instance, argue that cost-plus contracts are

more ﬂexible and easier to renegotiate than the ﬁxed-price under unanticipated contingen-

cies.10 Hence, cost-plus contracts are more likely to be prevalent in industries characterized

by complex activities and frequently subject to incompleteness of contracts, like in building

construction.11 Bajari and Tadelis argue that low-powered contracts (i.e., cost-plus) are more

often used than other contracts because they provide better allocation. In contrast, this paper

argues that low-powered contracts emerge in equilibrium as an ineﬃcient allocation due to a

free-riding problem.

Laﬀont and Tirole (1986) formulate a principal-agent model of cost-based procurement

and regulation and demonstrate that the principal can implement the optimal mechanism

by oﬀering a menu consisting of a continuum of linear contracts.12 In particular, they show

that cost-plus contracts are optimally designed for the less eﬃcient contractors, whereas ﬁxed-

price are for the most eﬃcient ones. Nevertheless, Gagnepain and Ivaldi (2002, 2008) provide

evidence that such revelation mechanisms do not explain the widespread use of cost-plus

contract in the French urban transportation industry. They show that the political aspects

(i.e., the political side - left or right wing - and the weight given by politicians to costs -

workers - and proﬁts - shareholders) explain the pervasiveness of low-powered contracts in

that industry.

This paper builds on Weitzman (1980) and McAfee and McMillan (1986) which primarily

characterize the optimal procurement contract under moral hazard for a risk neutral buyer

9Analyzing the US Air Force engine procurement contracts, Crocker and Reynolds (1993) ﬁnd that cost-
plus contracts are frequently used at the initial production stages of projects. They argue that in these initial
stages unanticipated changes in projects are expected, therefore ﬂexible contracts (i.e., cost-plus) are desired.
10Bajari and Tadelis (2001) illustrate the incompleteness of contracts in the building construction industry
describing many anticipated contingencies in the site conditions occurred during the building of the Getty
Center Art Museum in Los Angeles. Those events implied in several changes in the original project design.

11Bajari, McMillan and Tadelis (2008) ﬁnd evidence for that showing that cost-plus contracts are more often

used in complex task, which are more likely to be suﬀer anticipated contingencies.

12Laﬀont and Tirole wrote a series of papers which expand upon the insights of their basic model and the

results are reported in Laﬀont and Tirole (1993).

5

(principal) and a risk averse contractor (agent).

Instead, in a multiprinicipals one agent

setting this paper solves the trade oﬀ between inducing cost reduction and compensating the

contractor for bearing risk.

Furthermore, this paper is also related to the literature on multi-contracting under moral

hazard, started by Bernheim and Whinston (1986), and extended by Dixit (1996).13 In Bern-

heim and Whinston, the agent takes one action (one dimension choice variable) which aﬀects

the payoﬀ of all principals. Instead, in our paper the agent takes several actions, one action

for each principal (multidimensional choice variable), and each action aﬀects the other buyers’

payoﬀ through the positive externality in the technology. This diﬀerence allows this paper to

provide empirical implications and policy recommendations which have not been addressed in

the procurement literature.

In Dixit (1996), principals write contracts on all agent’s outcome and the externality in

contracting present in his model arises due to the public good nature of eliciting eﬀort. In

this paper, diﬀerently, principals contract only on part of agent’s outcome.14

This paper also contributes to the literature on economies of scale/scope and the power of

procurement contracts.15 This link was primarily made by Rogerson (1992), who analyzes the

contractor’s behavior when he performs several activities that share common production costs

- a reason pointed out by Teece (1990) for existence of economies of scale/scope. Rogerson

shows that contractors optimally switch common costs to least powered contracts in order to

get reimbursed for most of the production costs. Naturally, buyers anticipate this contractor’s

behavior, and design excessively high-powered contracts. Due to the diﬀerence in the nature

of economies of scale/scope, Rogerson’s model and this paper have diﬀerent predictions about

the relationship between power of contracts and the existence of such economies.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the model. Section 3

13Le Breton and Salani´e (2003) apply the common agency framework to analyze a lobbying game in which
special interest groups are not a priori organized or unorganized and the type of the politician is not common
knowledge.

14Another diﬀerence is that Bernheim and Whinston (1986), and Dixit (1996) solve an intrinsic common
agency problem, when the agent must accept or reject all contracts. Instead, this paper deals with a delegated
common agency problem, when the agent can accept or reject any subset of contracts which are oﬀered. Yet in
the adverse selection multi-contracting setting, Martimort and Stole (2009) analyzes the market participation
under delegated and intrinsic common agency games.

15This literature was originally developed by Willig (1979), Teece (1980), and Panzar and Willig (1981),

and related to market structure and multiproduct industries by Bailey and Friedlaender (1982).

6

characterizes the optimal cooperative contract, our benchmark case, which maximizes the net

surplus of all buyers, taking into account all existing externalities associated to the contracting

out problem. Section 4 characterizes the noncooperative contracting equilibrium which arises

when buyers individually design their procurement contracts. Section 5 discusses the results

and formally presents the empirical implications of the paper. Section 6 provides a set of

policy recommendations to improve the social welfare, and Section 7 analyzes the eﬀect of

competition among contractors on the power of equilibrium contracts. Section 8 concludes.

Proofs of the propositions that are not in the text can be found in the appendix.

2 The Model

The model is an extension of the standard bilateral principal-agent problem with moral hazard

to the case of many principals, where the principals are risk-neutral buyers and the agent is

a risk-averse contractor.

Building the model on that framework, we consider an industry consisting of n ≥ 2 buyers
and a single contractor. Each buyer wants to procure a diﬀerent and indivisible activity,16

and the contractor is the only ﬁrm which owns the technology to perform those activities.

The contractor may exert an unobservable eﬀort (i.e., investment) in each activity to reduce

production cost. Eﬀorts have spillovers: the eﬀort exerted in certain activity reduces also

production cost of other activities. This eﬀort spillover creates positive externality within

activities.

2.1 Technology
(cid:4) Production Cost. The contractor incurs a production cost Ci to perform the activity for
buyer-i. It is described by:

Ci(e1, ..., en, κ, εi) = β − ei − κ
n − 1

ej + εi,

for i = 1, ..., n.

(1)

16The presence of a multi-unit demand keeps the results unchanged, whereas it introduces a pricing decision

problem, which is out of scope of this paper.

7

(cid:88)

j(cid:54)=i

Equation (1) states that the contractor incurs a ﬁxed cost β > 0 to perform activity-i but

he can reduce it by making an eﬀort ei in activity-i. Furthermore, the contractor also enjoys
some cost reduction in activity-i by making eﬀort ej in other activities j (cid:54)= i. Besides that,
there is an unpredictable cost εi which realizes when the contractor performs the activity. For

simplicity, we assume that εi’s are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) according

to a normal distribution with zero mean and variance σ2, N (0, σ2). In addition, we assume

that Ci is contractible and veriﬁable.

Clearly, the technology allows the contractor to beneﬁt from positive externality when

performing activities for diﬀerent buyers: making an eﬀort to reduce cost in a certain activity

for one of the buyers, the contractor also reduces cost in other activities for the other buyers.

This positive externality is captured by the parameter κ, which measures the sum of marginal

impact of increasing eﬀort in all other activities to reduce cost in the activity-i.17 Let us
assume that κ ≥ 0, which means that the externality within activities is positive. When
κ = 0, we have the standard procurement problem already analyzed by Weitzman (1980),

and McAfee and McMillan (1986). In the case where κ > 0, we have the contribution of this

paper.

As it turns out, the positive externality in the production process can also be interpreted

as economies of scale (when the contractor performs the same activity for diﬀerent buyers)

or economies of scope (when the contractor performs diﬀerent activities for diﬀerent buyers),

since the contractor can reduce the production cost per activity performing more than one

activity.

The Veolia Transportation and Granite Construction Company examples, which were pre-

viously discussed, ﬁt to the kind of positive externality (or economies of scale/scope) in this

paper. Other examples like investment in training, know-how and ideas, which the knowledge
17The totaly externality in activity-i is divided by n− 1 in order to bound the externality eﬀect of increasing
n in the the production cost deﬁned in (1). This assumption is not crucial for the result. It can be replaced
by a less restrictive one which says that the positive externality is not strictly increasing in the number of
activities n. For instance, the results hold if it is assumed that the production cost of the activity-i takes the
following form

Ci(e1, ..., en, κ, εi) =

j=1,j(cid:54)=i ej + εi

,
,

if n ≤ h
otherwise

with h > 1.

(cid:26) β − ei − κ(cid:80)n

+∞

8

can spill over the entire company, also illustrate this externality story.

(cid:4) Eﬀort Cost. As discussed above, eﬀort clearly has a social value of reducing production
cost. However, it is costly. The contractor bears a cost for making them. For simplicity, we

assume that the cost of eﬀort ei has a quadratic form and is represented by

ψ(ei) =

1
2α

e2
i .

(2)

The total contractor’s eﬀort cost for making eﬀort in all activities is the sum of (2) over all n

performing activities.18 In expression (2), α measures the cost sensitivity to changes in eﬀort.

Note that, the higher α, the lower the marginal cost of exerting eﬀort. In addition, let us

assume that α > 0, which implies that eﬀort cost is positive.

Let us assume that eﬀort is not observable. Hence, the only contractible variable is con-

tractor’s production cost.

2.2 Buyers and The Contractor
(cid:4) Buyers. All n buyers are risk neutral and each derives utility v > β per activity per-
formed.19 Each buyer is indexed by i which belongs to the set of buyers N = {1, 2, ..., n}.
Because eﬀort is not contractible, they individually contract on the activity cost, deﬁned in

(1), oﬀering the contractor a standard linear procurement contract.

The standard procurement contract oﬀered by buyer-i to the contractor speciﬁes a reim-

bursement fraction ai of the contractor’s monetary expenditures Ci in activity-i and a ﬁxed

fee bi. They jointly characterize the buyer-i’s net transfer Ti to the contractor, which takes

the form

Ti(Ci) = bi + aiCi, with ai ∈ [0, 1].

(3)

In this linear setting, contracts are fully characterized by the (bi, ai). Buyers, being risk

18It is assumed that there is no substitutability or complementarity between eﬀorts in the total eﬀort cost
function. Clearly, it is quite natural that eﬀorts are complementary within similar activities performed by the
same contractor: making an investment (eﬀort) to reduce cost in activity-i, may reduce the cost of doing a
similar investment (eﬀort) in an activity-j. If such complementarity is assumed, the results of this paper are
even stronger. Hence, for simplicity, it was assumed the eﬀort cost function described in (2).

19This assumption guarantees that it is optimal for all buyers to procure for an activity.

9

neutral, are assumed to design contracts to maximize their own expected payoﬀ, which is the
utility derived from the activity minus the expected payment to the contractors, v−E(Ti(Ci)):

V (bi, ai, Ci) = v − bi − aiE(Ci).

(4)

(cid:4) The Contractor. The contractor is a risk averse ﬁrm with constant absolute risk aversion,
whose preferences are represented by an CARA utility function described by

u(x) = −exp{−rx},

(5)

where x is the total monetary transfer that contractor receives from buyers minus the pro-
duction and eﬀort costs for performing activities, and r ≥ 0 is the coeﬃcient of absolute
risk aversion. The contractor is assumed to be risk averse because he faces shocks when

undertaking activities.20

In order to describe the total expected contractor’s payoﬀ-utility when he performs activ-

ities for several buyers, let us ﬁrst characterize the payoﬀ-utility in a given activity-i. Then

we sum over all activities to obtain his total payoﬀ-utility.

On the one hand, the contractor earns a monetary transfer Ti = bi + aiCi from buyer-i for

performing the activity-i. On the other hand, the contractor incurs production cost Ci, deﬁned

in (1), and an eﬀort cost for exerting eﬀort in the activity-i, deﬁned in (2). Accordingly, the

expected contractor’s payoﬀ for performing activity-i is:

(cid:104)

(cid:16)

E

u

bi − (1 − ai)Ci − e2
i
2α

(cid:17)(cid:105)

.

(6)

Since the contractor has CARA utility function, his expected payoﬀ in equation (6) can

be written as follows:

E(cid:2) − exp(cid:8) − r(cid:2)bi − (1 − ai)Ci − e2

(cid:3)(cid:9)(cid:3).

i
2α

(7)

20The existence of risk averse contractors has been documented by Kawasaki and McMillian (1987), Asanuma
and Kikutani (1992) and Yun (1999) when analyzing the relationship between manufacturers and contractors
in Japan and Korea. Experimental works (see Kagel (1995) for a survey) and econometric studies (Athey and
Levin (2001)) identify risk averse ﬁrms analyzing their behaviors in auctions. Salani´e (1990) and Laﬀont and
Rochet (1998) analyze the issue of risk aversion in a principal agent model with adverse selection.

10

From expression (1), note that Ci is composed by a sum of deterministic variables, (e1, ..., en,

κ), and a shock εi, which is a random variable normally distributed with zero mean and vari-

ance σ2. In order to compute the expected value of exp (εi), we rely on the property of the

normal distributions that: when a random variable εi is normally distributed with zero mean
and variance σ2, then E[exp (εi)] is equal to exp( σ2

2 ). Accordingly, the expected contractor’s

payoﬀ for performing activity-i is:

EU (bi, ai) =(cid:2) − exp(cid:8) − r(cid:2)bi − (1 − ai)E[Ci] − e2

(cid:3)(cid:9)(cid:3).

− r(1 − ai)2σ2

2

(8)

i
2α

In equation (8), note that, the lower the reimbursement fraction of the contractor’s cost

in activity-i ai, the more the contractor residual claimant for its cost saving. Since ai lies in
the interval between 0 and 1, then (1 − ai) measures the power of the procurement contract.
In the case that the contractor performs a subset I of the N existing activities, he will

receive monetary transfers for performing those I activities, but he will also incur production

and eﬀort costs. Hence, his expected payoﬀ will be:

(cid:104)

(cid:16)(cid:88)

E

u

i∈I

bi − (1 − ai)Ci − e2
i
2α

(cid:17)(cid:105)

.

(9)

Applying to expression (9) the same algebraic manipulations employed in (6) and (7), we

obtain the total contractor’s expected payoﬀ for performing the I activities:

EU ({(bi, ai)}i∈I) =

(cid:104) − exp

(cid:110) − r

(cid:88)

(cid:104)

i∈I

bi − (1 − ai)E[Ci] − e2
i
2α

− r(1 − ai)2σ2

2

(cid:105)(cid:111)(cid:105)

,

(10)

where {(bi, ai)}i∈I are, respectively, the ﬁxed fees and reimbursement fractions of the I activ-
ities.

(cid:4) The Procurement Contracts. The model described above involves two seemingly ad
hoc assumptions, which coincides with the assumption in Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991)

multitask paper. The more obvious one is that the contract that parties sign speciﬁes a trans-

fer which is a linear function of production cost. The second assumption is more conventional

and therefore less likely to be noticed, but is no less troubling. It is the assumption that the

11

contractor is required to make a single, once-and-for-all choice of how he will allocate these

eﬀorts during the relationship without regard to the arrival of performance information over

time. A remarkable fact, which was established by Holmstrom and Milgrom (1987), is that

these two simplifying assumptions are exactly oﬀsetting in this model where the contractor

has CARA preferences and the shocks are normally distributed. That is, the optimal linear

contract analyzed in this model coincides with the optimal contract in a principal-agent prob-

lem in which the agent (contractor): (i) chooses eﬀorts continuously over time, and (ii) can

observe his accumulated production cost before acting.

In view of its underlying assumptions, the model seems especially well suited for ana-

lyzing contracts between buyers and contractors represented by cost-reimbursement schemes

paid over a short period, like a month, a quarter, or perhaps a year, in industries in which

production costs are cumulative result of persistent eﬀorts over time.

2.3 Sequence of Decisions and Events

Figure 1 describes the timing of the game. The game begins at date 0, when each buyer

individually makes a take-it-or-leave-it oﬀer of a procurement contract to the contractor.21

Since the contracts are restricted to be linear, as described in (3), each buyer’s oﬀer can be

represented by the ﬁxed fee bi and the reimbursement fraction ai. With abuse of notation,
let N = {1, 2, ..., n} be the set of all contracts, and P(N ) be the set of all subsets of the N ,
where I is a typical element of P(N ).

At date 1, the contractor accepts or refuses any individual oﬀer, having the right to accept
all contracts in N , or any subset of contracts I ∈ P(N ). At date 2, the contractor chooses an
eﬀort ei to make in each activity-i, which belongs to I, in order to maximize his total expected

utility-proﬁt.

When the contractor accepts I contracts, he chooses eﬀorts {ei}i∈I which maximize this
expected payoﬀ. In this case, his expected payoﬀ is characterized by (10). Hence, the optimal

21The main results of this paper hold under less extreme assumption on how the buyers and the contractor
reach an agreement over the terms of the contracts. However, it is important that all bargaining power is not
fully allocated to the contractor.

12

(cid:88)

j(cid:54)=i

eﬀorts are the ones that solve the following problem:

(cid:110) − r

(cid:88)

(cid:104)

i∈I

−exp

max
{ei}i∈I

bi − (1 − ai)E[Ci] − e2
i
2α

(cid:105)(cid:111)

− r(1 − ai)2σ2

2

(11)

where {(bi, ai)}i∈I are, respectively, the ﬁxed fees and reimbursement fractions of the I con-
tracts accepted by the contractor.

The optimal eﬀort in the activity-i is characterized by

ei
α

= (1 − ai) +

κ
n − 1

(1 − aj), for all i, j ∈ I,

(IC)

which satisﬁes the necessary and suﬃcient conditions of program (11).

According to equation above, the contractor optimally chooses the eﬀort in activity-i which

equalizes its marginal cost to its marginal beneﬁt. The marginal cost of increasing ei is equal

to ei

α , which is computed by deriving the eﬀort cost in (2) with respect to ei. The marginal
beneﬁt is the eﬀect of increasing ei on the total nonreimbursed production cost. This marginal

eﬀect corresponds to the sum of the marginal eﬀect of ei on nonreimbursed cost of activity-i,
which is (1 − ai), and its marginal eﬀect on nonreimbursed cost of the other activities, which
j(cid:54)=i(1 − aj). Note that the higher the power of the contracts (1 − ai) is, the higher
is

(cid:80)

κ
n−1

the eﬀorts ei’s will be.

As it turns out, equation (IC) corresponds to the incentive compatibility constraint in the

multiprincipals one agent framework. It says that the contractor (agent) optimally chooses
eﬀorts given the incentive schemes {ai}i∈I provided by the buyers (principals). Note that, if
no incentives are provided (ai = 1 for all i, j ∈ I), then all eﬀorts are equal to zero. This
is quite natural: if all costs are borne by the buyers (i.e., contracts are cost-plus), then the

contractor does not have incentives to reduce cost.

In addition, equation (IC) describes how the incentive schemes provided by diﬀerent buyers

are connected in this model.

In particular, it shows that when buyer-i sets high-powered

incentive scheme (low ai) to induce high eﬀort and reduce production cost in his activity-i,

he is also eliciting high eﬀort in all other j activities, thereby reducing production cost of the

activities for all other j buyers. This link between incentive schemes through the incentive

13

compatibility constraint (IC) is the source of free-riding problem analyzed in this model: A

buyer, when designing his contract, does not internalize that when inducing high eﬀort in his

activity, he is also providing incentives to reduce cost in activities for other buyers.

Finally, after making the eﬀort choice, shocks εi realize in each activity at date 3. At date

4, contracts are executed, and payoﬀs are realized.

Figure 1: Timing of events

0

6

1

6

2

6

3

6

4

6

Each buyer oﬀers
a contract (bi, ai)
to the Contractor

Contractor accepts
or refuses any
individual oﬀer

Contractor chooses
eﬀort for every
activity

Shock ε’s
are realized

Contracts are
executed, payoﬀs
are realized

3 Optimal Cooperative Contract: The Benchmark

The analysis of a free-riding problem requires a benchmark, which is useful for making al-

location and welfare comparisons. The benchmark in this paper is the optimal cooperative

contract. It is deﬁned as the contract that maximizes the total surplus of all buyers, taking

into account all externalities associated to this procurement problem. Indeed, this is the most

appropriate benchmark since the free-riding problem analyzed in this paper arises because

buyers do not completely internalize all the beneﬁts of eliciting eﬀort from the contractor.

Additionally, the cooperative contracting problem addressed in this section is useful to

analyze situations in which a consortia of buyers oﬀers a contract to a ﬁrm who has to perform

activities for all associated members, and also the contracting out problem of a national or

state government who has to contract a ﬁrm to provide public services/goods in several local

communities.22

22The aim of this section is to characterize the optimal contract when the buyers cooperative contract out
some activities. It does not state when buyers should organize themselves in consortia, or when the public
good/services decision should be centralized. For that, it will be necessary to have a theory which describes
the costs and beneﬁts of coordinating (centralizing) buyers (local public services/goods), which is not the
objective of this paper.

14

In the cooperative contracting problem, buyers cooperatively choose I activities that they
ﬁnd proﬁtable to contract for, and the terms of the contracts of those activities {(bi, ai)}i∈I.
The optimal contract is the one that maximizes the sum of all buyers net expected payoﬀ. It

is formally deﬁned as follows:

Deﬁnition 1 The optimal cooperative contract is deﬁned by (I c,{(bc
following problem:

i )}i∈I c) which solves

i , ac

(cid:105)

(v − bi − aiCi)

(cid:104)(cid:88)

i∈I

max

I∈P(N ),{(bi,ai)}i∈I

E

s.t.

(cid:88)

ai ∈ [0, 1]
κ
n − 1

j(cid:54)=i

= (1 − ai) +

ei
α

(cid:104)

(cid:16)(cid:88)

i∈I

max
{ei}i∈I

E

u

bi − (1 − ai)Ci − e2
i
2α

(1 − aj) i, j ∈ I

(cid:17)(cid:105) ≥ U (0)

(IC)

(IR)

where I c are the activities the buyers ﬁnd proﬁtable to contract for, and {(bc
respectively, the ﬁxed fees and reimbursement fractions of those I c activities.

i )}i∈I c are,

i , ac

The objective function in the problem above is composed by the sum of all buyers utility

for the I activities, minus their total transfer to the contractor. The ﬁrst constraint of the

problem says that buyers choose the reimbursement fraction of the procurement contracts in an

interval which goes from zero to one. When a = 1, the optimal contract is cost-plus, whereas
when a = 0, it is a ﬁxed-price contract. It is an incentive contracts, if a ∈ (0, 1). Expression
(IC) is the incentive compatibility constraint, and says that buyers take into account that the

contractor optimally chooses the eﬀort in each activity. The last constraint, deﬁned as (IR),

is the participation constraint and says that the contractor must be better oﬀ accepting the

I contracts than rejecting all of them. In the case that the contractor rejects all I contracts,

he does not incur any cost, however he receives no monetary transfers. Note that there is

an underlining assumption associated to expression (IR): buyers make an all-or-nothing oﬀer

to the contractor.

It means that the contractor should accept to perform all I activities,

otherwise no contract will be oﬀered to him.

15

Solving the cooperative contracting problem, buyers face a trade oﬀ between earning ben-

eﬁts from inducing cost reduction and bearing the costs to compensate the contractor to

bear some risk. Accordingly, if buyers want to induce cost reduction in activity-i, they must

make the contractor more residual claimant, thereby lowering their ai. However, this would

increase contractor’s exposure to risk, inducing him to demand a higher ﬁxed fee bi to per-

form the activity. By solving this trade-oﬀ, they optimally choose the ﬁxed fees bi’s and the

reimbursement fractions ai’s of the optimal contract.

The optimal contract (I c,{(bc

i )}i∈I c) which solves the cooperative contracting problem

i , ac

is characterized in the following proposition:

Proposition 1 The optimal cooperative contract (I c,{(bc

i )}i∈I c) is characterized by:

i , ac

ac
i =

 1 −
n(cid:88)

0

i=1

and

I c = N

α(1+κ)2

αn[ 2κ

n−1 + κ2(n−2)

(n−1)2 ]+[α(1− κ

n−1 )2+rσ2]

∈ (0, 1)

, if rσ2 ≥ κ(n − 2)

, otherwise

(cid:104)

bc
i = n

(1 − ac

i )β − (α(1 + κ)2 − rσ2)(1 − ac

i )2

2

(cid:105)

(12)

(13)

(14)

for all i ∈ I, where bc

i and ac

i are, respectively, the ﬁxed fee and the reimbursement fraction

of the optimal contract for activity-i.

Proposition 1 shows that buyers will optimally ask the contractor to perform all activities,
I c = N . This result comes directly from the assumption that v − β > 0, described in Section
2.2, which assumes symmetry between activities. In addition, it assumes that the net expected

utility of each activity is always positive, even though the contractor does not exert any eﬀort

to reduce cost. Indeed, if all activities are symmetric and, independently of the eﬀorts, all

activities individually give positive net utility surplus for the buyers, then they will optimally

demand all of them.

16

Additionally, Proposition 1 demonstrates that if the risk aversion and shock’s variance are
suﬃciently high such that their product, rσ2, is higher than a certain threshold κ(n − 2),
then buyers optimally choose an incentive contract, whose reimbursement fraction ac
i of the

contracts is between 0 and 1. Otherwise, they choose ﬁxed-price contracts, ac

i = 0.

The optimal contract has a single solution for the sum of all ﬁxed fees, which is charac-

terized in expression (14). However, due to the symmetry between activities, the ﬁxed fees
i}i∈I c of the optimal contract are not uniquely determined. In particular, many diﬀerent
{bc
combinations of bi’s that satisfy expression (14) are solutions for the cooperative contracting

problem described in Deﬁnition 1.

According to Proposition 1, the power of the optimal contract (1−ac

i ), implicitly described

by (13), depends on the externality eﬀect κ. The following corollary analyzes the relationship

between those variables.

Corollary 1 The optimal cooperative contract has the following properties:

• The power of the optimal contract (1 − ac

i (κ)) is monotonically increasing in the exter-

nality eﬀect, κ :

∂(1 − ac
∂κ

i (κ))

≥ 0

(15)

• In the presence of the externality eﬀect, κ > 0, the power of the optimal contract (1 −
i (0)) when the externality

i (κ)) is higher than the power of the optimal contract (1 − ac
ac
eﬀect is nonexistent, κ = 0:

(1 − ac

i (κ)) > (1 − ac

i (0)).

(16)

Corollary 1 shows that the higher the externality eﬀect (measured by the parameter κ),

the higher the power of procurement contracts. The economic intuition for these results is

straightforward: The higher the positive externality within activities, the higher the eﬀort’s

impact in reducing overall contractor’s cost. Hence, the lower the buyer’s transfer to compen-

sate the contractor for the activity’s cost. Since high-powered contracts induce higher eﬀort,

they will be the most proﬁtable incentive schemes for buyers.

17

In addition to that, Corollary 1 demonstrates that the optimal cooperative contract with

externality, κ > 0, provides higher-powered incentive schemes than the optimal contract

without externality, κ = 0.

4 Noncooperative Contracting Equilibrium

The focus of this section is to analyze the free-riding problem in procurement design. This

externality in contracting emerges in our model because buyers do not completely internalize

all the beneﬁts of eliciting eﬀort from the contractor.23

To analyze the strategic interaction between procurement designers (buyers), we look at

the Nash equilibrium in contract design. In this context, each buyer individually designs a

procurement contract that maximizes his expected payoﬀ, taking the other buyers’ contracts

as given. This equilibrium concept is formally deﬁned as follows:

Deﬁnition 2 The contract proﬁle (I nc,{(bnc
equilibrium if and only if
(i) For any given contract, (I,{(bi, ai)}i∈I), the contractor

i , anc

i )}i∈I nc) is a noncooperative contracting

◦ optimally chooses eﬀorts in the I activities:

(cid:104)

ei = α

(1 − ai) +

κ
n − 1

(1 − aj)

(cid:88)

j(cid:54)=i

(cid:105)

i, j ∈ I

(IC)

(IRnc)

(cid:17)(cid:105)

◦ is better oﬀ accepting the I contracts than any other J subsets of contracts:

max
{ei}i∈I

E

u

bi− (1− ai)Ci− e2
i
2α

max

{ei}j∈J,∀J∈P(N )

E

u

bj − (1− aj)Cj − e2
j
2α

(cid:17)(cid:105) ≥

(cid:104)

(cid:16)(cid:88)

j∈J

(cid:104)

(cid:16)(cid:88)

i∈I

23Yardstick competition, a cost comparison mechanism proposed by Shleifer (1985), may mitigate the free-
riding problem analyzed in this paper. However, as Rogerson (2003) argues, such complex contracts are diﬃcult
and costly to implement. Consequently, buyers and contractors usually prefer to write simple contracts which
have low informational requirements, as the ones characterized in this section.

18

(ii) Given (bnc−i, anc−i), then buyer-i maximizes his expected payoﬀ:

(cid:104)

(cid:105)

(bnc

i , anc

i ) ∈ arg max

(bi,ai)

E

v − bi − aiCi

s.t.

ai ∈ [0, 1].

i , anc

deﬁnition, (I nc,{(bnc
i , anc
(bnc

This equilibrium deﬁnition corresponds to Perfect Nash Equilibrium in contracts. By this
i )}i∈I nc) is a noncooperative contracting equilibrium if the contract
i ) maximizes the buyer-i expected payoﬀ, v − bi − aiCi, taking into account that other
buyers are choosing the contracts (bnc−i, anc−i). In addition, it has to satisfy to two other con-
ditions to be an equilibrium contract. First, constraint (IC) is the incentive compatibility

constraint, which states that the contractor optimally chooses the eﬀort in each activity in

I. Secondly, constraint (IRnc) is the participation constraint of the game. It states that the

contractor must be better oﬀ accepting the I contracts than any other J subsets of contracts,

which includes rejecting all contracts. Note that, if contractor rejects all contracts, then he

receives zero monetary transfer and does not incur any cost.

Proposition 2, described below, characterizes a noncooperative contracting equilib-

rium of this model:

Proposition 2 The contract proﬁle (I nc,{(bnc
tive contracting equilibrium:

i )}i∈I nc) described below is a noncoopera-

i , anc

I nc = N

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

i = 1 − α
anc

1 + κ2
n−1

α(1 + κ2) + rσ2 ,

i = (1 − anc
bnc

i )β − α(1 + κ)2(1 − anc)2

2

rσ2(1 − anc)2

2

,

+

(17)

(18)

(19)

for all i ∈ I, where bnc
of the contract for activity-i.

i and anc

i are, respectively, the ﬁxed fee and the reimbursement fraction

19

The equilibrium contracts characterized in Proposition 2 have some properties which are

described as follows:

Proposition 3 The equilibrium described in Proposition 2 has the following properties:

• The power of the noncooperative equilibrium contracts (1 − anc

i (κ)) is lower than the

power of the optimal cooperative contract (1 − ac

i (κ)),

(1 − anc

i (κ)) ≤ (1 − ac

i (κ)),

(20)

holding with equality if and only if there is no externality, i.e. κ = 0;

• the power of the noncooperative equilibrium contracts (1 − anc

i (κ)) is decreasing in n:

∂(1 − anc
∂n

i (κ))

≤ 0

(21)

• It is the unique equilibrium with n-contracts accepted;

• If κ ∈ [0, 1], then it is more proﬁtable than exclusive contracts. Hence, there is no

ex-ante and no ex-post incentive toward exclusive dealing agreements.

The ﬁrst result in Proposition 3 says that the equilibrium procurement contracts have

lower-powered incentive schemes than the optimal cooperative contracts. This conclusion is

quite intuitive: A buyer, who individually oﬀers a procurement contract for a contractor, does

not fully internalize that eliciting higher-powered incentives provides cost reduction in the

contractor’s activities, which beneﬁts other buyers. Hence, in equilibrium buyers oﬀer lower-

powered procurement contracts than what would be oﬀered if buyers cooperatively designed

their contracts.

To investigate in more details this eﬀect, let us ﬁrst look at the case in which κ is equal to

zero. Clearly, in this case there is no externality eﬀect in the production cost, and consequently,

there is no free-riding problem. Therefore, the reimbursement fraction of the procurement

contract in the optimal cooperative contracting problem and in noncooperative contracting

equilibrium are the same.

20

Secondly, let us analyze the case in which κ > 0.

It corresponds to the case in which

the externality eﬀect exists and, consequently, the free-riding problem in procurement design

is present. Doing so, let us illustrate it in a simple case where the number of activities-

buyers is equal to two, n = 2. To perform the analysis, we start with a key observation:

in both situations, optimal cooperative contract and noncooperative contracting equilibrium,

the contractor is indiﬀerent between accepting and rejecting all contracts. This means that

the contractor’s participation constraint is binding in both these cases. Consequently, it

corresponds to say that the total transfer received by the contractor is equal to his total costs,

which are composed by production costs, eﬀort costs and contractor’s desutility for bearing

risk:

T1 + T2 = E[C1(e1(a1, a2), e2(a1, a2), κ, ε1)] + E[C2(e2(a1, a2), e1(a1, a2), κ, ε2)]

(cid:16)

+

1
2α

e2
1(a1, a2) + e2

2(a1, a2)

(cid:17)

+

rσ2
2

(cid:104)

(1 − a1)2 + (1 − a2)2(cid:105)

First, note that in the expression above, the eﬀorts e1 and e2 are function of the reim-

bursement fraction of the procurement contracts, a1 and a2. They come from the incentive

compatibility constraint described in (IC), which says that the power of contracts aﬀects the

contractor’s eﬀort decision.

Now, let us see the forces which make the optimal cooperative contract diﬀerent from the

noncooperative contract. In the optimal cooperative contract, buyers jointly choose (bi, ai)i∈I
such that minimize the total transfers, T1 + T2.

In contrast, in the noncooperative contracting equilibrium, each buyer chooses bi and ai

that minimize its own transfer. For instance, buyer-1 minimizes

T1 = E[C1(e1(a1, a2), e2(a1, a2), κ, ε1)] + E[C2(e2(a1, a2), e1(a1, a2), κ, ε2)]

(cid:16)

+

1
2α

e2
1(a1, a2) + e2

2(a1, a2)

(cid:17)

+

rσ2
2

(cid:104)
(1 − a1)2 + (1 − a2)2(cid:105) − T2.

Taking T2, which is equal to b2 + a2E[C2(e2(a1, a2), e1(a1, a2), κ, ε2)], oﬀ his problem, buyer-1

does not fully internalize that by eliciting higher eﬀort from the contracting (i.e., lowering a1),

he will reduce the contractor’s production cost.

21

Proposition 3 also provides other interesting results. It says that the higher the number

of activities n performed by the same contractor, the lower the power of the equilibrium
contract (1 − anc
described in Proposition 2 is the unique equilibrium when the N contracts are accepted.

i (κ)). In addition, it states that the noncooperative contracting equilibrium

Furthermore, it shows that those equilibrium contracts are more proﬁtable for buyers than
exclusive contracts if the externality eﬀect is not so big, κ ∈ [0, 1]. An implication is that
buyers and the contractor have no ex-ante or no ex-post bilateral incentives to write exclusive

dealing contracts. Intuitively, this result says that despite the fact that the free-riding eﬀect

leads to low-powered contracts and, consequently, low eﬀort, those negative eﬀects do not

oﬀset the beneﬁts of having positive externality for providing activities for several buyers.24

At this time, it is worth recalling Corollary 1 and comparing the eﬀect of the external-

ity on the power of contracts in the optimal cooperative contracts with the noncooperative

equilibrium contracts. Corollary 1 says that the higher externality eﬀect κ is, the higher the

power of optimal cooperative contracts will be. This result comes from the fact that the

higher the positive externality within activities, the higher the impact of an eﬀort in reducing

overall contractor’s cost. Hence, it is proﬁtable for buyers to increase the power of the optimal

cooperative contracts.

In contrast, in the noncooperative equilibrium these cooperative statics are not straight-

forward. These results follow from the fact that there are two opposite forces determining

the power of the contracts in equilibrium: the positive externality eﬀect and the free-riding

eﬀect. The positive externality eﬀect is the same one discussed in Corollary 1: The higher the

positive externality within activities is, the higher the power of contracts will be.25 However,

the existence of the free-riding problem puts pressure to lower the power of the equilibrium

contracts. Intuitively, the higher the externality eﬀect κ is, the lower the private contractor’s

beneﬁt for eliciting eﬀort from the contractor will be. Hence, the lower the power of the

24In contrast, Martimort (1996) shows that exclusive dealing can be optimal in a multi-contracting envi-
ronment with adverse selection. In particular, he demonstrates that depending on the extent of the adverse
selection problem and on the complementarily or substitutability of their brands, manufacturers prefer to use
either a common or an exclusive retailer.

25A buyer, who takes as given the other buyers’ contracts, has more incentive to induce the contractor’s
eﬀort when the externality eﬀect κ is high. It happens because: the higher κ, the higher the reduction in
the contractor’s total cost for eliciting more eﬀort is, and the lower is the buyer’s ﬁxed fee transfer to the
contractor will be. Hence, the higher the beneﬁt of high-powered contracts.

22

contracts. In particular, this free-riding eﬀect increases with the number of activities n.

Corollary 2 analyzes the eﬀect of externality, measured by κ, on the power of equilibrium

contracts (1 − anc
i ).

Corollary 2 The power of the noncooperative equilibrium procurement contracts (1 − anc
i )
have the following relationship with the positive externality eﬀect (economies of scope/scale),

measured by κ:

• When the number of buyers contracting with the same contractor is suﬃciently low,
α , then the higher the contractor’s positive externality for performing diﬀerent

n ≤ 2 + rσ2
activities, the higher the power of equilibrium procurement contracts: ∂(1−anc

i )

∂κ ≥ 0;

• When the number of buyers contracting with the same contractor is suﬃciently high,
α , then the higher the contractor’s positive externality, the lower the power of

n > 2 + rσ2
equilibrium procurement contracts: ∂(1−anc

i )

∂κ < 0.

Corollary 3 and 4 conclude the section providing additional results on the power of pro-

curement contracts in equilibrium.

Corollary 3 When the number of buyers (principals) contracting with the same contractor is
suﬃciently high, n ≥ 2 + rσ2, then the noncooperative equilibrium contracts with externality,
κ > 0, have lower-powered incentive schemes than the optimal cooperative contract without

externality, κ = 0,

(1 − anc

i (κ)) ≤ (1 − ac

i (0)).

Corollary 4 If n ≥ 3, then each buyer’s expected transfer in the noncooperative equilibrium
increases with the number of buyers (principals),

∂T nc
i
∂n

> 0.

Corollary 3 says that, even in the presence of positive externality, the equilibrium con-

tracts have lower incentive power than the optimal contract when the positive externality is

23

nonexistent. Corollary 4 says that the higher the number of activities performed by the same

contractor for all buyers, the higher the transfers paid by each buyer. Consequently, the lower

the buyer’s expected payoﬀ. It implies that the free-riding eﬀect does damage the buyer’s

payoﬀ, and in particular, that negative impact increases with the number of buyers. In addi-

tion, it shows that negative free-riding eﬀect dominates the beneﬁts of having the contractors

performing several activities (i.e., the positive externality).

The negative relationship between buyer’s transfer and the number of buyers, described

in Corollary 4, has narrow connections to some results in the public good literature.

In

particular, it is related to Mailath and Postlewaite (1990) and Hellwig (2003)’s result that

when the number of agents who contribute for a public good increases, the provision of public

goods decreases. The common feature between this paper and the public good literature comes

from the fact that eliciting eﬀort in a multi-contracting setting has a public good nature: a

buyer, who gives incentives to the contractor to reduce cost in his own activity, is at the same

time contributing to reduce cost in activities for other contractors.

5 Empirical Implications

The main contribution of this paper is to explain how the existence of a positive externality

creates free-riding problem in procurement design, which leads to excessive low-powered con-

tracts in diﬀerent industries. A testable model on the power of procurement contract has to

deliver conditions under which low-powered contracts are more likely to be used. Our model

yields potentially testable implications describing circumstances under which low-powered

contracts should be used more frequently.

5.1 Externality in production, and economies of scope/scale: the

likelihood of low-powered contracts

An empirical implication which can be derived from this paper refers to the relationship

between κ and the power of procurement contracts. It can be obtained directly from Corollary

2, and it is formally stated in the following implication:

24

Implication 1 Consider the industries in which economies of scope and scale in the pro-

duction process are prevalent, κ > 0. When the number of buyers contracting with the same
contractor is suﬃciently low, n ≤ 2 + rσ2
α , the higher contractors’ economies of scope/scale
κ in a given industry, the more likely the use of high-powered procurement contracts. On the

other hand, when the number of buyers contracting with the same contractor is suﬃciently
high, n ≥ 2 + rσ2
scope/scale κ, the more likely the use of low-powered procurement contracts.

α , then this relationship is inverted: the higher the contractors’ economies of

This implication comes from that fact that two diﬀerent forces determine the power of

procurement contracts: the externality eﬀect and the free-riding eﬀect. The externality eﬀect

oﬀsets the free-riding eﬀect for low values of n, establishing a negative relationship between

the externality parameter κ and the power of the equilibrium contracts. Conversely, for

high values of n, the free-riding eﬀect dominates, which makes the power of the equilibrium

contracts decrease with κ.

Another implication can be easily derived from Corollary 3. In summary, this corollary

suggests: when the number of buyers contracting with the same contractor is suﬃciently high,

then the noncooperative equilibrium contracts in the presence of externality in the production

process (economies of scale/scope) have lowered-powered incentive schemes than the optimal

cooperative contracts when such economies are nonexistent.

In order to derive an empirical implication from this result, let us ﬁrst note that the

optimal cooperative contract without externality coincides with the noncooperative contract

without externality. It is quite natural since the source of ineﬃciency in multi-contracting is

the externality. Therefore, the empirical implication is formally expressed as follows:

Implication 2 We consider industries in which the number of buyers contracting with the
same contractor is suﬃciently high, n ≥ 2 + rσ2. Then, industries in which economies of
scale/scope in the production process are prevalent (κ > 0) shall have lower-powered procure-

ment contracts than industries in which externalities of this kind are nonexistent (κ = 0).

Other papers in the literature have related economies of scale/scope to the power of pro-

curement contracts. For instance, Rogerson (1992) and (1994) analyze the contractor’s be-

25

havior when he performs several activities which share common production costs. Rogerson

shows that the contractor optimally swifts common costs to least powered contract in order to

get reimbursed for most of the production costs. Naturally, an implication of Rogerson’s re-

sult is that contract designers will anticipate the contractor’s behavior and design excessively

high-powered contracts in a way to avoid the overhead allocation of costs.

As it turns out, Rogerson (1992) and (1994) provide diﬀerent empirical implications con-

cerning the relationship between the power of procurement contracts and the intensity of

economies of scale/scope in certain industries: Rogerson’s models suggest that this relation-

ship should be positive in order to prevent from contractor’s cost overhead behavior. By

contrast, this paper, by Corollary (2), argues that the same relationship should be negative

when the number of buyers contracting with the same contractor is suﬃciently high.

Clearly, these opposite empirical implications come from the diﬀerent nature of the economies

of scale/scope addressed in this paper and Rogerson’s. In Rogerson’s papers, the economies

of scale/scope arises due to the existence of common assets, inputs and workers, which are

used in diﬀerent activities of the contractors. As such, it suggests that there should be a

positive relationship between the power of procurement contractors and the share of common

cost used by the contractor in his diﬀerent activities.

In contrast, in this paper the economies of scale/scope emerge due to the existence of

common methods or procedures which are developed by a contractor’s branch (i.e., activity),

and can be used for all other contractor’s activities. Hence, it implies that we should observe

in the data a negative relationship between the power of procurement contractors and the

new methods and procedures developed by the contractors.

5.2 Incomplete Contracts, renegotiation and the number of buyers:

on the pervasiveness of cost-plus contracts

In some industries, only two types of procurement contracts are observed: ﬁxed-price and

cost-plus contracts. That is, for instance, the case of the US building construction industry,

described by Bajari, McMillan and Tadelis (2008), and the French public urban transportation,

highlighted by Gagnepain and Ivaldi (2002).

26

The literature has already discussed the reasons why we only observe those extreme con-

tracts. Bajari and Tadelis (2001), relying on Townsend (1979), and Gale and Hellwig (1985),

argue that the existence of measurement costs (i.e., auditing or veriﬁcation cost) explains
the choice of ﬁxed-price contract (a = 0) to any other cost-sharing contract with a ∈ (0, 1].
Basically, ﬁxed-price contracts do not require the measurement of production costs, whereas

any cost-sharing contract requires such measurement, which is costly. This leads to a non-

convexity in the cost of measuring and monitoring product costs. An immediate implication

of the existence of auditing cost is that ﬁxed-price contracts will dominate contracts that are

close to them.

On the other hand, the incompleteness of contracts explains the choice of cost-plus contract
(a = 1) to any other procurement contracts with a ∈ [0, 1). As argued by Bajari and Tadelis
(2001), cost-plus contracts are more ﬂexible and easier to renegotiate under noncontratactable

contingencies. Hence, when renegotiation is costly, cost-plus contracts dominate any other
contracts with low-powered incentive scheme where a ∈ [0, 1).

The focus of this section is to derive conditions under which cost-plus contracts arise in

industries plagued by incomplete contracts and costly renegotiations.

In order to provide

empirical implications for those industries, let us add some additional assumptions to the

standard model described in section 2.

(cid:4) Incomplete Contracts and Renegotiation. Assume that there are some states of the
nature in which contracts are incomplete. It occurs with probability µ ∈ (0, 1). It can happen
because some contingencies happen (e.g., site conditions in the building construction industry)

and a buyer decides to change the demand or project after the contract has been signed with

the contractor, and the contractor had optimally chosen the eﬀort. Under incompleteness,

buyer and contractor renegotiate the contract. Following Bajari and Tadelis (2001), let us

assume that cost-plus contract (a = 1) have zero renegotiation cost, whereas the renegotiation
of any other contract26 with a ∈ [0, 1) costs K.

26The renegotiation process can take diﬀerent ways, which will depend, among other things, on the bargain
power of buyers and the contractor. In each diﬀerent renegotiation process, the cost will be diﬀerent. For
simplicity, we do not model the renegotiation process. That is the reason why we consider the negotiation
cost as an exogenous variable.

27

In this extended model, let us derive the conditions in which cost-plus contracts emerge

in equilibrium. A suﬃcient condition is that each buyer is better oﬀ relying on cost-plus than

relying in the equilibrium contracts described in Section 4.27

By relying on a cost-plus contractor, a buyer knows he will never pay the renegotiation

cost. However, he will anticipate that the contractor will choose all eﬀorts equal to zero,

having production cost Ci equals to β. Since in equilibrium with only cost-plus contracts
ai = 1,∀i, the contractor does not bear any risk and makes zero eﬀort, buyer’s transfer to the
contractor will be equal to the production cost of the activity which is β. So, buyer’s expected

payoﬀ for oﬀering cost-plus contracts will be:

v − β.

(22)

Instead, if all buyers oﬀer the equilibrium contracts described in Section 4, then, with
probability 1 − µ, they will not have to renegotiate the contracts, and each one will have a
payoﬀ equal to v − T nc
. However, with probability µ, they will renegotiate the contracts, and
i − K. Therefore, buyer’s expected payoﬀ for
each one ends up with payoﬀs equal to v − T nc
oﬀering the equilibrium contracts described in Section 4 will be:

i

v − T nc

i − µK.

(23)

Expressions (22) and (23) give us the necessary ingredients to verify when that cost-plus
contracts will be emerge in equilibrium. That will occur when buyer’s payoﬀ for choosing v−β
i − µK, buyer’s payoﬀ for choosing the equilibrium contract. After some
is greater than v− T nc
simple algebra, we can show that the cost-plus contracts will emerge in equilibrium when the

27A suﬃcient and necessary condition for an equilibrium with cost-plus contracts is that each buyer is better
oﬀ relying on cost-plus than deviation oﬀering another contracts. If all buyers, except buyer-i, oﬀer a cost-plus
contracts, then the contractor eﬀort will be e∗
j . Given these eﬀort
levels, the cost will be C∗
i > C nc
is lower than
i
the net in equilibrium T nc
i described in Section 4. For this reason it is suﬃcient to compare the buyer’s payoﬀ
under cost-plus contracts with the equilibrium contracts described in Section 4.

, and then the net transfer to the contractor when deviating T ∗

i = α(1 − ai) < enc

j = κα(1−ai)

n−1 < enc

, and e∗

i

i

28

renegotiation cost is suﬃciently high:

K ≥ K, where K =

β − T nc

i

µ

.

(24)

The following proposition formally characterizes the condition for cost-plus contracts to

emerge in equilibrium in a model with incomplete contracts and renegotiation.

Proposition 4 If K ≥ K, where K is deﬁned in (24), then cost-plus contracts are equilibrium
contracts in a model with incomplete contracts and renegotiation.

Note that, through expression (24), whenever buyer’s transfer in equilibrium T nc

i decreases,

so will the threshold K. This result is quite intuitive since by decreasing T nc

i

, the beneﬁt of

oﬀering the equilibrium contract also reduces.

In order to test the result characterized above, an econometrician will need information

about the renegotiation cost to proceed the analysis. However, in many situations the rene-

gotiation cost is not observable.28 In general, the only information that the econometrician

has is that K is distributed according to a certain density function G(.).

With the information described above, an econometrician derives that the probability of

cost-plus contracts emerging in equilibrium is equal to:

P rob(K ≥ K) = 1 − G(K)

(25)

Indeed, a testable model on power of procurement contracts must establish what increases

or reduces the probability of observing cost-plus contracts, described in (25). In particular, it

has to characterize what changes K, and the direction of the change. This model does so by

using the result from Corollary 3. Combining the Corollary 3 with the implication discussed

above, we can derive the following implication:

Implication 3 The higher the number of buyers per contractor, n, the more likely it is that

the cost-plus contract will be chosen.

28Bajari, McMillan and Tadelis (2008) uses the complexity of tasks as an instrument for renegotiation cost

since the more complex the task are, the more likely that contract will be incomplete.

29

Bajari, McMillan and Tadelis (2008) provide some evidence which is consistent with this

implication, showing that the higher the number of contracts carry out by a contractor, the

higher the probability that cost-plus contracts will be oﬀered to this contractor.

Bajari, McMillan and Tadelis (2008) oﬀer a diﬀerent explanation for such empirical ﬁnding,

based on Banerjee and Duﬂo (2000). Banerjee and Duﬂo argue that in industries in which the

services (or goods) are very complex and the quality of the ﬁnal product is very diﬀerent from

one contractor to another, then buyers would not oﬀer contracts based on competitive bidding

for ﬁxed-price contractors. Instead, buyers optimally award an activity to the contractor who

has built a good reputation over time, and they negotiate a cost-plus contract which will lead

to a high quality service or good. Relying on this explanation, Bajari, McMillan and Tadelis

argue that the number of jobs done by a contractor is a measure of reputation. Therefore, it

explains the positive relationship between the number of jobs done by a contractor and the

probability that cost-plus contracts will be oﬀered to the contractor.

6 Policy Recommendations

In this paper, excessively low-powered incentive contracts emerge as an ineﬃcient allocation

due to a free-riding problem: buyers oﬀer lower-powered contracts than cooperative buyers.

One may wonder about the possible solutions for this problem. For the public sector, a

natural policy recommendation is the centralization of local and state government purchases.

Centralizing the purchase of services, with positive externalities among themselves, will induce

the procurer to internalize a big portion of the beneﬁt of eliciting eﬀort.

Nevertheless, centralization in public sector is never an easy policy to implement, since it

is usually accompanied by a reduction of local government’s power.29 Alternatively, national

authorities could create mechanisms which induce local governments to buy goods and public

services together. Inducing them to design procurement contract jointly can potentially make

them to internalize possible existing externalities in contracting out for services or goods. An

example of this kind is the Brazilian System of Price Registration, a procurement system

29Hart and Holmstrom (2009) analyze the trade oﬀ between autonomy and coordination faced by an orga-

nization which sees some beneﬁts from integrating a set of activities.

30

which allows diﬀerent branches of the national Brazilian government (administrative units,

public institutes, hospitals, universities, and others) to buy jointly diﬀerent goods. However,

it has been used only to buy simple goods, which are more likely to be optimally purchased

through ﬁxed-price contracts. In the spirit of this paper, this system should be extended to

encompass the purchase of public services, where positive externalities are more likely to be

present.30

As in the public sector, the private sector should also be aware of free-riding in procurement

and try to design mechanisms to overcome it. Agreements and consortia of buyers should

be encouraged, since they may induce buyers to design procurement contracts jointly, and

internalize all existing positive externalities among diﬀerent activities.31

Nevertheless, solutions of these kinds are not always easy to implement and rely strongly

on the capacity of buyers to coordinate themselves. One may wonder if there is any simple

rule that can be designed to improve the social allocation.

Proposition 5 If rσ2 ≤ rσ2, then there exists n such that for all n ≥ n buyers are better oﬀ
committing to ﬁxed-price contracts, a = 0, than relying on linear contracts, a ∈ (0, 1).

Proposition 5 states that laws in the public sector that bind public entities to oﬀer ﬁxed-

price contracts rather than choosing individually their own contracts can be welfare-enhancing.

Binding public entities to oﬀer ﬁxed-price contracts (a = 0) prevents a buyer from free-riding

behavior, since under the ﬁxed-price contracts buyers internalize all the beneﬁt of eliciting

eﬀort. However, it transfers too much risk for the contractor, who requires a high compensation

for bearing risk of the activity. When the risk and the variance of the shock are not so high,
expressed by the condition rσ2 ≤ rσ2 above, then buyers are better oﬀ jointly relying on
ﬁxed-price contracts.

The result in Proposition 5, discussed in the previous paragraph, provides the theoretical

foundations for the following policy recommendation:

30The Brazilian System of Price Registration (Sistema Brasileiro de Registro de Pre¸cos) is regulated by the

Law no 8.666 created in 1993 and has been widely used in several branches of the Brazilian government.

31Of course, regulators should be aware that promoting agreements between buyers in noncompetitive
markets can also give them additional incentive to collude: Buyers, whose activities are more likely to be
aﬀected by externality eﬀects, are also the same ones who compete for the same consumers.

31

Policy Recommendation Laws that force public sector to award ﬁxed-price contracts com-

petitive bidding should be adopted in industries in which:

• there are a lot of buyers and a few contractors;
• risk borne by contractors is low enough.

Bajari and Tadelis (2001), and Bajari, McMillan and Tadelis (2008) argue that cost-plus

contract are more eﬃcient than ﬁxed-price contracts under certain circumstances (i.e., under

incompleteness of contracts and high costs of renegotiation). They advice the laws which

oblige the US public entities to award ﬁxed-price contracts by competitive bidding should be

withdrawn from FAR (Federal Acquisition Rules).

Note that Bajari and Tadelis (2001), and Bajari, McMillan and Tadelis (2008) have a

policy recommendation which is contrary to the one in this paper. Naturally, these opposite

guidelines come from diﬀerences in accounting for the pervasiveness of low-powered procure-

ment contracts in certain industries. Bajari and Tadelis, and Bajari, McMillan and Tadelis

argue that low-powered contracts (i.e., cost-plus) are more often used than other contracts be-

cause they provide better allocation. In contrast, this paper argues that low-powered contracts

emerge in equilibrium as an ineﬃcient allocation due to a free-riding problem.

7 Competition between Contractors

In the basic model, described in Section 2, there is only one contractor providing services for

all buyers. However, in the real world, many potential contractors compete for provision of

goods and services for diﬀerent buyers. Hence, it will be interesting to analyze how competition

between contractors impacts the power of incentive schemes in equilibrium.

To introduce competition between contractors, we make a modiﬁcation in the basic model,

based on McAfee and McMillan (1986). In this extension, potential contractors compete for

activities bidding for the ﬁxed fee bi of the procurement contracts oﬀered by buyers.32

32Laﬀont and Tirole (1987, 1988) suggest a diﬀerent approach to model competition among contractors.
In particular, they consider the auctioning for incentive contracts of an indivisible project among several
contractors. Contractors have private information about their future cost at the bidding stage, and the
selected ﬁrm ex post invests in cost reduction.

32

This extended model will be called Procurement Auction Design Game. Here are

the additional assumptions to the basic model and the new timing of the game:

(cid:4) Potential Contractors. Assume that there is a continuum of potential contractors, each
one is indexed by its ﬁxed cost β. In addition, assume that β is distributed according to a

density function F (β), with ∂F (β)

∂β = f (β), and f (β) (cid:54)= 0 for all β in the interval [β, β]. For

simplicity, assume that the contractor’s ﬁxed cost β is public information.

(cid:4) Sequence of Events. Figure 2 describes the timing of the Procurement Auction Design
Game. At date 0, each buyer individually chooses and posts the reimbursement fraction
ai ∈ [0, 1] of a contract awarded to the contract winner. At date 1, every contractor bids for
the ﬁxed fee bi of each contract. The contractor who bids for the lowest ﬁxed fee of buyer-

i’contract bi, will perform the activity for the buyer-i. At date 2, buyer-i awards activity-i

to the winner, and, at date 3, the contract winner(s) choose(s) the eﬀort ei to make in each

activity in order to maximize his expected utility proﬁt. After making the eﬀort choice, at

date 4 the shocks in each activity εi realize. Contracts are executed, and payoﬀs are realized

at date 5.

As it turns out, this extended model is a dynamic game with perfect information, and can

be divided in two sequential stages. The ﬁrst one is the Procurement Design stage, where
buyers choose ai ∈ [0, 1] and award the activity to the contract winner. It corresponds to date
0 in Figure 2. The second one is the Procurement Auction stage, where contractors compete

and make eﬀort in the activities. It is represented by dates 1 to 5 in Figure 2.

Figure 2: Timing of Procurement Auction Design Game

0

6

Each buyer oﬀers

the contract, ai,

to be performed

by the winner

1

6

Contractor bids

for the activities

2

6

3

6

Activity-i is

awarded to the

lowest bid for

the activity-i

Winner(s)

choose(s)

eﬀort(s) for

the activity(ies)

4

6

Shock ε’s

are realized

5

6

Contracts are

executed, payoﬀs

are realized

33

(cid:4) Sub-game Perfect Nash Equilibrium. For games of this kind, the relevant equilibrium
concept is Sub-Game Perfect Nash Equilibrium (SPNE). This equilibrium can be characterized

by the backward induction. Doing so, we ﬁrst derive the Nash Equilibrium in the Procurement

Auction stage, and then proceed to characterize the Nash equilibrium in the Procurement

Design stage.

Nash Equilibrium in the Procurement Auction stage: In this stage, contractors bid for the

right to perform the activity for each buyer. Since there is no private information, and the

only source of asymmetry among contractors is the ﬁxed cost β, the kind of competition

which takes place at this stage of the game is the standard Bertrand competition between a

continuum of asymmetric agents.

As such, contractors ﬁercely compete for the n activities and, in equilibrium, they make
zero proﬁt. As a result, the sum of all bids of certain contractors β ∈ [β, β] will be equal to
total cost of performing all activities, which is expressed by:

n(cid:88)

n(cid:88)

(cid:104)

bi(β) =

i=1

i=1

(1 − ai)E[Ci(β)] +

e2
i
2α

+

r(1 − ai)2σ2

2

(26)

(cid:105)

The equilibrium outcome of this competition is that the most eﬃcient contractor, the one

whose β = β, wins all procurement auction, and performs every activity for all buyers. Due

to the presence of the positive externality within activities, many bidding strategies for each

activity leads to the total bidding equilibrium strategy described in (26). To proceed to the

Procurement Design Stage, we have to pick one of them. So, let us take bidding strategy

equilibrium which the bid for the activity-i is equal the contractor’s cost bearing in activity-i:

bi(β) = (1 − ai)E[Ci(β)] +

e2
i
2α

+

rσ2(1 − ai)2

2

(27)

It is easy to see that the bidding strategy in (27) satisﬁes to total bidding strategy equi-

librium requirement described in (26).

Nash Equilibrium in the Procurement Design stage: In this stage, each buyer individually

chooses the optimal reimbursement fraction of his procurement contract, ai, taking into ac-

34

count the bidding strategy equilibrium from the Procurement Auction stage, described in

(27). The buyer’s problem and the equilibrium associated to this strategic interactions among

them is formally deﬁned in the following deﬁnition:

Deﬁnition 3 The contract proﬁle (I pa{(bpa
contracting equilibrium if

i , apa

i )}i∈I pa) is a procurement auction design
(cid:104)

(cid:105)

v − bi − aiCi

(bpa

i , apa

i ) solves max
bi,ai

E

s.t.

ai ∈ [0, 1], (IC), and (27)

for given (bpa−i, apa−i), for all i ∈ I pa.

The buyer’s problem in this procurement design is similar to the buyer’s problem in Deﬁ-

nition (2). The only diﬀerence is that in Deﬁnition (3) the bidding strategies, represented by

constraint (27), replace the participation constraint (IRnc) in Deﬁnition (2).

The next proposition compares the power of the procurement auction equilibrium contracts

with the noncooperative equilibrium contracts discussed in Proposition (2):

Proposition 6 If κ ∈ (0, 1), then the power of the procurement contracts in the procure-
ment auction design game (1 − apa
i ) is lower than the power of the noncooperative equilibrium
contracts (1 − anc
i ),

(1 − apa

i ) < (1 − anc

i ), for all i.

(28)

This result says that in the presence of competition of contractors for the ﬁxed fee, the

free-riding eﬀect becomes even stronger. To illustrate this, let us again, for simplicity, take

n = 2. As we have discussed in Section 4, buyer-1 minimizes

T1 = E[C1(e1(apa

2 ), e2(apa

1 , apa
1 , apa

1(apa
e2

2 ) + e2

1 , apa
2(apa

2 ), κ, ε1)] + E[C2(e2(apa
(1 − apa
1 , apa
2 )

2 ), e1(apa
1 , apa
1 )2 + (1 − apa

+

2 ), κ, ε2)]

1 , apa

2 )2(cid:105) − T2.

(cid:16)

+

1
2α

(cid:104)

rσ2
2

(cid:17)

35

where T2 is equal to b2(apa

1 , apa

2 ) + apa

2 E[C2(e2(apa

1 , apa

2 ), e1(apa

1 , apa

2 , κ), ε2)]. Note that, unlike

the noncooperative contracting problem, the contractor’s bid for the ﬁxed fee of activity-2,
b2(apa

2 ), depends on the reimbursement fraction of the contractor, and that is the reason

1 , apa

for the free-riding problem to be stronger in the Procurement Auction Design Game.

The explanation for this is quite intuitive: When buyer-1 decreases apa

1 , he elicits higher

eﬀort, and provides higher incentives to reduce cost. Conceivably, lower cost will be translated

into a lower bid for activity-1 and 2. As the expression above shows, buyer-1 does not enjoy
any proﬁt from lower bids in activity-2, b2(apa

2 ). Hence, he elicits less incentive to perform

1 , apa

higher eﬀort that he does in the noncooperative contracting equilibrium.

As it turns out, the result in Proposition 6 comes from the sequential nature of the Pro-

curement Auction Design Game described in this section. To understand the reason for that,

ﬁrst note that in the last stage of the game, in the procurement auction stage, contractors

choose their bids taking as given the power of all contracts. In particular, the higher the power

of any contract, the higher the bid of each contractor for each activity, as demonstrated in

equation (27). In the ﬁrst stage of the game, in the procurement design stage, buyers choose

the power of the contracts. When a certain buyer chooses the power of his contracts, he

internalizes that by increasing the power of his contract, the bid for his activity increases.

However, he doesn’t internalize that by increasing the power of his contract, he will induce

the ﬁrms to bid more aggressively for other activities. This new eﬀect, added to the free-riding

eﬀect discussed in section 4, jointly explains why the ineﬃciency is stronger when contractors

bid for the ﬁxed fee.

Note that, in the equilibrium described in Section 4, the ﬁxed fees correspond to the bids

described in this section. However, unlike this section, in the noncooperative equilibrium

buyers simultaneously choose the ﬁxed fees and the power of the contracts.

8 Conclusions

This paper analyzes free-riding in procurement design, which provides an explanation for

the pervasiveness of low-powered contracts in certain industries, such as the US building

construction and French public bus transportation industry. We argue that buyers do not

36

provide high enough incentive schemes because they do not completely internalize all the

beneﬁts of eliciting contractor eﬀort.

The model predicts that low-powered contracts are more likely to be pervasive in industries

in which a contractor beneﬁts from positive externality when running diﬀerent activities than

in industries in which this eﬀect is nonexistent, and in industries in which the number of

activities that a contractor performs for diﬀerent buyers is suﬃciently high. These implications

could be the subject of an interesting empirical test that will shed light on contracts that have

been used in other industries.

Since excessively low-powered incentive schemes emerge as an ineﬃciency, this paper pro-

vides some policy recommendation to improve the social allocation. In particular, it recom-

mends that under certain circumstances laws that bind local governments to award ﬁxed-price

contracts by competitive bidding should be used. It may overcome the free-riding problem,

and increase the social welfare. Hence, unlike Bajari and Tadelis (2001), this paper argues

that in some industries cost-plus contract should not be allowed.

A potential interesting extension of this work would be the analysis of this multi-contracting

problem in an adverse selection setting. Martimort and Stole (2009) solve a similar problem

under private, intrinsic and delegated agency. The introduction of economies of scape/scope

presented in this paper to the standard Laﬀont and Tirole (1986) model, can potentially bring

new insights about how contracts are used in the practice.

37

References

Asanuma, Banri and Tatsuya Kikutani, 1992, Risk Absorption in Japanese Subcontracting:

A Microeconometric Study of the Automobile Industry, Journal of the Japanese and

International Economies, 6, 1-29.

Athey, S. and J. Levine, 2001, Information and Competition in US Forest Service Timber

Auctions, Journal of Political Economy, 109, 375-417

Bailey, Elizabeth E. and Ann F. Friedlaender, 1982, Market Structure and Multiproduct

Industries, Journal of Economic Literature, 20(3), 1024-1048

Bajari, Patrick and Steven Tadelis, 2001, Incentives versus Transaction Costs: A Theory of

Procurement Contracts , The RAND Journal of Economics, 32(3), 387-407

——————————, 2006, Incentives and Award Procedures: Competitive Tendering vs.

Negotiations in Procurement , in Dimitri Nicola, Gustavo Piga and Giancarlo Spagnolo

(eds.), Handbook of Procurement, Cambridge (UK): Cambridge U.P.

Bajari, Patrick, Robert McMillan and Steven Tadelis, 2009, Incentives and Award Proce-

dures: Competitive Tendering vs. Negotiations in Procurement, Journal of Law, Eco-

nomics, and Organization, 25(2):372-399

Banerjee, Abhijit and Esther Duﬂo, 2000, Reputation Eﬀects and the Limits of Contracting:

A Study of the Indian Software Industry, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, 989-1018

Bernheim, B Douglas and Michael D. Whinston, 1986, Common Agency, Econometrica,

54(4), 923-42

Carpineti, Laura, Gustavo Piga and Matteo Zanza, 2006, The Variety of Procurement Prac-

tice: Evidence from Public Procurement, in Dimitri Nicola, Gustavo Piga and Giancarlo

Spagnolo (eds.), Handbook of Procurement, Cambridge U.P., Cambridge (UK)

Chiappori, Pierre-Andr´e and Bernard Salani´e, 2000, Testing Contract Theory: A Survey of

Some Recent Work, Proceedings of the World Congress of the Econometric Society

38

Crocker, Keith J. and Kenneth J. Reynolds, 1993, The Eﬃciency of Incomplete Contracts:

An Empirical Analysis of Air Force Engine Procurement, The Rand Journal of Eco-

nomics, 24(1), 126-146

Dimitri, Nicola, Gustavo Piga and Giancarlo Spagnolo, 2006, Handbook of Procurement,

Cambridge U.P., Cambridge (UK)

Dixit, Avinash, 1996, Special-Interest Lobbying and Endogenous Commodity Taxation, East-

ern Economic Journal, 22(4), 375-388

Fraquelli, Giovanni, Massimilliano Piacenza and David Vannoni, 2004, Scope and Scale

Economies in Multi-utilities: Evidence from Gas, Water and Eletricity, Applied Eco-

nomics, 36, 2045-2057

Gagnepain, Philippe and Marc Ivaldi, 2002, Incentive regulatory policies: the case of public

transit systems in France, The RAND Journal of Economics, 33 (4), 605629

——————————, 2008, Contract choice, incentives, and political capture in public

transit, Working paper, Toulouse School of Economics

Gale, Douglas and Martin Hellwig, 1985, Incentive Compatible Debt Contracts: The One

Period Problem, Review of Economic Studies, 52, 647-663

Hart, Oliver and Bengt Holmstrom, 2009, A Theory of Firm Scope, forthcoming, The Quar-

terly Journal of Economics

Hellwig, Martin F., 2003, Public-Good Provision with Many Participants, Review of Eco-

nomic Studies, 70(3), 589-614

Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom, 1987, Aggregation and Linearity in the Provision of

Intertemporal Incentives, Econometrica, 55 (2), 303-28

——————————, 1991, Multitask Principal-Agent Analysis: Incentive Contracts, As-

set Ownership, and Job Design, Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 7 (Spe-

cial Issue), 24-52

39

Kagel, John H., 1995, Auctions: A Survey of Experimental Research, in John H. Kagel and

Alvin E. Roth (eds.), Handbook of Experimental Economics, Princeton University Press,

Princeton (US)

Kawasaki, Seiichi and John McMillan, 1987, The Design of Contracts: Evidence from

Japanese Subcontracting. Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 1,

327349.

Kim, Youn, 1987, Economies of Scale in Multi-Product Firms: An Empirical Analysis, Eco-

nomica, 54(214), 185-206

Laﬀont, Jean-Jacques and Jean-Charles Rochet, 1993, Regulation of a Risk Averse Firm,

Games and Economic Behavior, 25(2), 149-173

Laﬀont, Jean-Jacques and Jean Tirole, 1986, Using Cost Observation to Regulate Firms,

Journal of Political Economy, 94, 614-641.

Laﬀont, Jean-Jacques and Jean Tirole, 1987, Auctioning Incentive Contracts, Journal of

Political Economy, 95(5), 921-937

Laﬀont, Jean-Jacques and Jean Tirole, 1988, Repeated Auctions of Incentive Contracts,

Investment, and Bidding Parity with an Application to Takeovers, The Rand Journal of

Economics 19(4), 516-537

Laﬀont, Jean-Jacques and Jean Tirole, 1993, A Theory of Incentives in Procurement and

Regulation, MIT Press

Le Breton, Michel and Fran¸cois Salani´e, 2003, Lobbying under Political Uncertainty, Journal

of Public Economics, 87, 2589 2610

Mailath, George and Andrew Postlewaite, 1990, Asymmetric Information Bargaining Prob-

lems with Many Agents, Review of Economic Studies 57, 351-360.

McAfee, R. Preston and John McMillan, 1986, Bidding for Contracts, a Principal-Agent

Analysis, The Rand Journal of Economics, 17(5), 326-338.

40

Martimort, David, 1996, Exclusive Dealing, Common Agency, and Multiprincipals Incentive

Theory, The Rand Journal of Economics 27(1), 1-31

Martimort, David, 2007, Multi-Contracting Mechanism Design, Advances in Economic The-

ory, in Blundell, Newey and Persson (eds.), Proceedings of the World Congress of the

Econometric Society, Cambridge University Press

Martimort, David and Lars Stole, 2009, Market Participation under Delegated and Intrinsic

Common Agency Games, The Rand Journal of Economics 40(1), 78-102.

Monteverde, Kirk and David J. Teece, 1982, Supplier Switching Costs and Vertical Integra-

tion in the Automobile Industry, The Bell Journal of Economics, 13(1), 206-213

Panzar, John C., and Robert D. Willig, Economies of Scope,The American Economic Review

Papers and Proceedings, 71(2), 268-272

Rogerson, William P., 1992, Overhead Allocation and Incentives for Cost Minimization in

Defense Procurement, The Accounting Review, 67 (4), 671-690

——————————, 1994, Economic Incentives and the Defense Procurement Process,

The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 8 (4), 65-90

——————————, 2003, Simple Menus of Contracts in Cost-Based Procurement and

Regulation, The American Economic Review, 93 (3), 919-926

Salani´e, Bernard, 1990, S´election Adverse et Aversion pour Le Risque, Annales d’ ´Economie

et de Statistique, 18, 131-149

Shleifer, Andrei, 1985, A Theory of Yardstick Competition, The Rand Journal of Economics,

16, 319-327

Taylor, Curtis R. and Steven N. Wiggins, 1997, Competition or Compensation: Supplier

Incentives under the American and Japanese Subcontracting Systems, The American

Economic Review, 87(4), 598-618

41

Teece, David J., 1980, The Economies of Scope and The Scope of the Entreprise, Journal of

Economics Business and Organization, 1(3), 223-247

Townsend, Robert, 1979, Optimal Contracts with Costly State Veriﬁcation, Journal of Eco-

nomic Theory, 21, 265-293

Weitzman, Martin L., 1980, Eﬃcient Incentive Contracts, The Quarterly Journal of Eco-

nomics, 94(4), 719-730

Willig, Robert D., 1979, Multiproduct Technology and Market Structure, The American

Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 69 (2), 346-351

Yun, Mikyung, 1999, Subcontracting Relations in the Korean Automotive Industry: Risk

Sharing and Technological Capability, International Journal of Industrial Organization,

17, 81-108.

42

Appendix: Proofs of Propositions

Proof of Proposition 1Part 1 : Since that eﬀort in each activity is restricted to positive,
ei ≥ 0,∀i , then expected production cost of each activity deﬁned in (1) has a upper bound
which is β. Therefore, wherever is the contractor’s eﬀort choices, E(Ci) ≤ β. Because v−β >0,
then v − E(Ci) > 0. It means that any activity contributes positively to increases the total
net surplus, even though the contractor exerts zero eﬀort. Hence, the buyers will optimally

demand all activities. That is the reason why is optimality to have I c = N .

Part 2: Optimal {(bi, ai)}n

i=1 Given that I c = N , the cooperative contracting problem is:

(cid:104) n(cid:88)

i=1

max
{(bi,ai)}n

i=1

E

(v − bi − aiCi)

s.t.

(cid:104)

ei = α

(cid:88)

ai ∈ [0, 1]
κ
n − 1

j(cid:54)=i

(1 − aj)

(cid:105)

(1 − ai) +

(cid:104)

(cid:16) n(cid:88)

max
{ei}n

i=1

E

u

i=1

bi − (1 − ai)Ci − e2
i
2α

Using expression (10), the (IR) constraint can be replaced by

(cid:104) − (1 − ai)E[Ci] − e2

i
2α

n(cid:88)

i=1

b +

− r(1 − ai)2σ2

where b =(cid:80)n

i, j = 1, ...n

(cid:17)(cid:105) ≥ U (0)
(cid:105) ≥ 0,

2

i=1 bi, and ei and the optimal described in (IC).

Replacing the (IR) in the production cost deﬁnition in (1), and the replacing it in (IR∗),

(IC)

(IR)

(IR∗)

(cid:105)

(cid:105)

we can rewrite the cooperative contracting problem as follows:

max
{(bi,ai)}n

i=1

E

s.t.

(v − bi − aiCi)

(cid:104) n(cid:88)

i=1

ai ∈ [0, 1]

43

b +

n(cid:88)

i=1

+

(cid:110) − (1 − ai)
(cid:104)
(cid:104)

(cid:104)
β −(cid:104)
(cid:104)
(cid:80)

α

(1 − ai) + κ
n−1
2α

α

κ
n − 1

(1 − ai) +

(cid:105)(cid:105)2
j(cid:54)=i(1 − aj)

(cid:88)

j(cid:54)=i

(1 − aj)

(cid:105)(cid:105) − κ
(cid:111) ≥ 0

n − 1

(cid:104)

(1 − ai) +

(cid:104)

α

(cid:88)

j(cid:54)=i

(cid:88)

j(cid:54)=i

κ
n − 1

(cid:105)(cid:105)

(1 − aj)

(IR∗).

− r(1 − ai)2σ2

i

2

For the maximization problem, in the optimal constraint (IR∗) is binding. After replacing the
bidding (IR∗) constraint in the objective function, we derive the ﬁrst-order conditions of the

problem.

The ﬁrst-order conditions are:

(1 + κ2) = (1 − ai)

1 +

κ2
n − 1

(cid:104)

+ rσ2(cid:105)

+

(cid:88)

j(cid:54)=i

(cid:104) 2κ

n − 1

(cid:105)

,∀i, j = 1, ..., n

(n − 2)κ2
(n − 1)2

+

(1 − aj)

The n conditions above are equations of a system of equations. The {ai}n

i=1 which are

solutions for this system of equations is the optimal reimbursement fraction of the contractor’s

production cost.

Solving it, we obtain

ac
i =

0

αn[ 2κ

α(1+κ)2

n−1 )2+rσ2]

∈ (0, 1)

n−1 + κ2(n−2)

(n−1)2 ]+[α(1− κ

 1 −
i ’s in the binding (IR∗) constraint, we obtain b. Since that b =(cid:80)n
n(cid:88)

, if rσ2 ≥ κ(n − 2)

i )β − (α(1 + κ)2 − rσ2)(1 − ac

(1 − ac

, otherwise

bc
i = n

(cid:104)

(cid:105)

i )2

.

2

i=1

i=1 bi,

Replacing the optimal ac

then we get

The ﬁrst-order conditions are necessary and suﬃcient because the objective is concave in the
choice variables.(cid:4)
Proof of Corollary 1 Part 1 : From Proposition 1, in equation (13) we have

 1 −

0

ac
i =

α(1+κ)2

αn[ 2κ

n−1 + κ2(n−2)

(n−1)2 ]+[α(1− κ

n−1 )2+rσ2]

∈ (0, 1)

, if κ ≤ rσ2
n−2

, otherwise

44

For the case which κ ≤ rσ2

n−2, we have

(cid:104)

(cid:104)

∂(1 − ac
∂κ

i (κ))

=

2(1 + κ)

α(1+κ)2

αn[ 2κ

n−1 + κ2(n−2)

(n−1)2 ]+[α(1− κ

n−1 )2+rσ2]

α(1+κ)2

αn[ 2κ

n−1 + κ2(n−2)

(n−1)2 ]+[α(1− κ

n−1 )2+rσ2]

(cid:105)

+ (2 + 2κ)(1 + κ)2

(cid:105)

After some algebraic manipulations, we get ∂(1−ac
For the case which κ ≥ rσ2

= 0.
Part 2 : From equation (13), note that when κ = 0, we are in the case that κ ≤ rσ2

i is always equal to zero. Therefore, ∂(1−ac

n−2, then ac

= 2(1 + κ)rσ2, which is strictly positive.

i (κ))

i (κ))

∂κ

∂κ

i ) ∈ (0, 1). In particular, (1− ac

i ) reaches its lower bound, which is 1− α

n−2, which
α+rσ2 ,

means that (1− ac
when κ = 0 .

When κ > 0, we can have two cases: (i) κ ≤ rσ2

n−2, and (ii) κ > rσ2
i (0)). In addition, (1 − ac

i (κ)) > (1 − ac

i (κ)) = 1 which is greater than (1 − ac
i (0)) for all κ. (cid:4)

0, which implies that (1 − ac
(1 − ac
(1 − ac
Proof of Proposition 2 Part 1 : If buyers oﬀer {(bnc
then the contractor will have payoﬀ equals zero in the case that he accepts all the contract,

n−2. Therefore, (1 − ac

i (κ)) when κ ≤ rσ2

i=1 as deﬁned in (18) and (19),

i )}n

i , anc

i (κ))

n−2. In case (i), ∂(1−ac
>
i (κ)) ∈ (0, 1). In case (ii),
i (κ)) ≥

∂κ

and negative payoﬀ if he rejects any of the n contract. To see that, just as (18) and (19) in
expression (10), we obtain that EU ({(bi, ai)}i∈I) = U (0), if I = N , and EU ({(bi, ai)}i∈I) <
U (0), if I (cid:54)= N . Note that, given the equilibrium contracts, the contractor is indiﬀerent
between accept all contracts and rejecting all contracts. In particular, he is worse-oﬀ accepting

a subject of the contracts. It happens because if he accepts just a subset, he loses the positive

externality, receiving a negative net payoﬀ.

Part 2 : Each buyer-i chooses (bi, ai) which minimizes his expected transfer, Ti = bi +
aiE[Ci], taking into account the other buyer’s contracts, (bnc−i, anc−i), described in (18) and (19),
and (IC) and (IRnc). Replacing (18) and (19), and (IC) in (IRnc), buyer-i chooses (bi, ai) that

make the (IRnc) - buyer-i maximizing his expected payoﬀ will not leave rent for the contractor.

Given that, we obtain that

45

bi = −(cid:88)

j(cid:54)=i

j −(cid:104)−(1−ai)E[Ci]− e2

bnc

i
2α

−r(1 − ai)2σ2

2

(cid:105)−(cid:88)

j(cid:54)=i

(cid:104)−(1−anc

j )E[Cj]− e2

j
2α

(cid:105)

−r(1 − anc

j )2σ2

2

where ei = ei(ai, anc−i),∀i in the equation above are the optimal ones described in (IC).

Replacing the equation above in the objective function of the buyer-i, which is Ti =

(29)

bi + aiE[Ci], and

Ti = −(cid:88)
−(cid:88)

j(cid:54)=i

bnc

j −(cid:104) − (1 − ai)E[Ci] − e2
(cid:104) − (1 − anc

j )E[Cj] − e2

i
2α

j
2α

− r(1 − ai)2σ2
(cid:105)

j )2σ2

2

− r(1 − anc

2

j(cid:54)=i

(cid:105)

+ aiE[Ci].

Buyer-i chooses ai that minimizes the Ti described above. The ﬁrst-order condition for

the problem the buyer-i problem is

α(1 +

κ2
n − 1

) = (1 − ai)[rσ2 + α(1 + κ2)]

(30)

This equation gives the optimal choice of buyer-i given the other buyer (bnc−i, anc−i), which is
equal to

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

i = 1 − α
anc

1 + κ2
n−1

α(1 + κ2) + rσ2 ,

Replacing the optimal anc

i described above in (29), we obtain the

i = (1 − anc
bnc

i )β − α(1 + κ)2(1 − anc)2

2

rσ2(1 − anc)2

2

,

+

which is the one characterized in (19). (cid:4)
Proof of Proposition 3 Part 1 : From equations (13) and (18), then

(1 − ac

i (κ)) − (1 − anc

i (κ)) =

α(1 + κ)2

αn[ 2κ

n−1 + κ2(n−2)

(n−1)2 ] + [α(1 − κ

n−1)2 + rσ2]

46

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

− α

1 + κ2
n−1

α(1 + κ2) + rσ2 .

After some algebraic manipulations, we obtain

κ2

(1 − ac

i (κ)) − (1 − anc

i (κ)) = 2κ(n − 1)rσ2 + rκ2σ2(n − 2)
(n − 1)2 (n3 − 4n2 + 6n − 4)
(n − 1)2 (2n3 − 6n2 + 5n − 1) + 2κ3(n − 1).
which is equal or greater than zero for any n ≥ 2. In particular, when κ = 0, (1 − ac
(1 − anc

i (κ)) is equal to zero.

κ4

+

+

.

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

i (κ)) −

Part 2 : From equation (18), we have that 1 − anc

i =

to n, we have that

1+ κ2
n−1

α
α(1+κ2)+rσ2 . Deriving it with respect

∂(1 − ac
∂n

i (κ))

= −

ακ2

(n − 1)2(α(1 + κ2) + rσ2)

≤ 0

With strict inequality if n > 2, κ > 0 and α > 0.

Part 3 : In the equilibrium that the contractor will accept all contracts, I nc = N , there is
a unique ai,∀i that solves the ﬁrst-order conditions (30). Given that, the (19) is the unique
symmetric bi’s that are equilibrium.

Part 4 : In the exclusive dealing contract, a buyer and the contractor sign a contract in

which the contract commits to perform activities only for that buyer. In the exclusive dealing
contract, the optimal power of the contract is (1− aED
) = (1 + rσ2)−1, and the buyer expected
transfer will be

i

E[T ED

i

] = β − (1 − αED)(1 + αED)

2

+

rσ2
2

(1 − aED)2

(31)

From (3), we know that buyer-i expected transfer is E[Ti(Ci)] = bi + aiE[Ci]. Replacing

the equilibrium values of bi and ai, characterized by (19) and (18) in that expected transfer

expression, and also in the production cost expression in (1), we obtain the equilibrium buyer-i

expected transfer which is

E[T nc

i

] = β − (1 + κ)2

2

(cid:104)

(cid:105)(cid:104)

2 −(cid:104)

(cid:105)(cid:105)

(cid:104)

+

rσ2
2

1 + κ2
n−1

1 + κ2 + rσ2

(cid:105)2

1 + κ2
n−1

1 + κ2 + rσ2

1 + κ2
n−1

1 + κ2 + rσ2

(32)

47

We want to show that E[T nc

]−E[T ED
≥ 0,∀n ≥ 3. It means that E[T nc
suﬃcient to show that: (i) E[limn→∞ T nc

∂E[T nc
i
∂n

(n)]

i

i

] < 0. Because, as will show in Corollary 4, that that
i (3)] ≤ E[T nc
i (n)]− E[T ED

i (3)] ≤ ... ≤ E[T nc
] < 0, and (ii) E[T nc

i (n)]. Therefore, it is
i (2)]− E[T ED

] < 0.

i

i

Let us prove that (i) E[limn→∞ T nc

i (n)]−E[T ED

i

] < 0. After some algebraic manipulations,

we obtain

E[ lim

n→∞ T nc

i (n)] = β − (1 + κ)2

(cid:16)

2

(cid:17)(cid:16)1 + 2κ2 + 2rσ2

(cid:17)

1 + κ2 + rσ2

+ rσ2(cid:16)

1

1 + κ2 + rσ2

(cid:17)2

2

1 + κ2 + rσ2
i (n)] − E[T ED

i

Deﬁning Φ(κ) = E[limn→∞ T nc

], and after some algebraic manipulations, we

obtain

(cid:110)(1 + κ)2(1 + 2κ2 + 2rσ2)(1 + rσ2) − (1 + κ2 + rσ2)2

(cid:111)

(1 + rσ2)(1 + κ2 + rσ2)2

Φ(κ) = −1
2

Evaluation this expression at κ = 0, we obtain Φ(0) = 0. In addition, we obtain that Φ(1) is

equal to:

Φ(1) = −

1

2(1 + rσ2)(2 + rσ2)

(cid:110)
8 + 12rσ2 + 3(rσ2)2(cid:111)

< 0

To conclude the proof, we need to show that Φ(κ) is monotonic decreasing in κ, that is to

show that ∂Φ(κ)

∂κ > 0. Computing this derivative, we obtain

∂Φ(κ)

∂κ

= − [(1 + rσ2)(1 + κ2 + rσ2)]
2[(1 + rσ2)(1 + κ2 + rσ2)2]2
[4κ(1 + rσ2)(1 + κ2 + rσ2)][(1 + κ)2(1 + 2κ2 + 2rσ2)(1 + rσ2) − (1 + κ2 + rσ2)2]

+

2[(1 + rσ2)(1 + κ2 + rσ2)2]2

.

which is negative for any κ ∈ [0, 1].

Now, let us prove that (ii) E[T nc

i (2)] − E[T ED

i

] < 0. Before, note that E[T nc

i (2)] is

the equilibrium, which means that E[T nc

timal solution for buyer-i problem, then E[T nc

i (2)] = E[T nc
i (2)(anc

i (2)(anc
i , anc−i)] < E[T nc

i , anc−i)]. Since anc
i

i (2)(ai, anc−i)],∀ai.

is the op-

In

particular, E[T nc

i (2)(anc

i , anc−i)] < E[T nc

i (2)(aED, anc−i)]. Therefore, it is enough to show that

48

E[T nc

i (2)(aED, anc−i)] − E[T ED

i

].

i (2)(aED, anc−i)] = β − [(1 − aED) + κ(1 − anc

E[T nc

i )][1 + aED + κ(1 − anc
i )]
2
i ) + κ(1 − aED)][1 + κaED + κ − anc
i )]

− [(1 − anc

+

rσ2
2
i (2)(aED, anc−i)] − E[T ED

i

Computing E[T nc

], we get

(1 − aED)2 + +

2

(1 − κ)2(1 − anc
i )2

2

.

E[T nc

i (2)(aED, anc−i)] − E[T ED

i

] = −2κ(1 − anc

i )(1 + anc

i ) − κ2(1 + anc

i )(1 − anc

i ) < 0.(cid:4)

Proof of Corollary 2 Deriving (1 − anc
we obtain

(cid:104)

(cid:16)

(cid:17) − rσ2

n−1

(cid:105)

∂(1 − anc
i )

∂κ

=

−2ακ

α

1 − 1
n−1

[α(1 + κ2) + rσ2]2

i ), which is implicity deﬁned (18), with respect to κ,

(33)

Expression (33) is positive if n ≤ 2+ rσ2

α . This result says that, when the number of buyers
contracting with the same contractor is suﬃciently high, the higher is the externality eﬀect,

the lower is the lower power is the externality eﬀects. This result is quite intuitive. When

the number of buyers contracting with the same contractor is suﬃciently high, the free-riding

eﬀect oﬀ set the fact that a higher κ increases the marginal beneﬁt of eliciting contractor’s
eﬀort (due to cost reduction), leading to lower power procurement contracts.(cid:4)
Proof of Corollary 3 From (18), we know that (1 − anc
know that when κ = 0, (1 − ac
(1 − ac

α
α(1+κ2)+rσ2 . From (13), we
In particular, note that if κ = 0, then

i (0)) = 1 − α

i (0)) = (1 − anc

i (0)). Therefore,

α+rσ2 .

i ) =

1+ κ2
n−1

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

(1 − anc

i (κ)) − (1 − ac

i (0)) = −1 +

1

n − 1

+

rσ2
n − 1

.

It is positive if n ≥ n = 2 + rσ2. (cid:4)
Proof of Corollary 4 From (3), we know that buyer-i expected transfer is E[Ti(Ci)] =

bi + aiE[Ci]. Replacing the equilibrium values of bi and ai, characterized by (19) and (18) in

that expected transfer expression, and also in the production cost expression in (1), we obtain

49

the equilibrium buyer-i expected transfer which is

E[T nc

i (n, κ, σ)] = β− (1 + κ)2

2

1 + κ2
n−1

1 + κ2 + rσ2

(cid:104)

The partial derivative of E[T nc

i (n, κ, σ)] with respect to n is equal to:

∂E[T nc

i (n, κ, σ)]

∂n

=

2(n − 1)2(1 + κ2 + rσ2)2

−1

(cid:105)2

(34)

1 + κ2
n−1

1 + κ2 + rσ2

(cid:105)(cid:104)

+

(cid:104)

rσ2
2

(cid:105)(cid:105)

1 + κ2
n−1

1 + κ2 + rσ2

2−(cid:104)
(cid:104) − 2rκ2(1 + κ)2σ2 + 2rκ2σ2(cid:16)

(cid:17)(cid:105)

1 +

κ2
n − 1

(cid:105)

(cid:104)

After some algebraic manipulation, we obtain the following expression for the derivative above:

∂E[T nc

i (n, κ, σ)]

∂n

=

2rκ3σ2

2(n − 1)3(1 + κ2 + rσ2)2

κ(n − 3) + 2(n − 1)

,

n−3

n−3

−2(n−1)

−2(n−1)

. Note that κ =

is negative for any n ≥ 3.
≥ 0.

with is positive whenever κ ≥ κ =
Since that we have assumed κ ≥ 0, then we can conclude that if n ≥ 3, then ∂E[T nc
(cid:4)
Proof of Propostion 4 In the text.(cid:4)
Proof of Proposition 5 . First, we compute the expected payoﬀ of each buyer (v− E[T F P
])
when they commit to ﬁxed-price contracts, ai = 0,∀i. Then, we compute the expected payoﬀ
of each buyer in the noncooperative contracting equilibrium (v − E[T nc
]). To conclude, we
provide the conditions that guarantees that (v − E[T F P
]) > (v − E[T nc
]).

(n,κ,σ)]

∂n

i

i

i

Part 1 If ai = 0,∀i, then according to (IC), e = ei = (1 + κ),∀i. Then, in the symmetric
equilibrium, the contractor will accept all the contracts I = N if and only if bi = β − e(1 +
2 ,∀i. Given that the buyer-i expected transfer is E[Ti(Ci)] = bi + aiE[Ci], and
κ) + rσ2

2 + e2

i

i

the production cost expression in (1), we obtain the buyer-i expected transfer when all buyer

relies on ﬁxed-price contracts.

E[T F P

i

(n, κ, σ)] = β +

rσ2
2

− (1 + κ)2

2

.

Part 2 In the noncooperative contracting equilibrium, the buyer-i expected transfer is

E[T F P

i

(n, κ, σ)] = β +

r(1 − ai
2

nc)2σ2

50

− (1 − anc

i )2(1 + κ)2

.

2

where ai

nc are deﬁned in (refnoncoopa).

Part 3 To conclude, we provide the conditions that guarantees that (v − E[T F P

]) >

(v− E[T nc
algebraic manipulations, we obtain that

i

]). For that, we need to show under which conditions E[T F P

] ≤ E[T nc

i

i

]. After some

i

E[T F P

i

] − E[T nc

i

] = −anc
i
2

(rσ2(anc

i − 2) + (1 + κ)2anc
i )

Therefore, to that the expression above is negative, it is suﬃcient to show that

i − 2) + (1 + κ)2anc
(anc

i ≥ 0.

(35)

Replacing anc
i

, deﬁned in (18), in (35), we obtain that the left-hand side of the expression

(35) is equal to

ψ(n) =

−rnσ2κ2 − (n − 1)r2(σ2)2 − 2nrσ2 + 2rσ2

+
−2(1 + κ)2κ2 + rn(1 + κ)2σ2 − rσ2(1 + κ)2

(n − 1)(1 + κ2 + rσ2)

(n − 1)(1 + κ2 + rσ2)

.

Note that ψ(2) = − rσ2(rσ2+(1−κ)2
that ψ(n) is a continuous function, then the only conditions that we have to provide are the

(n−1)(1+κ2+rσ2), which is negative. In addition, limn→∞ ψ(n) = ∞. Since

ones that guarantee that ∂ψ(n)
that ∀n ≥ n ψ(n), and consequently (35).

∂n monotonic positive. Doing so, we can guarantee that ∃n such

Deriving ψ(n) with respect to n, we obtain

∂ψ(n)

∂n

= −r2σ4 − rσ2(1 − 2κ) + κ2(1 + κ)2.

Note that it is a quadratic equation in (rσ2). Solving that quadratic equation for (rσ2), we

found that ∂ψ(n)
∂n

is strictly positive if

rσ2 ≤ rσ2 =

(1 − 2κ)2 + 2κ2(1 + κ)2

2

(1 − 2κ)

2

+

(cid:112)(1 + 2κ2)2 − 4κ(1 + κ)(1 − 2κ).(cid:4)

51

Proof of Proposition 6 First we will derive the power of the procurement contracts in the
procurement auction design game (1− apa
noncooperative equilibrium contracts (1 − anc
i ).

i ), then we will compare it with the the power of the

Part 1 - The power of the procurement contracts Without loss of generality, consider

the case that n = 2.

In the procurement auction design game, each buyer-i chooses ai

which minimizes his expected transfer, Ti = bi + aiE[Ci], taking into account the contractor’s

bid. The equilibrium bidding strategies are described in (27) and (26). Replacing them in

Ti = bi + aiE[Ci], and given the (IC) constraint, we ﬁnd that

Ti = β − 1
2

[(1 − ai) + κ(1 − aj)][(1 + ai) + κ(1 + aj)] − 1
2

[(1 − aj) + κ(1 − ai)][(1 + aj) + κ(1 + ai)] +

+ (1 − aj) + κ(1 − ai) + κ[(1 − ai) + κ(1 − aj)][(1 + ai) + κ(1 + aj)] +

rσ2(1 − ai)2
− [(1 − aj) + κ(1 − ai)]2

2

.

2

Buyer-i chooses ai that maximizes the Ti described above. The ﬁrst-order condition for

the problem the buyer-i problem is

κ2 + 1 = (1 − rσ2)(1 − aj) + κ(1 − ai),∀i, j

(36)

Since that n = 2, to ﬁnd the equilibrium a1 and a2 we have to solve the following system of

equations

κ2 + 1 = (1 − rσ2)(1 − a2) + κ(1 − a2)
κ2 + 1 = (1 − rσ2)(1 − a1) + κ(1 − a2).

The solution for the system of equation is:

1 − apa

i =

1 + κ2

1 + rσ2 + κ

,∀i

which is the power equilibrium of the power of the procurement contracts in the procurement

design game.

52

Part 2 - Comparing the power of the procurement contracts in the procurement auction
i ) with the power of the noncooperative equilibrium contracts (1 − anc
i ).

design game (1 − apa
For the case that n = 2, then

1 − anc

i =

1 + κ2

1 + rσ2 + κ2 ,∀i

Making some algebraic manipulations, we can show that (1− apa
which happens if and only if κ ∈ (0, 1). (cid:4)

i ) < (1− anc

i ) if and if κ2 < κ,

53

