Multidimensional characteristics and deforestation: an analysis for the Brazilian Legal 

Amazon1  

 

Admir Antonio Betarelli Júnior2 
Weslem Rodrigues Faria1 
Rosa Lívia Gonçalves Montenegro3 

 
Resumo 
O  recente  debate  sobre  a  Amazônia  Legal  no  Brasil  sugere  que  o  desmatamento  é  um 
fenômeno  multidimensional.  Muitos  estudos  analisaram  o  desmatamento  nesta  região  nas 
esferas  econômica  e  institucional,  tratando-o  em  conjunto  ou  separadamente.  No  entanto, 
além  de  incluir  estrutura  familiar  e  aspectos  sociais,  este  trabalho  busca  identificar  as 
múltiplas  configurações  que  potencialmente  levam  ao  desmatamento.  Para  isso,  aplicamos 
técnicas  estatísticas  exploratórias  para  analisar  os  762  municípios  localizados  na  Amazônia 
Legal  e  extrair  quatro  dimensões  características:  desenvolvimento  típico, ambiente  familiar, 
abertura  ao  comércio  e  propriedade  e  escala  rural.  Essas  dimensões  formam  possíveis 
combinações  em  uma  análise  configurável  que  são mais consistentes  com  os  fenômenos  de 
desmatamento.  Os  resultados  conclusivos  sugerem  que  a  configuração  lógica  entre  alto 
“desenvolvimento  típico”  e  alta  “propriedade  e  escala  rural”  cobre  55%  dos  municípios 
analisados e é altamente consistente com o alto desmatamento na Amazônia Legal. 
 
Palavras-chave:  Desmatamento,  Amazônia  Legal,  Análise  Multivariada,  Análise 
Comparativa Qualitativa (QCA) 
 
Abstract 
The  current  debate  concerning  the  Legal  Amazon  in  Brazil  suggests  that  deforestation  is  a 
multidimensional  phenomenon.  Many  studies  have  analysed  deforestation  in  this  region  in 
the  economic  and  institutional  spheres,  treating  them  jointly  or  separately.  However,  in 
addition  to  including  family  structure  and  social  aspects,  this  work  seeks  to  identify  the 
multiple  configurations  that  potentially  lead  to  deforestation.  For  this  purpose,  we  applied 
exploratory  statistical  techniques  to  analyse  the  762  municipalities  located  in  the  Legal 
Amazon  and  to  extract  four  characteristic  dimensions:  typical  development,  family 
environment, openness to trade and property and rural scale. These dimensions form possible 
combinations  in  a  configurational  analysis  that  are  more  consistent  with  deforestation 
phenomena.  The  conclusive  results  suggest  that  the  logical  configuration  between  high 
“typical development” and high “property and rural scale” covers 55% of the municipalities 
analysed and it is highly consistent with the high deforestation in the Legal Amazon. 
 
Keywords:  Deforestation,  Legal  Amazon,  Multivariate  Analysis,  Qualitative  Comparative 
Analysis (QCA) 
 
Área ANPEC: Área 11 - Economia Agrícola e do Meio Ambiente 
 
JEL classification: Q15, Q56, C38 
 
 

 

                                                             
1 Os autores agradecem à Fapemig, CAPES e CNPq pelo apoio financeiro. 
2 Department of Economics, Federal University of Juiz de Fora (UFJF).  José Lourenço Kelmer Street, Campus 
Universitário, Juiz de Fora – MG, Brazil, Post Code: 36036–330. Telephone number: +5532991725836. 
3 Department of Economics, Federal University of São João Del Rei (UFSJ). 

1 

 

Introduction 

1 
 

The  Brazilian  Amazon  region  is  well  known  and  mentioned  nationally  and 
internationally for hosting large areas of forests and areas of environmental conservation. The 
presence of these areas makes the region quite distinct and raises a number of issues. One is 
that  the  region  is  of  outstanding  importance  for  possessing  a  large  portion  of  the  world’s 
biodiversity and it functions as a regulator of the global climate (Barbier, 2001). In general, 
the  Brazilian  Amazon  encompasses  nine  states4  and  for  the  purposes  of  planning  and 
management, the region was established as the Legal Amazon. The region represents around 
60%  of  the  country’s  territory,  but  contains  only  12%  of  the  population  according  to  the 
Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística (IBGE, 2016). 

Other  issues  related  to  the  region  will  be  the  subject  of  study  of  this  work.  The 
purpose  of  it  is  to  provide,  first,  a  characterization  of  the  municipalities  that  compose  the 
Amazon  considering  three  broad  aspects:  social,  economic  and  property  rights.  Second,  it 
aims to carry out an analysis of the relationship between the dimensions of the characteristics 
found and deforestation to include environmental issues in the discussion as these are among 
the  most  important  aspects  in  understanding  the  processes  governing  the  region.  Finding 
ways  to  reduce  the  destruction  of  forest  cover  has  become  a  priority  for  the  environmental 
development agenda of the region. Thus, a better understanding of the characteristics of the 
region  and  the  factors  that  may  be  closely  associated  with  deforestation  deserves  further 
investigation. 

The  Amazon  region  is  marked  by  the  strong  exploitation  of  forest  resources,  driven 
largely by economic and commercial interests. Several drivers of deforestation in developing 
countries  were  discussed  widely  in  Allen  and  Barnes  (1985)  and  Angelsen  and  Kaimowitz 
(1999).  The  main  empirical  results  suggest  that  deforestation  occurs  most  generally  when 
forest  areas  are  more  affordable,  commodity  and  wood  prices  are  high,  wages  in  the 
agricultural  sector  are  low  and  there  is  a  trading  opportunity  in  the  international  market. 
Barbier  (2000)  shows  through  a  basic  model  how  changes  in  input  and  product  prices 
influence  the  conversion  of  forest  land  into  agricultural  use.  The  underlying  assumption  is 
that  political  reforms  towards  economic  liberalization  affect  domestic  prices  and  thus 
encourage the expansion of the agricultural frontier. Agricultural activities in less developed 
regions, such as the Amazon, are characterized by more intensive land use. If the returns for 
these  sectors  increase,  the  result  is  more  land  demand  and  increased  pressure  on  natural 
resources. 

Even within the economic context of the relationship between international trade and 
deforestation,  according  to  Ferreira  (2004),  the  usual  indicator  of  openness  to  trade  (X  + 
M)/GDP)5  is  a  significant  predictor  of  deforestation  if  institutional  expropriation  and 
corruption  factors  are  present.  For  Brazil,  López  and  Galinato  (2005)  conclude  that  the 
degree  of  openness  to  trade  between  1980  and  1999  had  a  positive  impact  on  forest  cover. 
Faria  and  Almeida  (2016), considering  the  period  2000–2010,  found  that  an  increase  in  the 
degree  of  openness  to  trade  encouraged  more  deforestation  in  the  Amazon.  Hargrave  and 
Kis-Katos  (2013)  point  out  that  the  subsidized  credit  to  agricultural  producers,  measured  in 
terms of credit density, contributes to increased deforestation in the Amazon. 

Other  aspects  evaluated  as  associated  with  deforestation  are  property  rights  and 
government  programmes  and  projects  for  the  Amazon  region.  In  the  1970s  especially,  the 
Brazilian  government  encouraged  and  provided  subsidies  for  mining,  farming  and  livestock 
in the region, as well as funding major highway projects that contributed to the establishment 
                                                             
4  Rondônia  (RO),  Acre  (AC),  Amazonas  (AM),  Roraima  (RR),  Pará  (PA),  Amapá  (AP),  Tocantins  (TO), 
Maranhão (MA) and Mato Grosso (MT). 
5 Where X is the exports and M the imports. 

2 

 

of  new  settlers  from  other  parts  of  the  country  (Mahar,  1989).  One  of  the  major  problems 
associated with new settlements in the region was the lack of regulation by federal and state 
governments, which resulted in confusion over land ownership. Over the years, this generated 
land  conflicts  between  farmers,  miners,  settlers  and  indigenous  groups,  mainly  in  border 
regions  (Brandão  et  al.,  2006).  Thus,  in  the  Legal  Amazon  an  important  issue  is  weak 
enforcement with respect to property rights, particularly with respect  to public lands. Public 
lands, when not incorporated in legally protected areas, may suffer from illegal occupation. 
Conflicts commonly occur in the so-called arc of deforestation (Fearnside, 2001). It is worth 
noting that even on private land, normally concentrated in medium and large farms (> 100 ha) 
(McAlpine  et  al.,  2009),  there  is  an  incentive  to  deforest  most  of  the  virgin  forests  as  the 
owners could lose them to expropriation and invasion. 

As  there  is  no  official  indicator  of  the  enforcement  of  property  rights,  different 
measures  have  been  used  to  relate  this  issue  to  deforestation.  Araujo  et  al.  (2009)  used  the 
number  of  homicides  related  to  land  conflicts  and  number  of  expropriations  performed  by 
INCRA as proxies for the lack of enforcement of property rights. The main results indicated 
that most of the occupants of land had no legal title of ownership and that  the insecurity of 
property  rights  contributed  to  increased  deforestation.  Faria  and  Almeida  (2016)  used  the 
proportion  of  establishments  for  which  the  status  of  land  ownership  was  squatters  as  an 
indicator  of  insecurity  of  property  rights.  The  results  of  this  study  showed  a  positive 
relationship between this indicator and deforestation. 

The  association  between  social  context  and  deforestation  in  the  Brazilian  Amazon 
cannot be considered completely separately from the economic context. The Amazon region 
offers economic opportunities arising from its forest resources and this has an impact  on the 
level  of  regional  development.  Diegues  (1996)  suggests  that  among  the  causes  of  the 
deforestation  in  the  Amazon  are  factors  related  to  population  dynamics  and  social 
programmes  that  have  encouraged  the  rural  settlement  of  families.  Painter  and  Durham 
(1995) suggest that the social causes of deforestation are related to human subsistence needs, 
which again are associated with the economic issue as forest resources are used as a source of 
obtaining the means of subsistence. Fujisaka et al. (1996) pointed out that deforestation from 
the  conversion  of  forest  land  to  pasture  in  the  Amazon  occurs,  in  many  cases,  because  the 
settlers believe that this practice can increase the value of land by adding  ponds, corrals and 
fencing to their pasture lands. For Pffaf (1999), the main social causes of deforestation in the 
Amazon are related to the distribution of the population, not the population density. Thus, the 
first migrants to a location have a greater impact on deforestation than the next settlers. 

The  inherent  issues  most  influential  in  terms  of  social  development,  such  as  the 
Municipal  Human  Development  Index  (HDI-M),  infant  mortality  and  basic  housing 
infrastructure, have not been used by other studies as variables associated with deforestation. 
Moreover,  it  is  not  possible  to  find  any  characterization  of  the  region  considering  different 
dimensions, in this case, economic, social and property rights. Thus, this study aims to  make 
a  twofold  contribution,  first  through  the  characterization  of  the  municipalities  of  the  Legal 
Amazon  and  second  by  determining  the  association  between  the  dimensions  found  in  the 
characterization of the municipalities and deforestation.  

It is worth noting that the paper uses the level of municipalities as a spatial reference 
unit.  Microeconomic  models  that  are  based  on  the  use  of  micro  data  tend  to  focus  on  the 
specific behaviour of landowners and families in relation to deforestation (Bluffstone, 1995; 
Chomitz  and  Thomas,  2003).  Such  an  approach  ignores  the  broader  influences  of 
deforestation  (e.g.  the  indirect  effects  of  international  trade).  Empirical  macroeconomic 
models  use  aggregated  data  that  can  more  easily  be  found  in  relative  terms,  but  such  data 
often result in an average that is representative of a large number of regions, which may lead 
to  inaccuracies in  the  analysis.  Regional  models  provide  appropriate  solutions  because  they 

 

3 

are  based  on  data  at  the  local  level,  simultaneously  making  it  possible  to  avoid  erroneous 
inferences  from  the  use  of  highly  aggregated  data  and  to  incorporate  local  features  in  the 
analysis. 

To  achieve  the  study  objectives,  two  approaches  were  used.  The  characterization  of 
the municipalities of the Legal Amazon was performed using factor analysis and exploratory 
spatial  data  analysis  (ESDA).  Factor  analysis  allowed  us  to  create  synthetic  indicators  that 
summarize  the  complete  set  of  information  based  on  the  common  variations  thereof.  Thus, 
we can see how the variables are associated  in the formation of the  characteristics and how 
these  underlie  a  typology  of  municipalities.  ESDA  allowed  us  to  verify  the  existence  of 
spatial patterns with respect to each of the factors or characteristics (dimensions). Finally, we 
employed  a  fuzzy  set  qualitative  comparative  analysis  (fsQCA)  to  verify  if  possible  logical 
combinations of the dimensions exhibit sufficient links with deforestation. In short, this  is a 
strategy  to  associate  directly  the  intrinsic  characteristics  of  the  municipalities  with 
environmental  issues.  The  main  hypothesis  in  this  paper  is  that  the  forest  resources  of  the 
region  are  strongly  associated  with  different  characteristics  of  the  municipalities,  whether 
economic or social. 

In  addition  to this  introduction,  this  paper  comprises  four  sections.  Section  2  briefly 
describes the articulation between statistical and configurational techniques. Section 3 shows 
the base data and indicators. The fourth section  presents and discusses the results. Section 5 
provides concluding remarks. 
 
2  Empirical strategy 
 

Our  empirical  strategy  consists  of  three  successive  steps.  For  the  first  step,  we  used 
exploratory factor analysis based on Spearman (1904) to summarize the economic, social and 
institutional characteristics  of  the  municipalities  of  the  Legal  Amazon  in  latent  dimensions. 
This technique also helps us to identify a typology for the municipalities under analysis. The 
the  vector  p  of  standardized  variables, 
factor  analysis  model  postulates 
linearly  dependent  on  m  common  and  unknown  factors, 

that 

is 

, 

, as well as p specific factors, 

, according to the matrix 

form: 

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   (1) 

where 

 is a matrix with coefficients 

 of the i-th standard variable 

 in the j-

th factor 

.  

Common  factors  exhibit  null  means,  unit  variances,  are  not  correlated  and  are 
independent  of  specific  factors.  These  exhibit  almost  the  same  statistical  properties  as 
common factors, excepting variance, which are not necessarily unitary but equal. Faced  with 
such assumptions, the structure of the correlation matrix is defined as 
, where 

  is  the  matrix  of  specific  variance; 

,  where 

 is the variability of 

 expressed by m factors, known as commonality (Johnson 

and Wichern, 2007). For the estimation of 

 and 

, this study used principal components 

 

4 

],,,[21pZZZZ],,,[21pFFFF],,,[21pε)1()1()()1(pxmxpxmpxεFLZijpxm)(Lij)(iZ)(jFLLΡpxp][21)(ppxpdiagiiihZVar2)(mjijih122iZijianalysis  as  most  of  the  variables  do  not  present  univariate  or  multivariate  normal 
distribution.6  

Thus, when applying the spectral decomposition to the factorization of the correlation 
.  If  m  <p,  the 

matrix,  with  pairs  of  eigenvalues  and  eigenvectors, 

, 

factor  loadings  matrix  in  this  method  become 

  and  therefore 

 and 

. 

Commonly,  the  choice  of  m  is  made  taking  into  account  the  Kaiser  criterion,  the 
eigenvalues  of  which  are  at  least  equal  to  unity,  and  the  Pearson  criterion,  in  which  the 
selected  number  of  factors  reaches  at  least  80%  of  the  proportion  of  variance.  To  facilitate 
interpretation  and  preserve  the  statistical  properties  of  common  factors,  Kaiser’s  (1958) 
varimax  orthogonal  rotation  tends  to  be  applied.  After  applying  these  criteria,  the  factor 
scores  are  estimated.  As  the  data  were  not  normally  distributed,  we  used  Bartlett’s  (1937) 
weighted least squares method (Johnson and Wichern, 2007; Mingoti, 2007). 

For the second step, we used the scores of the common factors (dimensions) selected 
to verify the presence of significant spatial patterns in the Legal Amazon region. Two  ESDA 
techniques  were  applied.  From  Moran’s  I,  it  is  possible  to  indicate  whether  or  not  there  is 
global spatial autocorrelation in the municipalities of the region. The local indicator of spatial 
association (LISA) has the capacity to capture local and statistically significant patterns.  This 
represents  four types  of  cluster  association:  high-high,  low-low,  high-low  and  low-high.  To 
apply the ESDA, it is necessary to define a spatial weights matrix that represents the spatial 
structure of the data (neighbourhood or contiguity criterion), or rather to condense a certain 
spatial  arrangement  of  the  resulting  interactions  of  the  phenomenon  to  be  studied.  Each 
municipality  is  related  to  a  set  of  neighbours  by  means  of  purely  spatial  tendencies, 
introduced exogenously in the spatial weights matrix (Anselin, 1995, 1996). 

Finally, for the third step, we used Ragin’s (1987, 2000) fsQCA to identify patterns of 
associations  between  the  latent  dimensions  and  deforestation  in  the  Legal  Amazon.  This 
analysis  is  based  on  set-theoretic  notions  and  applies  Boolean  logic  to  evaluate  the  most 
possible  combinations  of  factors  that  are  present  or  absent  when  a  phenomenon  of  interest 
occurs or not. FsQCA is capable of dealing with equifinality (Ragin, 2000), the idea that there 
may  be  various  combinations  of  conceptual  factors  that,  among  other  things,  promote 
deforestation.  In  other  words,  the  ability  of  fsQCA  to  account  for  equifinality  and  complex 
interactions reflects deforestation in the Brazilian Legal Amazon. 

Nevertheless,  the  results  obtained  do  not  strictly  “prove”  causal  relations,  but  rather 
reveal  patterns  of  associations  between  the  sets,  thus  providing  support  for  the  existence  of 
such  causal  relationships  (Riheux  and  Ragin,  2009;  Schneider  and  Wagemann,  2010; 
Legewie, 2013). For example, a solution such as “AB → Y” points to the logical combination 
between  conditions  A  and  B  potentially  causing  result  Y.  However,  this  solution  may  also 
simply represent particular empirical concordances between conditions and  the outcome that 
are not truly causal (Schneider and Grofman, 2006). 

In fsQCA the membership cases of sets can be partial or complete, allowing values of 
conditions from 0 to 1 by means of conditional probabilities (Ragin, 2006). The advantage of 
this  fuzzy  set  variant  of  QCA  lies  in  the  possibility  of  staggering  different  scores  of 
association (Schneider and Wagenemann, 2010). Generally, three qualitative anchors define a 

                                                             
6 If the variables have normal multivariate distribution, the maximum likelihood method can be applied. 

 

5 

),(iie0,1kiiieeeemmeeeL,,,2211miiii1eeLLLLΡfuzzy set: full membership (indicated by a membership score equal to 1), no adhesion (score 
equal to 0) and a cutoff point (score equal to 0.5) (Ganter and Hecker, 2014).7 

If there are k = 4 dimensions (e.g. extracted by factor analysis), there will be 2k or 16 
possible logical combinations, some of which are associated with high or low deforestation, 
while others are not observed empirically. These combinations are organized in a truth table, 
but  this  can  be  reduced  considering  the  consistency  and  coverage  of  each  configuration. 
These traditional measures show us how well the cases in a data set fit in terms of necessity 
or  sufficiency  (Ragin,  2006).  The  coverage  indicates  the  number  of  empirically  observed 
cases  for  each  configuration,  while  the  consistency  shows  the  proportion  of  municipalities 
consistent with the outcome, namely the deforestation of the Legal Amazon. The closer to 1 
the  value,  the  greater  the consistency  of  a  configuration  in  relation  to the  outcome;  a  value 
below 0.5 denotes low consistency. Ragin (2000, 2006) considers that for this measure to be 
adequate, it must be at least equal to 0.80 for all configurations. 

Configurations consistent with or sufficient in relation to the outcome are presented in 
so-called  “primitive  expressions”.  However,  these  primitive  expressions  are  often  complex 
because they include a large number of configurations (greater than three). Thus, fsQCA uses 
“Boolean  minimization”  to  reduce  primitive  expressions  and  to  identify  the  most  general 
combinations of sufficient conditions for the outcome to remain logically true. This is done 
using the Quine–McCluskey algorithm (Schneider and Wagemann, 2010). 

Compared to traditional quantitative techniques (e.g. econometrics), fsQCA makes it 
possible  to  find  distinct  combinations  of  causal  variables,  which  in  turn  suggest  different 
theoretical  paths  according  to  certain  results.  Econometric  models,  for  example,  seek  to 
establish  the  analysis  of  the  variables  and  relationships  between  causal  and  dependent 
variables,  these  being  additive  relations  and  linear  causal  effects.  As  fsQCA  focuses  on  the 
analysis  of  different  configurations  that  produce  different  results,  the  relations  are  non-
additive.  Thus,  fsQCA  has  a  limitation  in  relation  to  quantitative  models,  which  is  the 
inability to establish  cause-and-effect relationships.  Thus, fsQCA is not able to quantify the 
impact of an exogenous policy or to determine marginal effects  in the associations  between 
variables (Rihoux and Ragin, 2009). 
 
3  Base data 
 

The data used in this study for the characterization of the municipalities of the Legal 
Amazon correspond to four data sources: the Human Development Atlas in Brazil (from the 
United Nations Development Programme, Institute for Applied Economic Research  – IPEA 
and  the  João  Pinheiro  Foundation),  the  Brazilian  Institute  of  Geography  and  Statistics 
(IBGE), the Ministry of Development, Industry and Foreign Trade (MDIC) and the National 
Institute for Space Research (INPE). The latter source was used to obtain the deforested area 
data.  All  information  corresponds  to  the  year  2010  for  762  municipalities  of  the  Legal 
Amazon.  

In  this  study,  we  attempted  to  cover  five  major  aspects  of  characteristics  of  the 
municipalities to associate them with the pattern of deforestation using the fsQCA technique, 
thus  illustrating  possible  causal links  between  them. Table  1  presents  the  variables  selected 
for  the  factor  analysis.  The  factor  analysis  determines  the  most  important  dimensions  for 
different groups of municipalities. In other words, it determines a typology of municipalities 
according to different dimensions. The factor analysis also provide scores for each dimension 

                                                             
7 Operationally, the original variables are transformed into fuzzy sets. Software such as Stata, fsQCA, Tosmana, 
and R are used to compute such set operations. 

6 

 

based on the variability of the data, which are transformed into fuzzy sets or causal conditions 
that – when combined – should relate sufficiently to the deforestation of the Legal Amazon. 

Together, these variables seek to replicate the five aspects, namely: (a) human capital; 
(b)  urban  infrastructure;  (c)  family  and  health  structure;  (d)  economic  environment  and 
inequality; (e) property rights and the rural scale of the municipalities. For the indicators (a) 
to (c), the latest information from the Human Development Atlas was used with reference to 
the year 2010 (Human Development Atlas in Brazil, 2013).  Considering factors that have an 
influence on the social development of the Amazon region contributes to better understanding 
of the characterization of its municipalities (Fearnside, 1990; Ebeling and Yasué, 2008). It is 
worth mentioning that we included the variable dependency ratio to treat the family structure. 

 

Table 1 – Selected indicators of the municipalities of the Legal Amazon – 2010 

Indicators 

Acronym 

Description 

Mean 

SD 

Min.  Max. 

Deforestation  Def 

Deforested area (in km2) 

1077.8 

1372.7 

0.0 

16989.9 

 

 

 

HDI-M  Municipal Human Development Index (HDI-M) 

Human capital 

Dformal 

Degree of formalization of the employment – 18 
years and over 

Illrate 

Illiteracy rate – 18 years and over 

 

 
Elec 

 
Percentage (%) of the population in domiciles with 
electricity 

Urban 

Bath 

infrastructure 

Percentage (%) of the population in households with 
bathrooms and running water 

Sew 

Participation (%) of people in households with 
inadequate water supply and sewerage 

 

 

Infmort 

 
Infant mortality 

Family and 

health structure 

 

Economic 

environment 
and inequality 

 

Property and 

rural scale 

Fec 

Dep 

 

PCI 

Poor 

Opt 

Opp 

 
Own 

Total fecundity rate 

Dependency ratio 

 
Per capita income (in R$) 

Percentage (%) of poor 

Openness to trade total: (Exports + imports) / GDP 

Openness to trade primary 

 
Owners: number of establishments 

 

 

 

 

 

0.6 

 

0.1 

 

0.4 

 

0.8 

31.6 

14.8 

3.0 

80.4 

19.9 

91.4 

8.6 

 

9.9 

3.5 

43.5 

 

27.4 

 

100.0 

58.1 

24.9 

4.9 

99.4 

23.6 

18.0 

0.1 

85.4 

23.0 

2.8 

61.0 

 

6.8 

0.6 

 

12.4 

1.7 

 

45.3 

4.9 

11.8 

35.8 

118.0 

363.0 

 

175.6 

 

96.3 

 

1162.4 

36.6 

17.6 

0.1 

0.1 

0.5 

0.4 

696.4 

 

934.2 

1.8 

0.0 

0.0 

 

0.0 

78.6 

9.3 

9.2 

 

9278.3 

Rural 

Rural population 

8781.3 

10144.9 

140.0  125336.0 

Source: Human Development Atlas in Brazil, 2013, INPE (2016) and IBGE (2016). 
Note:  The  variable  Dep  represents  the  proportion  of  people  in  families  with  a  dependency  ratio  higher  than 
75%. 
 

In the dimension “(d) Economic environment and inequality” there are variables such 
as per capita income, proportion (%) of poor and two indicators of  the degree of economic 
openness  to  international  trade.  One  of  these  indicators  is  the  degree  of  openness  of  each 
municipality  to  international trade  considering  all  products  traded  (openness  to  trade  total). 
The other indicator also denotes the degree of openness to  international trade, but considers 
only  primary  goods  traded  with  foreign  countries  (openness  to  trade  primary).8  As  primary 
products represent relatively high participation in the production of the municipalities of the 
Legal  Amazon,  it  is  expected  that  there  will  be  different  effects  from  the  two  openness-to-

                                                             
8 The primary products include products of animal, vegetable and mineral origin. 

7 

 

trade measures. The data on per capita income and proportion of poor people were also taken 
from  the  Human  Development  Atlas.  The  variables  of  openness  to  trade  were  elaborated 
based on data from the AliceWeb System data of MDIC9 for exports and imports and IBGE 
for  gross  domestic  product  (GDP).  Economic  aspects  may  have  strong  connection  with 
specific  characteristics  of  the  region  (e.g.  deforestation),  which  can  contribute  to  a  more 
comprehensive characterization of municipalities (Angelsen, 1999; Hargrave and Kis-Katos, 
2013; Faria and Almeida, 2016). 

Finally,  the  indicator  “(e)  Property  rights  and  rural  scale  of  the  Amazon 
municipalities”  includes two  variables,  namely  the  number  of establishments,  for which  the 
status of the land is the owner (owners: number of establishments), and the rural population. 
The property rights issue in the Amazon region is a topic that is widely discussed. One of the 
main  points  involves  the  debate  on  whether  property  rights  are  well  defined  or  not  in  the 
region (Fearnside, 2001; Araujo et al., 2009; McAlpine et al., 2009; Brito and Barreto, 2010). 
In  addition,  there  is  discussion  concerning  how  the  degree  of  weakness  in  the  definition  of 
property rights affects deforestation (Ferreira, 2004; Araujo et al., 2009; Araujo et al., 2010). 
Conflicts over land tenure, the illegal occupation of land and squatters are facts in the region, 
so considering a status indicator of tenure makes the characterization of the municipalities of 
the Amazon region  more appropriate.  Data on land ownership were obtained  from the most 
recent Brazilian Agricultural Census of 2006 (IBGE, 2012). The information on this year was 
extrapolated by progression  up to 2010. For this, information from  the previous census was 
also used. Data on the rural population were collected from the Human Development Atlas. 

Two  facts  with  respect  to  the  data  are  worth  mentioning.  The  first  is  that  the  Legal 
Amazon  region  has  782  municipalities  that  are  part  of  the  Program  for  the  Estimation  of 
Deforestation  in  the  Brazilian  Amazon  (PRODES).10  However,  of  this  total  number  of 
municipalities,  762  have  data  included  in  the  Human  Development  Atlas.  Therefore,  this 
paper considers the sample of 762 municipalities in the Legal Amazon region. The second is 
that  some  variables  presented  missing  observations  in  relation  to  some  municipalities.  To 
circumvent  this  problem,  geographically  weighted  estimates  were  used  to  generate 
observations.  The  procedure  implies  estimation  by  ordinary  least  squares  (OLS),  using  the 
following specification: 

 
                                                  

 

 

 

   (2) 

 
where x and y represent the latitude and longitude of the centroid of each spatial unit; m refers 
to  the  vector  of  variables  used  that  presented  missing  observations;  βi  is  the  vector  of 
coefficients for each i, where i indicates the relevant variable with missing observation and ε 
is  the  error  term.  The  adjusted  values  of  the  specific  regression  for  each  variable  were 
predicted and used in place of the missing information. 
 
4  Results 
 

We present the results of our three analytical steps and then we describe and explain 
the  characteristics  of  the  municipalities  located  in  the  Legal  Amazon  and  how  they  are 
associated  with  deforestation  in  the  region.  We  can  identify  a  typology  as  well  as  a  spatial 
pattern in the latent dimensions obtained. Preliminarily, it can be seen that the municipalities 
of  the  Legal  Amazon  have  an  average  Municipal  Human  Development  Index  (HDI-M)  of 

                                                             
9 www.aliceweb.gov.br 
10 The data on deforestation correspond to the deforested area (km2). The methodology  for estimating the rates 
of  deforestation  is  based  on  geo-referenced  satellite  images;  more  information  on  this  can  be  found  at 
http://www.obt.inpe.br/prodes (INPE, 2016). 

8 

 

0.62, a level below the national average of  0.66 for 2010, but above the average  HDI-M of 
the  North  and  Northeast  regions,  equal to  0.61  and  0.59  respectively.  The  municipalities  of 
the  Legal  Amazon  had  a  mean  per  capita  income  (PCI)  of  R$362.95,  an  amount  that  was 
more  than  twice  as  low  as  the  national  average  for  the  same  year  (R$793.87)  (Human 
Development Atlas in Brazil, 2013). 

The  efficiency  of  the  factor  model  depends  on  the  coefficients  of  the  correlation 
matrix  as  this  technique  describes  the  interdependencies  or  commonalities  between  the 
variables.  High  correlations  between  certain  variables  should  reproduce  factor loadings  and 
high  commonalities  in  certain  latent  factors;  otherwise,  the  variables  will  not  be  well 
explained  by  these  respective  factors.  For  this  reason,  a  prior  analysis  of  the  correlation 
matrix is  recommended. The correlation matrix is  presented in Table 2.  Examining this, we 
notice that from a total of 105 coefficients, 51% present values above 0.30 (Hair et al., 1998), 
which allows us to infer that the data structure used can be considered adequate for the factor 
analysis.  There  is  a  pattern  associated  with  the  degree  of  regional  development  in  the 
municipalities, or rather that indicators such as human capital are positively correlated  with 
urban infrastructure, PCI, family structure and favourable health conditions, as well as being 
negatively correlated with the level of poverty and illiteracy. 
 

Table 2 – Correlation matrix of the variables 

 

 
The high ratio between poverty and most other variables is significant, especially with 
HDI-M  (r  =  0.90,  p-value  <  0.01)  and  dependency  ratio  (r  =  0.84,  p-value  <  0.01).  PCI  is 
highly correlated with the degree of formalization of employment (r = 0.83, p-value < 0.01) 
and HDI-M (r = 0.81, p-value < 0.01). The relationship between the establishments of owners 
and rural population is also significant (r = 0.51, p-value < 0.01), which is consistent with the 
literature signalling the rural scale in the Legal  Amazon. The correlations provide empirical 
evidence that the set of characteristic variables for local development has a low relationship 
with  rural  scale  in  the  762  municipalities,  an  observation  that  must  be  reflected  in  factor 
loadings.  Therefore,  several  of  these  correlations  may  represent  a  latent  dimension, 
constructed by factor analysis.  

Table  3  reports  the  main  results  of  the  factor  analysis  derived  from  principal 
components  analysis.11  The  statistical  tests  for  these  results  are  satisfactory.  Bartlett’s 

                                                             
11  We  carried  out  an  analysis  of  the  distribution  of  the  original  variables  using  graphical  tools  and  statistical 
tests,  such  as  histograms,  Kernel  graphs,  the  Q-Q  graph,  the  Shapiro-Wilk  test  (1965)  and  symmetry  and 

9 

 

1234567891011121314151HDI-M12Dformal0.82***13Elec0.57***0.41***14Bath0.85***0.79***0.51***15Sew-0.68*-0.64*-0.36*-0.86*16Infmort-0.65*-0.60*-0.06*-0.62*0.46***17Fec-0.63*-0.56*-0.50*-0.67*0.57***0.36***18Dep-0.76*-0.68*-0.61*-0.79*0.64***0.47***0.82***19Illrate-0.75*-0.63*-0.30*-0.66*0.41***0.7***0.43***0.59***110PCI0.87***0.83***0.41***0.79***-0.63*-0.64*-0.58*-0.74*-0.70*111Poor-0.90*-0.85*-0.55*-0.90*0.7***0.63***0.67***0.84***0.71***-0.89*112Rural-0.21*-0.21*-0.14*-0.33*0.39***0.13***0.040.16***0.02-0.16*0.23***113Opt0.2***0.24***0.06*0.12***-0.07*-0.14*-0.08*-0.13*-0.18*0.24***-0.17*0.06114Opp0.18***0.22***0.050.11***-0.08*-0.13*-0.05-0.11*-0.15*0.22***-0.15*0.010.93***115Own-0.01-0.02-0.09*-0.050.13***-0.08*-0.09*-0.06*-0.16*0.06*-0.010.51***-0.01-0.011*** p<0.01; **p<0.05; * p<0.10.sphericity  test  for  the  correlation  matrix  indicates  that  there  are  coefficients  statistically 
different  from  zero.  The  value  of  the  Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin  (KMO)  criterion  is  0.86,  which 
indicates that the factorial model is adequate (considering a minimum reference value of 0.8) 
(Johnson and Wichern, 2007). 

The  number  of  factors  selected  satisfies  both  traditional  criteria,  Kaiser  (1958)  and 
Pearson, because the eigenvalues exceed unity, so that each retained factor represents at least 
the  information  of  an  original  variable;  the  four  factors  obtained,  when  accumulated,  reach 
approximately  82.5%  of  the  total  variance  in  the  data.  To  facilitate  the  interpretation,  the 
factor loadings were rotated using the Kaiser (1958) varimax method.12 Finally, it should be 
mentioned that the commonalities are higher than 0.69, indicating that the interdependencies 
of the variables are well described by the four factors, the result of which is a reflection of an 
adequate  correlation  matrix.  Despite  this,  we  still  have  to  be  careful  when  evaluating  the 
reliability  of  our  multi-item  measures  (Flynn  et  al.,  1990).  The  literature  uses  Cronbach’s 
alpha  to  evaluate  the  reliability  between  items.  The  results  for  all  measurements  indicate 
acceptable reliability (close to 0.90). 
 

Table 3 – Results of factor analysis 

Acronym 

Description 

Sew 

Elec 

Bath 

Illrate 

Dformal 

Infmort 
PCI 
Poor 

HDI-M  Municipal Human Development Index (HDI-M) 
Degree of formalization of the employment – 18 
years and over 
Illiteracy rate – 18 years and over 
Percentage (%) of the population in households with 
bathrooms and running water 
Participation (%) of people in households with 
inadequate water supply and sewerage 
Infant mortality 
Per capita income (in R$) 
Percentage (%) of poor 
Percentage (%) of the population in domiciles with 
electricity 
Total fecundity rate 
Dependency ratio 
Openness to trade total: (Exports + imports) / GDP 
Openness to trade primary 
Rural population 
Owners: number of establishments 

Fec 
Dep 
Opt 
Opp 
Rural 
Own 
Eigenvalues 
Proportion of variance 
Cronbach’s scale test: 0.902 
Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin (KMO): 0.863 
Bartlett’s sphericity test: 12.026 (p-value = 0.000) 
Source: Research results elaborated based on Stata software. 
The hidden values are below of 0.650. 

Factors 

2 

3 

4 

Commonalities 

1 

0.845 

0.810 

−0.836 

0.830 

−0.663 

−0.883 
0.855 
−0.846 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

−0.854 
−0.850 

0.892 

0.779 

0.742 

0.901 

0.691 

0.825 
0.839 
0.919 

0.768 

0.724 
0.861 
0.961 
0.956 
0.775 
0.738 

−0.849 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
6.216 
0.414 

0.677 
0.658 

 
 
 
 
2.483 
0.166 

 
 

−0.974 
−0.974 

 
 
1.988 
0.133 

1.684    
0.112    

 
 
  

 
 

 
 

 

                                                                                                                                                                                              
kurtosis testing. Even transforming the original variables using the Box and Cox method and adding a constant 
and  taking  the  logarithm,  the  asymmetric  distribution  remained  for  some  variables.  Thus,  the  conditions  of 
normal univariate distribution and in particular multivariate distribution were not satisfied, making it impossible 
to apply the maximum likelihood method. This attempt strictly followed the recommendations of Johnson and 
Wichern (2007). 
12 The PROMAX rotation was performed alternately and the results were robust to the VARIMAX rotation. 

10 

 

The  factor  loadings  of  the  first  factor  synthesize  the  main  locational  aspects 
concerning the degree of development of the municipalities of the Legal Amazon. In regional 
economies  in  which  poverty,  inadequate  water  and  sewerage  supplies,  illiteracy  and  infant 
mortality  are  relatively  prominent,  the  scores  will  be  positive.  Municipalities  with  a  higher 
HDI-M, a degree of formalization of employment, higher PCI and better basic infrastructure 
will  present  negative  scores  for  this  factor.  In  terms  of  regional  policy,  this  result  may 
contribute  to  highlighting  the  developmental  disparities  between  municipalities, 
the 
configuration  of  which  may  be  strongly  associated  with  the  deforestation  of  the  Legal 
Amazon.  In  short,  this  first  factor  can  be  denominated  “Typical  Development”,  with  a 
positive  and  greater  score  illustrating  the  predominance  of  local  aspects  of  diseconomies  in 
the municipalities. 

The second factor describes the characteristics that are common to the family structure 
variable,  the  fecundity  rate  and  the  percentage  of  the  population  in  households  with 
electricity.  From  the  signals  of  factor  loadings,  it  can  be  observed  that  access  to  electric 
energy is positively associated with this factor. The presence of electricity gives households 
access  to  information  through  electronic  devices  (e.g.  radios,  televisions  and  computers), 
enabling  them  to  take  advantage  of  the  opportunities  (facilities,  activities  and  services) 
needed for social and economic inclusion. In this regard, access to electricity can positively 
influence access to opportunities and social information for families and consequently reduce 
the  dependence  of  family  members  and  their  own  fecundity.  In  short,  municipalities  that 
exhibit a high proportion of people with access to electricity also have a family structure  that 
is  less  dependent  and  a  lower  fecundity  rate,  almost  certainly  due  to  access  to  durable 
consumer goods. Therefore, this factor can be termed the “Typical Family Environment”.  

to  Trade”,  essentially  capturing  primary  product  activity,  which 

The  third  factor  reports  the  interdependencies  between  the  variables  of  openness  to 
trade, both considering all products (variable Opt) and only primary products (variable Opp). 
Many  municipalities  in  the  Legal  Amazon  concentrate  their  productive  structure  in  the 
production of primary goods rather than other types of product. Considering the possibility of 
foreign trade, such an association tends to be even  greater. Thus, this  third factor expresses 
“Openness 
is 
characteristically  dependent  on  agricultural  inputs  for  the  expansion  of  production.  Finally, 
the  fourth  factor  describes  a  strong  correlation  between  the  rural  population  and  number  of 
agricultural  establishments  the  land  status  of  which  is  proprietary.  The  joint  relationship 
between  these  two  variables  provides  a  more  grounded  dimension  concerning  the  issues 
inherent  to  the  property  rights  of  the  Legal  Amazon  region.  Therefore,  this  factor  is  called 
“Property  and  Rural  Scale”.  It  is  expected  that  this  factor  is  positively  associated  with  the 
deforestation of the Legal Amazon, or rather that it presents a sufficient relationship to lead to 
more deforestation. 

In  short,  the  order  of  importance  of  the  factors,  given  the  proportion  of  the 
explanation of variance, is relevant in the factor analysis. One result of the factor analysis is 
that the first factor has a greater capacity to represent the set of indicators  analysed (Mingoti, 
2007).  Thus,  the  factor  “Typical  Development”  represents  the  main  characterization  of  the 
municipalities of the Legal Amazon. Factor scores were constructed and extracted in this step 
to proceed with the ESDA, which will allows us to verify the presence of spatial patterns in 
each factor at the global and local levels (Anselin, 1995, 1996). Thus, the ESDA will allow us 
to determine a typology of municipalities in the Amazon region based on their characteristics 
(dimensions).  Table  4  provides  the  Moran’s  I  value  for  each  factor  (characteristics  or 
dimensions) according to the queen spatial weight matrix.13 The Moran’s I results indicate the 
positive  presence  of  global  spatial  autocorrelation  at  the  1%  level  of  significance  for  all 

                                                             
13 Moran indices were calculated using other types of spatial weights matrices. The results remained robust. 

11 

 

factors.  This  means  that  there  is  a  spatial  pattern  in  the  Legal  Amazon  along  the 
municipalities considering each of the dimensions. The first factor,  “Typical Development”, 
is  the  one  with  the  highest  global  spatial  autocorrelation.  Municipalities  that  exhibit 
locational  aspects  predominantly  of  diseconomies  tend  to  be  surrounded  by  municipalities 
also  with  low  “Typical  Development”.  The  difference  in  the  level  of  global  spatial 
autocorrelation is related to the spatial features of each dimension.14 

The same applies to the other factors, but the Moran’s I value with regard to “Open to 
Trade” is lower than the others. Of the 762 municipalities considered, 226 carried out some 
type  of  foreign  trade in  2010.  The  foreign  trade  of a certain municipality  may  occur  due  to 
some  more  specific  characteristics  of  such  a  municipality,  which  may  not  be  present 
systematically in the neighbouring municipalities. 

Another  way  of  identifying  spatial  autocorrelation  is  through  the  local  indicator  of 
spatial  autocorrelation  (LISA)  statistic,  which  is  a  measure  of  local  association.  The  LISA 
statistic provides,  based on local spatial autocorrelation indices, cluster maps describing  the 
significant  spatial  regimes  of  the  four  factors,  as  shown  in  the  maps  in  Figure  1.  For  the 
“Typical  Development”  factor,  two  patterns  can  be  observed  (Figure  1a).  The  first  shows  a 
high–high cluster formed by municipalities that cover almost all the state of Mato Grosso and 
great part of the municipalities of Rondônia and Tocantins. This means that, in relative terms, 
municipalities  with  high  “Typical  Development” are  neighbours  of  municipalities  also  with 
high  “Typical  Development”.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  also  two  low–low  clusters,  one 
that is bigger covering the state of Maranhão and another that includes some municipalities of 
Acre and Amazonas. 
 

Table 4 – Global spatial autocorrelation index of the factors 

Factors 

Moran’s I 

Typical Development 

Typical Family Environment 

Openness to Trade 

Property and Rural Scale 

0.758 

0.643 

0.076 

0.396 

Mean 

0.000 

–0.002 

–0.001 

–0.002 

SD 

0.022 

0.021 

0.018 

0.022 

p-value 

0.001 

0.001 

0.002 

0.001 

Source: Research results elaborated based on Stata, GeoDa and ArcView GIS software. 
 

Figure 1 – Cluster maps of the factors 

         (a) Typical Development                  (b) Typical Family Environment 

                                                             
14 For the ESDA, the reference in terms of positive and negative scores of this factor was reversed  to provide a 
better interpretation of the results. 

12 

 

 
           (c) Openness to Trade                            (d) Property and Rural Scale 

Source: Research results elaborated based on Stata, GeoDa and ArcView GIS software. 

 

 

For the factor “Typical Family Environment”, as shown in Figure 1b the LISA result 
indicates  that  some  municipalities  in  Maranhão  and  Mato  Grosso  form  a  high–high  cluster. 
Given the relationship between the variables related to this factor, this result indicates that in 
such municipalities there is a significantly lower rate of fecundity and dependency ratio and a 
higher  proportion  of  municipalities  with  access  to  electricity,  in  relative  terms.  Some 
municipalities  in  Amazonas  and  Pará  show  the  opposite  results,  characterizing  a  low–low 
cluster.  In  turn,  the  LISA  result  for  “Openness  to  Trade”  indicates  the existence  of  a  high–
high  cluster  involving  some  municipalities  in  Mato  Grosso.  The  low–low  pattern  occurs 
mainly in Tocantins (Figure 1c). 

Finally,  the  LISA  result  for  the  fourth  factor,  “Property  and  Rural  Scale”,  indicates 
that  most  of  the municipalities  of  Pará  have  a  relatively  high  number  of  establishments  the 
land  status  of  which  is  proprietary  and  a  high  rural  population  spatially  associated  with 
similar municipalities (Figure 1d). This  means that in this state there is a  high-density rural 
pattern. This result does not indicate that this state has no problems related to the definition of 
property  rights.  On  the  contrary,  the  state  of  Pará  has  the  largest  number  of  agricultural 
establishments  in  the  region,  which  increases  the  potential  for  insecurity  in  relation  to  the 
definition  of  property  rights.  Indeed,  as  Brito  and  Barreto  (2010)  have  pointed  out,  Pará  is 
one  of  the  regions  most  affected  by  uncertainties  regarding  land  tenure  in  the  Amazon. 
According to these authors, in 2010, 36% of the territory of Pará did not have  well-defined 
property rights and 70% of the total deforestation of the state was located in this part of the 
territory. 

Having  analysed  the  spatial  associations  of  the  four  factors  based  on  the 
interdependencies of the indicators in the municipalities of the Legal Amazon, it is opportune 

 

13 

to  investigate  if  such  factors,  defined as conditions,  show  sufficiency  relationships  with  the 
size  of  the  deforested  areas  in  these  regions.  Such  relationships  are  potentially  causal  and 
should  expose  the  particularities  of  empirical  agreement  between  these  four  conditions  and 
resulting  deforestation.  To  examine  this,  we  applied  QCA,  which  initially  transforms  these 
five  variables  into  fuzzy  sets,  providing  the  corresponding  degrees  of  membership  of  the 
municipalities  (or  cases).15  In  this  research,  each  set  is  represented  by  a  letter,  which  if 
uppercase (lowercase) depicts a high (low) conditional probability of the cases in each set, as 
follows: (D) Deforestation; (M) Typical Development; (F) Typical Family Environment; (C) 
Openness to Trade; (P) Property and Rural Scale. 
 

Table 5 – Matrix of sufficiency and necessity 

  
D 
M 
F 
C 
P 

D 

1.00 
0.61 
0.66 
0.65 
0.74 

M 
0.61 
1.00 
0.67 
0.79 
0.68 

F 

0.66 
0.67 
1.00 
0.66 
0.67 

C 

0.65 
0.79 
0.66 
1.00 
0.70 

P 

0.74 
0.68 
0.67 
0.70 
1.00 

Source: Research results. 

 

 

 

 

Independently,  one  can  ascertain  the  proportion  of  the  number  of  municipalities 
contained  in  each  of  the  four  conditions  that  coincides  with  deforestation,  which  should 
preliminarily  provide  the  respective  sufficiency  and  necessity  relationships.  Table  5  shows 
the proportion of the total overlap between pairs of sets, standardizing the coincidence scores 
by the respective set sizes. The Property and Rural Scale (P) set is the most sufficient in terms 
of  leading  to  Deforestation  (D)  as  the  possible  shared  areas  constitute  74%.  Despite  this 
significant overlap, Table 5 does not indicate the coverage rate and consistency, which would 
strictly  indicate  the  relations  of  necessity  and  sufficiency.  Or  rather,  it  is  not  possible  to 
indicate which of these two sets is contained in another and vice versa. The lowest registered 
coefficient  is  between  M  and  D,  signalling  that  characteristically  poorer  regions  are  not  as 
closely associated with a profile of a high degree of deforestation in the Legal Amazon. 

Nevertheless,  in  spite  of  this  preliminary  analysis,  it  is  necessary  to  test  the 
relationships  of  sufficiency,  as  well  as  to  derive  the  logical  combinations  that  cause  or  are 
associated with deforestation. Table 6 provides only those logical combinations that exhibit 
sufficient relationships with the strong and weak deforestation, statistically significant, whose 
respective consistencies are higher than 0.80, according to recommendations of Ragin (2000, 
2006).16 
 

Table 6 – Sufficient logical combinations 

Classification 

Logical 

Combinations 

High 

Deforestation 

 

mfcP 
mfCP 
mFcP 
mFCP 

 

Consistency 

D 

0.87 
0.88 
0.90 
0.88 

 

1–D 
0.79 
0.79 
0.75 
0.76 

 

F 

p-value 

9.46 
16.33 
34.52 
19.38 

 

0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 

 

Cases and Frequency 

Number  Relative  Accumulated 

48 
22 
57 
47 

 

6% 
3% 
7% 
6% 

 

6% 
9% 
17% 
23% 

 

                                                             
15 Parsimoniously, this transformation  varies  between 0 and 1 and  does  not  change the calibration standard of 
the qualitative anchors. 
16  The  number  of  municipalities  describes  those  that  present  a  score  higher  than  0.50  in  each  specific 
configuration. For more details, see Longest and Vaisey (2008). 

 

14 

Low 

Deforestation 

mfCp 

Mfcp 
MfCp 

MFcp 

0.83 

0.81 
0.76 

0.83 

0.88 

0.92 
0.92 

0.93 

4.51 

31.11 
54.14 

24.96 

0.03 

0.00 
0.00 

0.00 

12 

27 
54 

24 

2% 

4% 
7% 

3% 

24% 

28% 
35% 

38% 

Source: Research results. 
Notes:  “F”  represents  the  distribution  F  used  for  the  Wald  test  on  the  consistency  scores.  “Significant”  p-value 
denotes  that  the  consistency  D  and  1–D  are  statistically  different.  Column  “D”  evaluates  the  consistency  of  the 
combination with high D, while “1–D” evaluates the cases without high D. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

There are logical configurations that lead to or are associated  with high deforestation 
and those that exhibit sufficient relationships with the low deforestation score. Both settings 
are statistically significant at the 3% level. It can be noted that there are 54 municipalities, 7% 
of the total, that present a MfCp combination, i.e. relatively poorer regions (M), with families 
with low access to electricity, fecund and highly dependent (f), with a high level of openness 
to trade (C) and a low score in the property and rural scale factor (p), exhibiting a sufficient 
relation  with  low  deforested  areas  (1–D).  Altogether,  there  are  four  types  of  logical 
configurations that are related to low deforestation, reaching 15% of the total cases. 

On  the  other  hand,  Table  6  provides  the  primitive  expression  with  multiple  paths 
(multi-causality)  associated  with  high  deforestation  in  the  Legal  Amazon  (equifinality),  or 
better:  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   (3) 

 

 
However,  when  applying  the  Quine–McCluskey  minimization  algorithm,  it  can  be 
noticed  that  the  sets  “Typical  Family  Environment”  and  “Openness  to  Trade”  do  not 
influence  the  occurrence  of  high  deforestation.  The  condition  of  high  “Property  and  Rural 
Scale” (P) is necessary, but not sufficient, as it only leads to the “D” result if combined with 
“m”, that is, to a high degree of development. Thus, the condition “D” should not on its own 
produce  the  high  deforestation  in  the  Legal  Amazon  (D).  In  short,  after  the  minimization 
process, the following sufficient relationship was obtained: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

(4) 

As this is a qualitative comparative analysis, it is important to present the adjustment 
measures  of  the  model,  i.e.  the  coverage  and  the  consistency  of  the  solution.  The  logical 
configuration  “mP”  presents  consistency  of  85%  and  coverage  of  55%  for  the  high 
deforestation  in  the  Amazon.  Municipalities  with  high  development  and  high  property  and 
rural scale should generate or present high deforestation, but cover 55% of the cases observed 
for  this  configuration.  In  practice,  this  means  that  45%  of  the  deforestation  in  the  Legal 
Amazon is independent of this configuration. It should be noted that  generally in QCA, high 
consistency  measures  tend  to  be  associated  with  low  coverage,  with  consistency  being  the 
main  criterion  for  validating  the  results  generated.  Therefore,  expression  (4)  is  satisfactory, 
with  a  moderate  coverage  rate.  Figure  2  represents  the  spatial  distribution  of  the  “mP” 
configuration and the fuzzy set of deforestation. The maps in Figure 2 spatially illustrate the 
association of the reduced solution (4). It is observed that municipalities with high scores for 
the “mP” configuration, darker spots, are also those with higher values of deforestation on the 
map. 
 

Figure 2 – Logical configuration “mP” and deforestation (fuzzy) 

 

 

15 

DmFCPmFcPmfCPmfcPDmPSource: Research results elaborated based on Stata, GeoDa and ArcView GIS software. 
 
5  Final remarks 

 

 
The  objective  of  this  paper  has  been  to  find  dimensions  of  the  characteristics  of  the 
municipalities  of  the  Legal  Amazon  region  and  verify  how  these  dimensions  (factors)  are 
associated  with  deforestation.  For  this  purpose,  variables  with  data  for  the  year  2010  have 
been used to take into account economic aspects, social development and status in relation to 
land  tenure.  The  methods  used  to  perform  the  characterization  of  the  municipalities  were 
factor  analysis  and  ESDA.  To  verify  the  relationship  between  the  dimensions  found  and 
deforestation, QCA was used. 

Aspects  other  than  economic  ones  have  also  been  considered  with  the  objective  of 
developing  a  broader  characterization  based  on  social  conditions  and  basic  housing 
infrastructure,  which  not  only  reflect  the  situation  regarding  the  level  of  regional 
development, but also its association with deforestation. This  approach is in contrast to that 
commonly adopted in  the literature, which tends to focus on economic issues to explain the 
causes of deforestation in regions that have abundant forest resources, but which are notably 
less developed (Allen and Barnes, 1995; Angelsen and Kaimowitz, 1999). One of the results 
is  that  variables  related  to  social  issues  (e.g.  HDI-M,  basic  housing  infrastructure,  PCI  and 
proportion  of  poor)  are  the  main  dimensions  characterizing  the  municipalities  of  the  Legal 
Amazon. In addition, the issue of the family environment, openness to trade and property and 
rural scale are also found to be dimensions that characterize the municipalities of the region. 

The  family  environment  dimension  suggests  that  there  is  a  negative  relationship 
between the degree of access to electricity and fecundity rate and the dependence ratio in the 
region.  Openness  to  trade,  another  dimension  found,  represents  one  of  the  main  economic 
measures  for  defining  the  profile  of  the  municipalities  in  the  region.  Not  all  municipalities 
carry out foreign trade, but those that do so tend to market primary goods, mainly goods from 
forest resources. The issue of insecurity with respect to property rights also represents another 
dimension  found,  but  the  result  better  represents  a  measure  that  synthesizes  both  the 
proprietary status of land and the rural population. 

The  results  also  indicate  that  deforestation  tends  to  be  higher  in  municipalities  that 
have,  at  the  same  time,  relatively  greater  development,  a  high  number  of  agricultural 
establishments under ownership and a rural population. Put another way, deforestation tends 
to be larger when there is a greater rural density coupled with higher income per capita and 
HDI-M,  for  example.  Therefore,  deforestation  in  the  region  may  be  closely  related  to  the 
intensity  of  agricultural  practices.  This  argument  reinforces  the  hypothesis  that  one  of  the 
major  problems  of  forest  conservation  in  the  region  is  related  to  the  expansion  of  the 
agricultural  frontier.  Increasing  soybean  production  and  pasture  areas  are  the  main 

 

16 

determinants  of  this  expansion  (Margulis  et  al.,  2004).  Although  there  are  already 
mechanisms  in  place  to  help  discourage  the  private  marketing  of  soy  produced  from 
deforestation (e.g. companies in the Amazon region that buy a fixed amount of product from 
each  establishment),  it  is  not  possible  to  trace  the  origin  of  all  production.  Coordinated 
policies or actions between companies and public authorities could help increase the number 
and quality of inspections to reduce the incentives for deforestation in the region. 
 
References 
Allen,  J.C.  and  D.F.  Barnes  (1985),  'The  causes  of  deforestation  in  developing  countries', 
Annals of the Association of American Geographers 75(2): 163–184. 

Angelsen,  A.  (1999),  'Agricultural  expansion  and  deforestation:  modelling  the  impact  of 
population,  market  forces,  and  property  rights',  Journal  of  Development  Economics 
58(1):185–218. 

Angelsen, A. and D. Kaimowitz (1999), 'Rethinking the causes of deforestation: lessons from 
economic models', The World Bank Research Observer 14(1): 73–98. 

Anselin,  L.  (1995),  'Local  indicators  of  spatial  association  –  LISA',  Geographical  Analysis 
27(2): 93–115. 

Anselin,  L.  (1996),  'The  Moran  scatterplot  as  an  ESDA  tool  to  assess  local  instability  in 
spatial  association',  in  H.  J.  Fischer  and  D.  Unwin  Scholten  (eds.),  Spatial  Analytical 
Perspectives on GIS, London: Taylor & Francis, pp. 111–125. 

Araujo, C., C.A. Bonjean, J.L. Combes, P.C. Motel, and J.E. Reis (2009), 'Property rights and 
deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon', Ecological Economics 68: 2461–2468.  

Araujo, C., C.A. Bonjean, J.L. Combes, P.C. Motel, and J.E. Reis (2010), 'Does land tenure 
insecurity  drive  deforestation  in  the  Brazilian  Amazon?',  CerdI,  Etudes  et  Documents,  E 
2010.13. 

Barbier, E. (2000), 'Links between economic liberalization and rural resource degradation in 
the developing regions', Agricultural Economics 23: 299–310. 

Barbier, E. (2001), 'The economics of tropical deforestation and land use: an introduction to 
the special issue', Land Economics 77(2): 155–171. 

Bartlett,  M.S.  (1937),  'The  statistical  conception  of  mental  factors',  British  Journal  of 
Psychology. General Section 28(1): 97–104. 

Bluffstone,  R.A.  (1995),  'The  effect  of  labor  market  performance  on  deforestation  in 
developing  countries  under  open  access:  an  example  from  rural  Nepal',  Journal  of 
Environmental Economics and Management 29: 42–63. 

Brandão,  A.A.P.,  G.C.  Rezende,  and  R.W.C.  Marques  (2006),  'Crescimento  Agrícola  no 
Período  1999/2004:  A  Explosão  da  Soja e  da  Pecuária  Bovina  e  seu  Impacto  sobre  o  Meio 
Ambiente', Economia Aplicada 10(1): 249–266. 

Brito, B. and P. Barreto (2010), 'The impacts of the new land laws in defining property rights 
in Pará. Report Imazon', [Available at] www.imazon.org.br . 

 

17 

Chomitz, K.M. and T.S. Thomas (2003), 'Determinants of land use in Amazonia: a fine-scale 
spatial analysis', American Journal of Agricultural Economics 85(4): 1016–1028. 

Diegues,  A.C.  (1996),  'The  social  dynamics  of  deforestation  in  the  Brazilian  Amazon:  an 
overview',  United  Nations  Research  Institute  for  Social  Development  (UNRISD) 
Publications, 
at] 
http://www.unrisd.org/80256B3C005BCCF9/(httpPublications)/4DF569C03BC4FE5480256
B640055E523?OpenDocument&panel=relatedinformation . 

[Available 

Ebeling,  J. and  M.  Yasué  (2008),  'Generating  carbon  finance  through  avoided  deforestation 
and  its  potential  to  create  climatic,  conservation  and  human  development  benefits', 
Philosophical Transactions of Royal Society B, 363: 1917–1924. 

Faria,  W.R.  and  A.N.  Almeida  (2016),  'Relationship  between  openness  to  trade  and 
deforestation:  empirical  evidence  from  the  Brazilian  Amazon',  Ecological  Economics  121: 
85–97. 

Fearnside, P.M. (1990), 'Environmental destruction in the Brazilian Amazon', in D. Goodman 
and  A.  Hall  (eds),  The  Future  of  Amazonia  Destruction  or  Sustainable  Development?, 
London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, pp. 179–225. 

Fearnside,  P.M.  (2001),  'Land–tenure  issues  as  factors  in  environmental  destruction  in 
Brazilian Amazonia: the case of Southern Pará', World Development 29(8): 1361–1372. 

Ferreira, S. (2004),  'Deforestation, property rights, and international trade', Land Economics 
80(2): 174–193. 

Flynn,  B.B.,  S.  Sakakibara,  R.G.  Schroeder,  K.A.  Bates,  and  E.J.  Flynn  (1990),  'Empirical 
research methods in operations management', Journal of Operations Management 9(2): 250–
284. 

Fujisaka,  S.,  W.  Bell,  N.  Thomas,  L.  Hurtado,  and  E.  Crawford  (1996),  'Slash-and-burn 
agriculture,  conversion  to  pasture,  and  deforestation  in  two  Brazilian  Amazon  colonies', 
Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment 59(1–2): 115–130. 

Ganter,  A.  and  A.  Hecker  (2014),  'Configurational  paths  to  organizational  innovation: 
aualitative  comparative  analyses  of  antecedents  and  contingencies',  Journal  of  Business 
Research 67(6): 1285–1292. 

Hair,  J.F.,  W.C.  Black,  B.J.  Babin,  and  R.E.  Anderson  (1998),  Multivariate  Data  Analysis, 
5th ed., New York: Prentice Hall International. 

Hargrave,  J.  and  K.  Kis–Katos  (2013),  'Economic  causes  of  deforestation  in  the  Brazilian 
Amazon:  a  panel  data  analysis  for  the  2000s',  Environmental  and  Resource  Economics  54: 
471–494. 

Human  Development  Atlas  in  Brazil  (2013),  'Rio  de  Janeiro,  PNUD,  IPEA,  Fundação João 
Pinheiro', [Available at] http://www.atlasbrasil.org.br/2013/pt/consulta/ . 

IBGE  –  Instituto  Brasileiro  de  Geografia  e  Estatística  (2016),  'Cadastro  de  Municípios 
localizados 
at] 
http://www.ibge.gov.br/home/geociencias/geografia/amazonialegal.shtm?c=2 .  

[Available 

Amazônia 

Janeiro, 

Legal', 

Rio 

de 

na 

 

18 

IBGE –  Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística  (2012), 'Censos  Agropecuários 1995–
1996 
at] 
http://www.ibge.gov.br/home/estatistica/economia/agropecuaria/censoagro/default.shtm .  

[Available 

Janeiro, 

2006', 

Rio 

de 

e 

INPE (2016), 'PRODES: Monitoramento da Floresta Amazônica por Satélite', [Available at] 
www.obt.inpe.br/prodes/.  

Johnson, R.A. and D.W. Wichern (2007), Applied Multivariate Statistical  Analysis, 6th ed., 
Englewood Cliffs: Prentice–Hall.  

Kaiser,  H.F.  (1958),  'The  varimax  criterion  for  analytic  rotation  in  factor  analysis', 
Psychometrika 23(3): 187–200. 

Legewie,  N.  (2013),  'An  introduction  to  applied  data  analysis  with  qualitative  comparative 
analysis (QCA)', Forum: Qualitative Social Research 14(3): 1–45.  

Longest,  K.C.  and  S.  Vaisey  (2008),  'Fuzzy:  a  program  for  performing  qualitative 
comparative analyses (QCA) in Stata', Stata Journal 8(1): 79–104. 

López, R. and G.I. Galinato (2005), 'Trade policies, economic growth and the direct causes of 
deforestation', Land Economics 81(2): 145–169. 

Mahar,  D.J.  (1989),  'Government  policies  and  deforestation  in  Brazilian  Amazon  region', 
Report 8910, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and The World Bank, 
Washington: The World Bank, pp. 56. 

Margulis, S. (2004), 'Causes of deforestation of the Brazilian Amazon', World Bank Working 
Paper N. 22, Washington: The World Bank, pp. 78. 

McAlpine,  C.A.,  A.  Etter,  P.M.  Fearnside,  L.  Seabrook,  and  W.F.  Laurance  (2009), 
'Increasing  world  consumption  of  beef  as  a  driver  of  regional  and  global  change:  a  call  for 
policy action based on evidence from Queensland (Australia), Colombia and Brazil', Global 
Environmental Change 19: 21–33. 

Mingoti,  S.A.  (2007),  Análise  de  dados  de  métodos  de  estatística  multivariada:  uma 
abordagem aplicada, Belo Horizonte: Editora UFMG. 

Painter,  M.  and  W.H.  Durham  (1995),  The  Social  Causes  of  Environmental  Destruction  in 
Latin America, Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press. 

Pfaff,  A.S.  (1999),  'What  drives  deforestation  in  the  Brazilian  Amazon?',  Journal  of 
Environmental Economics and Management 37(1): 25–43. 

Ragin, C.C. (1987), The Comparative Method: Moving Beyond Qualitative and Quantitative 
Strategies, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.  

Ragin, C.C. (2000), Fuzzy–Set Social Science, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.  

Ragin,  C.C.  (2006),  'Set  relations  in  social  research:  evaluating  their  consistency  and 
coverage', Political Analysis 14(3): 291–310. 

Rihoux,  B.  and  C.C.  Ragin  (2009),  'Configurational  comparative  methods:  qualitative 

 

19 

comparative  analysis  (QCA)  and  related  techniques',  Applied  Social  Research  Methods 
Series, 51, Los Angeles: SAGE Publications. 

Schneider, C.Q. and B.  Grofman (2006), 'It might look like a regression equation… but it’s 
not!  An  intuitive  approach  to the  presentation  of  fsQCA  and  FS/QCA  results',  Unpublished 
manuscript, 
[Available  at]  http://www.suz.uzh.ch/dam/jcr:d562d9c5–b9b6–47eb–add6–
09d630ae4d2a/Text_26.pdf . 

Schneider,  C.Q.  and  C.  Wagemann  (2010),  'Standards  of  good  practice  in  qualitative 
comparative analysis (QCA) and fuzzy-sets', Comparative Sociology 9(3): 397–418. 

Spearman,  C.  (1904),  '“General  intelligence,”  objectively  determined  and  measured',  The 
American Journal of Psychology 15(2): 201–292. 

 

20 

