Long-run Eﬀects of Conditional Cash Transfers †

Michael Christian Lehmann‡

July 2013

ANPEC: ´Area 12 - Economia Social e Demograﬁa Econˆomica

Abstract: There is a growing literature on Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) programs, like Bolsa Familia
in Brazil or Progresa in Mexico. Very little, however, is known regarding the long-term eﬀects of these
programs. Using a structural model that is calibrated to the well known Progresa randomized control trial,
this paper studies how treatment eﬀects could evolve over time. The increase in cash recipients’ utility is
found to be smaller in the long-run.
Keywords: General Equilibrium Eﬀects, Impact Evaluation, Structural Modelling

Resumo: H´a muitos estudos sobre programas de transferˆencia de renda, como por exemplo o programa
Bolsa Fam´ılia no Brasil ou o Progresa no M´exico. Muito pouco, no entanto, ´e conhecido acerca dos efeitos
de longo prazo destes programas. Este artigo estuda como os efeitos do programa poderiam evoluir ao longo
do tempo, usando um modelo estrutural que ´e calibrado para dados de Progresa. A an´alise sugere que o
aumento na utilidade dos beneﬁci´arios ´e menor no longo prazo.
Palavras-chave: Efeitos de equil´ıbrio geral, avalia¸c˜ao de impacto, modelagem estrutural

JEL Classiﬁcation: E21, H43, I38, O12, O17.

1

Introduction

By addressing problems of selection eﬀects, simultaneity bias, and omitted variables the recent wave of ran-
domized control trials (RCTs) has generated much knowledge on the causal impact of an aid intervention
on consumption of recipients (Banerjee and Duﬂo, 2009). Taking the example of the well-known Progresa
conditional cash transfer randomized experiment, I explore what more can be learned about the interven-
tion’s consumption eﬀect if the experimental data is analyzed within a general equilibrium framework. I
develop a simple general equilibrium model which elicits how cash transfers change the commodity and fac-
tor market equilibrium of the village economy, and how these changes in turn shape the treatment eﬀects of
the intervention. I ﬁnd that the general equilibrium framework helps to provide a structural interpretation
for the signs and magnitudes of the (reduced-form) treatment eﬀects observed from the experimental data.

Using an empirical version of the model that is calibrated to the experimental data, I study how treatment
eﬀects could evolve over time. My simulated long-run consumption eﬀects of Progresa diﬀer quite a bit from
the shorter run eﬀects observed in the experimental data.

Between October 1999 and March 1999 the Mexican adminstration relaxed Progresa’s eligibility require-
ments. Consequently, the share of village residents receiving cash transfers increased from about 50 percent
to roughly 80 percent. My general equilibrium analysis suggest, quite interestingly, that this within-village
expansion (scale-up) may have changed the magnitudes of the program’s consumption eﬀects. For example,
the average treatment eﬀect on non-food consumption seems to be lower after the scale-up, while that on
food consumption seems to be higher.

†I thank Fran¸cois Bourguignon for his guidance. I beneﬁted from conversations with Martin Ravallion (George-
town), Francisco Ferreira (World Bank), Fabio Veras (IPEA), Ken Wolpin (UPenn), Jere Behrman (UPenn), Alain de
Janvry (Berkeley), Frederico Finan (Berkeley), Giaccomo de Giorgi (Stanford), Chris Blattman (Columbia), Miguel
Szekely (Mexican Government), Raquel Tsukada (UNU-MERIT), Catherine Guirkinger (Namur), Phillipe de Vreyer
(Paris-Dauphine), Marc Gurgand (PSE), Karen Marcours (PSE). All errors are mine.

‡University of Brasilia. Email:clehmann@unb.br

1

I also explore how sensitive treatment eﬀects are to the local context, and hence how far one can extrapolate
from the observed treatment eﬀects to diﬀerent environments.

The structural model helps to better understand how the eﬀects of cash transfers extend beyond those
households receiving them. I ﬁnd, perhaps surprisingly, that Progresa may have adversely aﬀected the wel-
fare of some program-ineligible households residing in the same villages as cash transfer recipients. At the
same time, however, my model provides some guidance how the program may be designed to mitigate these
adverse aﬀects.

Theoretically pinning down how program eﬀects ’spill-over’ to non-targeted populations (including the con-
trol group) further allows to better understand how well identiﬁed treatment eﬀects are in which environment.

The paper contributes to several diﬀerent strings of literatures. First, the paper adds to a small literature
combing both structural and reduced-form techniques to generate a richer policy analysis. The ‘reduced-
form approach’ adopted by the majority of program evaluations has been criticized by some for the narrow
set of questions that can be answered with it (Heckman and Vytlacil (2005), Rodrik (Rodrik), Rosenzweig
and Wolpin (2000), Deaton (2010)). These authors argue that highly policy relevant questions (e.g. what
would be the eﬀect of a nation-wide program?’, ‘in how far can one generalize from results to diﬀerent
contexts?’, or ‘what would happen if we change some parameters of the program?) can only be adequately
addressed by using structural models. Proponents of the reduced-form approach, on the other hand, argue
that the latter needs fewer and less severe assumptions than the structural approach (Banerjee and Duﬂo
(2009); Imbens and Wooldridge (2009); Duﬂo et al. (2007)). Despite the obvious advantages of both the
structural and the reduced-form approach, few attempts have been made to combine the two approaches
(Todd and Wolpin (2006), Attanasio et al. (2012), Lise et al. (2004), Kaboski and Townsend (2012)). The
studies most relevant to my analysis are (Todd and Wolpin (2006) and Attanasio et al. (2012), who combine
a structural model with data from the Progresa randomized control trial. While their models are designed to
study the schooling impacts of Progresa, my model is designed to study the consumption eﬀects of Progresa.
My model, for example, explicitly incorporates the general equilibrium eﬀect of higher consumption demand
on local prices and wages. Diﬀerent from their analysis, I attempt (1) to provide a structural interpretation
for the consumption eﬀects of the cash transfer program, (2) to distinguish between short, medium, and
long-run consumption eﬀects, (3) to look at scaling-up eﬀects, and (4) to study the spillover eﬀects on
consumption of the rest of the population not targeted by the cash transfer program.

Second, I extend the literature on general equilibrium eﬀects of social policies. Heckman et al. (1998) argue
that program eﬀects estimated for small-scale pilot interventions (as is the standard practice in the program
evaluation literature) may change substantially when the program reaches a larger scale (e.g. nation-wide
implementation). This is because a large-scale program is likely to aﬀect the general equilibrium of the econ-
omy. And because program eﬀects are functions of general equilibrium prices and wages, program eﬀects do
change as well. Yet, despite the importance of the topic (because in the end, governments want to implement
large-scale interventions and not small scale pilot programs), general equilibrium eﬀects of social policies are
largely understudied in the literature.1 Taylor et al. (2005) and Coady and Harris (2004) use computable
general equilibrium models to study general equilibrium eﬀects of cash transfers. My analysis diﬀers from
theirs in at least three ways. First, while their models are designed to study the eﬀects of cash transfers on
economic eﬃciency, agricultural production and related variables (land rents, agricultural wages, produc-
tion), my model instead is designed to provide a detailed analysis of non-agricultural production and related
variables (e.g. prices of non-food items, non-agricultural wages). Second, my model is calibrated to the
control group of the Progresa randomized experiment rather than social accounting matrices (SAMs) from
conventional household survey data. This allows me, in the vein of Todd and Wolpin (2006) and Lise et al.
(2004), to test the model by comparing simulated treatment eﬀects with actual treatment eﬀects. Third,
my analysis looks at potential scaling-up eﬀects. Quite interestingly, my analysis suggest that a scale-up of

1Results of Heckman et al. (1998) and Duﬂo (2004) suggest that policies which encourage school attendance may
reduce future wages. Buera et al. (2012) predict that microﬁnance will lead to a more eﬃcient distribution of capital
and entrepreneurs in the economy, which will increase demand for labor hence wages. Empirically, this prediction is
supported by Kaboski and Townsend (2011) and Kaboski and Townsend (2012), who ﬁnd increasing wages following
the introduction of a large-scale microﬁnance initiative in Thailand. See also Townsend (2010) for a discussion of
general equilibrium eﬀects in credit markets in developing countries.

2

the program (i.e. increasing the number of beneﬁciaries) may change quite substantially the magnitudes of
the eﬀects of cash transfers on consumption eﬀects. The average treatment eﬀect on non-food consumption
seems to be lower after the scale-up, while that on food consumption seems to be higher.

Third, I contribute to the program evaluation literature on consumption eﬀects of cash transfer programs.
Angelucci and De Giorgi (2009), Hoddinott and Skouﬁas (2004), Soares et al. (2010), Maluccio and Flores
(2005), Attanasio and Mesnard (2006), Fizbein and Schady (2009) report consumption eﬀects of cash trans-
fers for the major cash transfer programs in Mexico, Brazil, Nicaragua, and Ecuador, respectively. Yet, it
is unclear from these exclusively empirical studies why the reported magnitudes are what they are, and not
higher or lower. Also across studies, there is signiﬁcant variation in the consumption impacts (lower impacts
are found in Brazil and Ecuador, higher impacts in Mexico and Nicaragua). These diﬀerences can partly be
explained by diﬀerences in timing of surveys and the method of measurement, as well as diﬀerences in the
size of transfers. My analysis unveils some of the structure underlying the reduced-form treatment eﬀect
reported in these studies. I analytically derive the consumption treatment eﬀect as a function of household,
village, and program characteristics. This helps to interpret the magnitudes reported in the above mentioned
empirical studies. Furthermore, King and Behrman (2009) point out an existing knowledge gap regarding
the relationship between timing of an evaluation and estimated impacts. By studying how treatment eﬀects
evolve over time, my analysis may eventually contribute to narrowing this gap. In the case of Progresa,
the Mexican government decided to conduct three follow-up surveys: 6 months, 12 months, and 18 months
after Progresa was launched. Suppose the Mexican government would have decided, instead of conducting
these follow-ups, to have only one follow-up some 24 months after Progresa was launched. My results, for
example, suggest that the latter follow-up survey would have measured a higher treatment eﬀect on food
consumption (and a lower eﬀect for non-food consumption) than the previous follow-ups.

Fourth, I contribute to a small literature on spillover eﬀects of social policies on other households not
targeted by the policy. The majority of impact evaluations look exclusively at the eﬀect of the program
on those households receiving the aid intervention. Yet, general equilibrium eﬀects, kinship networks, and
other linkages between aid recipients and non-recipients are likely to extend the eﬀects of program way
beyond targeted households. Knowledge on how these non-targeted households are aﬀected is important for
calculating the overall welfare eﬀect of a social policy. For example, positive eﬀects for aid recipients may
appear in a diﬀerent light when weighed against potentially adverse spillover eﬀects on the non-targeted
population. Despite their importance, such spillover eﬀects have received little attention. Miguel and
Kremer (2004) ﬁnd that anti-worm treatment to some individuals, because of reducing disease transmission,
generate large beneﬁts for other individuals not receiving treatment. In terms of cash transfer programs,
Bobonis and Finan (2009) and Lalive and Cattaneo (2009) ﬁnd that school enrollment of Progresa-ineligible
household is higher in treatment villages vis-a-vis control villages.
In another seminal paper, Angelucci
and De Giorgi (2009) ﬁnd higher food consumption of Progresa-ineligible households in treatment vis-a-
vis control villages.2 My analysis helps to further pin down the mechanisms underlying the latter eﬀect.
Angelucci and De Giorgi (2009) hypothesize that increase in food consumption of ineligible households is a
consequence of lower pre-cautionary grain savings. My structural analysis suggests that general equilibrium
eﬀects in factor and commodity markets may play an important role as well. While Angelucci and De Giorgi
(2009) ﬁnd no eﬀect on average non-food consumption of ineligible households, my model reveals that this
average eﬀect masks a signiﬁcant degree of heterogeneity. For example, model and data suggest heterogenous
impacts depending on a household’s labor endowment. Lastly, using the parameter values obtained from
the calibration of the model, I am able to calculate the program eﬀects on utility. Astonishingly perhaps,
my analysis suggests that despite the increase in food consumption documented by Angelucci and De Giorgi
(2009) (and depending on the form of the utility function), welfare of some program-ineligible households
may potentially decrease.

2In a more recent paper, Bandiera et al. (2009) look at the eﬀects of a large-scale asset transfer and training
programme which is targeted at the poorest women in rural Bangladesh. They ﬁnd evidence for wealth spillover on
households not eligible for the intervention but living in the same community.

3

2 Theory

2.1 The Model

Consider a village populated by g = 2 groups of households: poorer households (Ps) and somewhat richer
households (Rs)
g ∈ {P, R}

(1)

Household i in group g has two sources of initial endowment. First, a share ¯λ{i,g} of the village’s staple
endowment ¯Q. Second, its stock of labor ¯L{i,g}, net of labor needed to produce the staple household’s staple
endowment. The simpliﬁcation of an exogenous staple endowment allows to keep the analysis analytically
tractable. It further helps to maintain the analytical focus of the analysis on the non-food sector. This
sector, so the analysis suggests, is quite important to better understand the structure of the consumption
eﬀects of cash transfers in (local) general equilibrium. The household consumes part of its endowment (I
denote consumption of the staple henceforth q{i,g}), and liquidates the remainder to purchase a non-food
commodity x{i,g} (e.g. batteries).
Assumption A.1 The staple is produced inside the village, while the non-food commodity is produced outside
the village.

Thus, the non-food commodity needs to be imported into village. Assumption A.1 reﬂects the fact that rural
areas usually specialize in agricultural production, while importing manufactured and services from urban
areas items (e.g. batteries). For example, for the Mexican data that I’ll be using at a later point, at least
80 percent of the adult village population report agriculture as their main occupation. At the same time,
about half of the monthly value of consumption are non-food items such as hygiene products (e.g. soap,
combs, tooth and hair brushes, detergents, whiteners), household utensils (ollas, platos, cazuelas, sartenes,
sabanas, toallas y cobijas), industrialized clothing, tennis shoes and boots, school supplies (pens and paper),
and energy (batteries, gas, carbon, petrol). Given the latters’ industrialized nature and the aforementioned
high share of labor force employed in agriculture, these non-food items are unlikely to be produced by the
village. Importing these items implies transactions costs:

Assumption A.2 For each unit of consumption of x it is required one unit of labor.

The village price of x is consequently px = ¯pχ +pL, where ¯pχ is the factory price of x and pL being the price of
labor. The interpretation of x is not necessarily limited to consumption of imported non-food commodities.
It can also be thought of as a consumed service. Think of, for example, a carpenter service: In this case ¯pχ
may be the remuneration of the wood and tools that the carpenter is using, and pL the remuneration of the
carpenter’s labor.

Assumption A.3 Utilities are comparable between households, and each household maximizes a utility

function that represents its reﬂexive, transitive, complete, continuous, and convex preferences.

The utility function of i writes u{i,g}(q{i,g}, x{i,g}, l{i,g}) where l{i,g} is consumption of leisure.
Assumption A.4 All agents treat prices as parametric, and no trade is permitted to take place except at
equilibrium prices.
Household i chooses a consumption bundle {q{i,g}, x{i,g}, l{i,g}} which maximizes its utility function subject
to the household’s budget constraint:

max

u{i,g}(q{i,g}, x{i,g}, l{i,g})

s.t.

q{i,g},x{i,g},l{i,g}
px × x{i,g} + ¯pq × q{i,g} ≡ [ ¯L{i,g} − l{i,g}]pL + [λ{i,g} × ¯Q]¯pq + T{i,g}

(3)
where T{i,g} is a cash transfer granted by the government exclusively to g ∈ P, i.e. T{i,P} > 0 and T{i,R} =
0. Under the maintained assumption of strict quasi concavity of the utility function, the solution of the
household’s maximization problem will result in a demand function for the food item

(2)

q{i,g} : (pL, T{i,g}, Ω) → (cid:60)

(4)

4

the non-food item

x{i,g} : (pL, T{i,g}, Ω) → (cid:60)

and a labor supply function (L{i,g} = ¯L − l{i,g})

L{i,g} : (pL, T{i,g}, Ω) → (cid:60)

(5)

(6)

as functions of the village’s wage rate (pL), the parameter vector Ω={¯pχ, ¯pq, ¯L{i,g}, ¯λ{i,g}, ¯Q}, and the cash
transfer T{i,g}.

2.2 Program Eﬀects in Partial Equilibrium

In partial equilibrium the village wage rate pL is exogenous.

PROPOSITION 2.1 (Partial equilibrium) Under assumptions A.1-A.4 and in partial equilib-
rium, we have that ∂x{i,P}/∂T{i,P} > 0 and ∂q{i,P}/∂T{i,P} > 0. For g ∈ R, however, ∂q{i,R}/∂T{i,P} =
x{i,R}/∂T{i,P} = 0.
Proof. A utility function which fulﬁlls the preference requirements of assumption A.2 is the Cobb-Douglas
utility function3

u{i,g}(q{i,g}, x{i,g}, l{i,g}) = q

{αq}
i

{αx}
i

{1−αq−αx}
l
i

x

with 0 < αq + αx < 1.

Utility maximization then yields demand and labor supply functions of the form

q{i,g} = ¯αq[ ¯L × pL + λ{i,g} × ¯Q × ¯pq + T{i,g}]/¯pq
x{i,g} = ¯αx[ ¯L × pL + λ{i,g} × ¯Q × ¯pq + T{i,g}]/[¯pχ + pL]
L{i,g} = ¯L{i,g} − [1 − ¯αq − ¯αx][ ¯L × pL + λ{i,g} × ¯Q × ¯pq + T{i,g}]/pL

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Deriving with respect to T{i,P} yields ∂q{i,P}/∂T{i,P} = αq/pq > 0, and ∂x{i,P}/∂T{i,P} = αx/[pχ + pL] > 0,
and ∂L{i,P}/∂T{i,P} = −[1 − αq − αx]/pL < 0. For g ∈ R we have ∂x{i,R}/∂T{i,P} = ∂q{i,R}/∂T{i,P} = 0
and ∂L{i,R}/∂T{i,P} = 0. (cid:4)
In partial equilibrium, the cash transfer generates a positive income eﬀect for g ∈ P. The latter shifts the
budget constraint outwards. Therefore, demand for q{i,P}, x{i,P} and l{i,P} increases. The income eﬀect for
g ∈ R is zero and, consequently, demand remains unchanged.

Empirical evidence rejects the predictions of the partial equilibrium model.
In particular, the negative
relationship between the cash transfer and recipient’s labor supply is not supported by existing empirical
evidence (Parker and Skouﬁas, 2000). Furthermore, Angelucci and De Giorgi (2009) show that food con-
sumption of program-ineligible households increases, whereas the partial equilibrium model predicts that
g ∈ R is not aﬀected.

2.3 Local General Equilibrium

In general equilibrium, the village’s labor market equilibrium writes

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

L{i,g} ≡(cid:88)

(cid:88)

x{i,g}

(11)

g

i

g

i

where the left hand side is the village’s aggregate labor supply, and by assumption A.2 the right hand side
being the village’s aggregate labor demand. Equation (11) assumes that the village labor market is local
(i.e. limited to the village’s population). This assumption is corroborated by data from the 2002 Encuesta

3Proposition 2.1, however, holds for every other utility function which fulﬁls the preference requirements of A.2.

5

Nacional de Hogares Rurales (a representative household survey of rural mexico), where only six percent of
adult village residents report to do non-agricultural work in a diﬀerent village. I am not aware of any studies
looking at cross-village migration in Mexico. Existing studies exploit the Mexican census, where respondents
are asked the state in which they were born (Bush, 1993). It is however diﬃcult to conclude from cross-state
migration about cross-village migration, because it is unclear to which extent cross-state migration simply
reﬂects rural-to-urban migration. But several factors suggest that the magnitude of cross-village migration
to be rather low. First, land markets are often imperfect, which may constraints the acquisition of land of
emigrants (Finan et al., 2005). Second, formal credit and insurance markets are imperfect hence informal
insurance networks with other village members a dominant source of insurance (Fafchamps and Lund, 2003).
Thus, emigration is costly, because it may disconnect emigrants from these networks. Furthermore, there
are no large supermarket/retail chains (which receive products from its urban area headquarters) in these
villages.

PROPOSITION 2.2 (General equilibrium) Under assumptions A.1-A.4, ∂q{i,R}/∂T{i,P} > 0.
However, ∂x{i,R}/∂T{i,P} > 0 only if (1) labor endowment of i ∈ R is suﬃciently large, or (2)
staple endowment of i ∈ R is suﬃciently low.
Proof. Substituting (9) and (10) into (11) and solving for pL yields

p∗
L =

(cid:80)
i T{i,P} + ¯Q × ¯pq − ¯αx ¯pχ

¯pχ[(¯αx − 1)( ¯Q × ¯pq +(cid:80)
(cid:80)
¯L{i,g} > [(cid:80)

(cid:80)

(cid:80)

g

i

Assumption A.5: ¯αx

Note that the equilibrium wage is positive only if

(cid:80)

i T{i,P})]

¯L{i,g}

i

g

i T{i,P} + ¯Q × ¯pq]/¯pχ,

.

(12)

i.e.
if the village’s aggregate labor endowment is large enough to allow the village’s aggregate consump-
tion demand for x to be satisﬁed. Substituting (12) into (8) and deriving with respect to T{i,P} yields
∂q{i,R}/∂T{i,P} > 0.
Substituting (12) into (9) and deriving with respect to TP yields

[ ¯L{i,R} ¯pχ − ¯λ{i,R} ¯Q¯pq][¯αx − 1](cid:80)
¯L{i,g} ¯pχ − ¯Q¯pq −(cid:80)
−((cid:80)

(cid:80)

g

i

(cid:80)

¯L{i,g}

i

g
i T{i,P})2

∂x{i,R}
∂T{i,P}

=

(13)

By assumption A.5 the denominator in equation (13) is always negative. Since ¯αx < 1, the term [¯αx − 1] in
the numerator is always negative. Consequently, the sign of ∂x{i,R}/∂T{i,P} will depend on the sign of the
ﬁrst term in brackets in the numerator. We have that

∂x{i,R}
∂T{i,P}

> 0 if ¯L{i,R} > ¯λ{i,R} ¯Q¯pq/¯pχ. (cid:4)

(14)

The intuition behind proposition 2.2 is the following: The cash grant increases cash recipients’ demand
for non-food items. Importation of these items requires labor. The village’s labor demand increases, raising
the village’s equilibrium wage.4 A higher wage, however, has an a priori ambiguous eﬀect on non-food
consumption of the remainder of the village population not receiving cash transfers. On the one hand,
higher wages imply a positive income eﬀect which ceteris paribus increases consumption of non-food items.
On the other hand, because px = pχ + pL, higher wages raise the village price of these non-food items,
making their consumption more expensive. Consumption of program-ineligible households decreases if the
price eﬀect outweighs the income eﬀect. This is the case, according to condition (14), when the program-
ineligible household’s labor demand (pertaining to the household’s consumption of the imported good) is
larger than the labor that the household is able to supply. In this case, the household relies on labor from
other households. When labor becomes more expensive, the household is then forced to reduce consumption
of non-food items.

4

∂p∗
∂T{i,P}

L

=

−[¯α(cid:80)

g

(cid:80)
¯L{i,g} ¯pχ −(cid:80)

¯αx[¯αx − 1]¯p2

(cid:80)

χ

g

i

(cid:80)
i T{i,P} − ¯Q × ¯pq]2

¯L{i,g}

i

6

> 0

(15)

The distinction between food and non-food consumption is important. Cash grants increase recipients’
demand for both food and non-food items. For food items, however, the price eﬀect is zero, because the
village is a net seller of staple. Furthermore, food items are produced by the village and their consumption
is therefore not subject to transaction costs linked to importation.5 The absence of a price eﬀect and the
positive income eﬀect resulting from higher within village wages, therefore, generates exclusively positive
externalities on ineligibles’ food consumption.

3 Data and Empirical Strategy

3.1 Data

In 1997, the Mexican government started the so called Progresa program with the aim of reducing rural
poverty and inequality (Schultz, 2004). The program provides monetary grants the poorest households of
a village.6 Progresa monetary grants are of substantial size, amounting to about 20 percent of average
household monetary income in rural Mexico.

The program was initially not implemented simultaneously in all villages. In 1997, the Mexican government
determined all eligible households. Then, a set of villages where the program ought to be implemented
ﬁrst was chosen randomly. Households classiﬁed as ‘poor’ in these villages would receive the ﬁrst Progresa
transfer payment in early 1998. The remaining villages would only be incorporated into the program two
years later. Households classiﬁed as ‘poor’ in these villages would receive the ﬁrst Progresa transfer only
in early 2000. The latter, therefore, serve as a control group for the years 1998 and 1999. In some 320
villages where the program would be implemented ﬁrst (henceforth referred to as ‘treatment villages’) and
in another 186 villages where the program would start two years later (henceforth referred to as ‘control
villages’) the Mexican government conducted a comprehensive baseline, and three follow-up surveys between
October 1998 and November 1999. These surveys are village censuses, i.e. data on all residents of these 506
villages was collected. We thus have a panel of the entire village population, consisting of program-eligible
households and program-ineligible households, in each of the 320 treatment and 186 control villages.

3.2 Empirical Strategy

Proposition 2.2 elicits that non-food consumption of a household not receiving cash grants (but residing in
a village with households that do) does increase only if (1) the household’s labor endowment is suﬃciently
large, or (2) the household’s staple endowment is suﬃciently low. This implies that, ﬁrst, the smaller
the household size of a Progresa-ineligible household residing in a treatment village, the lower Progresa’s
eﬀect on this household’s non-food consumption. Second, the larger the cultivated land of a Progresa-
ineligible household residing in a treatment village, the lower Progresa’s eﬀect on this household’s non-food
consumption. The regression model I estimate thus takes the form

xi = α0 + β1[Vi × Ni] + β2Vi + β3Ni + β(cid:48)

4Zi + 

if i ∈ R

(16)

where xi is ineligible household i’s monthly expenditure for non-food items. Ideally, instead of expenditure,
we would want to have quantities. However, neither non-food quantities nor prices are observed from the
Progresa data. In one speciﬁcation, the dummy Ni indicates if the household has below median household
size. In another speciﬁcation Ni will be a dummy indicating if the household has above median cultivated
land. Vi is a dummy that indicates whether the household resides in a treatment village, and Zi is a vector
of controls. The regressions includes exclusively ineligible households.

5Fafchamps and Hill (2005) show that farmgate selling is the most common selling method of farmers, suggesting

no transaction costs linked to exportation.

6In order to identify the latter, the Mexican government used a multidimensional poverty index (see Skouﬁas et al.

(2001) for a description of the method).

7

4 Results

Table 1 reports the results of the regression model (16). The ﬁrst three columns display the results for
non-food expenditure. Column (1) shows that the coeﬃcient on the treatment village dummy is positive
(though imprecisely measured) when the interaction eﬀects treat× hhsize-small are excluded. Including the
interaction eﬀects, however, changes this picture. The coeﬃcient on treat × hhsize-small is negative for all
three follow-up surveys. The impact of Progresa on non-food expenditure, β1[treat× hhsize-small]+β2treat,
is smaller for ineligible households with below median household size vis-a-vis households with above me-
dian household size. The latter brings empirical evidence for proposition 2.2 that non-food consumption of
a household not receiving cash grants (but residing in a village with households that do) does increase only
if the household’s labor endowment is suﬃciently large. Local general equilibrium eﬀects, however, may not
be the only possible explanation for the observed empirical ﬁndings. Angelucci and De Giorgi (2009) ﬁnd
that cash transfer recipient households do share part of the cash transfer with households belonging to their
social network (family, friends, etc.), which often includes program-ineligible households. Small ineligible
households may have a lower likelihood to be connected to a program-eligible households and, therefore, a
lower chance to that eligible households share part of the cash transfer.

Furthermore, and again in line with proposition 2.2, column (3) in Table 1 shows that (except for the third
follow-up survey) the coeﬃcient on treat×land-large is negative. The eﬀect of Progresa on non-food con-
sumption expenditure, β1[treat×land-large]+β2treat, is smaller for ineligible households with above median
cultivated land vis-a-vis households with above median land-holdings.

The model explains these empirical ﬁnding by, ﬁrst, cash grants raising recipients’ non-food consumption.
I empirically test this by comparing expenditure of Progresa eligible households in treatment and control
villages. Table 4 shows that the majority of the cash transfer is spent on non-food items: In the March 1999
follow-up survey (i.e. about one year after the ﬁrst cash transfers were given out), for example, the treatment
eﬀect on total non-food expenditure is 94.2 peso/month (roughly 10 US Dollar), while the treatment eﬀect
on food-expenditure is only 67.9 peso/month (roughly 7 US Dollar). About 50% percent of the increase in
expenditure can be explained by higher clothing and shoe expenditure. The cash transfer is further spent
on hygiene products (e.g. soap), household utensils (e.g. pens), and toys.

Because more consumption of these non-food items implies higher labor demand for importing the items
into the village, and taking into account that the village’s labor endowment is limited (the average Progresa
village size is 44 households), the model predicts the village’s wage rate to rise. Empirically, we can infer
changes in the wage rate by looking at daily proﬁts made from non-agricultural within-village commercial
activities (e.g. petty trade, tailoring, washing and ironing, etc.) of Progresa-ineligible households in treat-
ment vis-a-vis control villages. Table 2 reports these treatment eﬀects. The Tobit estimate suggests that
daily service proﬁts of ineligible households increase by, on average, 2.8 peso. The OLS estimate is lower
than that, yet still statistically signiﬁcant.7

In the model a higher wage, however, has an a priori ambiguous eﬀect on program-ineligibles’ non-food
consumption. On the one hand, higher wages imply a positive income eﬀect which ceteris paribus increases
consumption of non-food items. On the other hand, because importation of these items requires labor,
higher wages raise the village price of these non-food items, making their consumption more expensive.
Consumption of ineligible households decreases if the price eﬀect outweighs the income eﬀect. Proposition
2.2 suggests that this is the case if the household size (hence income eﬀect from higher wages) is small, or if
the household is very rich (and thus consumption hence labor demand is high). Column (2) and (3) in table
1 bring some empirical evidence for this, suggesting that the impact of Progresa on non-food expenditure is
smaller for ineligible households with below median household size, or for ineligible households with above
median cultivated land.

7Angelucci and De Giorgi (2009) report no changes in wages. Their deﬁnition of wages, however, includes agri-
cultural labor. Their wage measure, therefore, is more likely capture the exogenous outside-village rather than the
endogenous inside-village wage rate (because agricultural wage labor is a large share of total hours worked, yet largely
consisting of seasonal work on some commercial farm away from the village (Taylor and Dyer, 2009)).

8

However (as has been pointed out earlier), because the village is a net food seller, the eﬀect on food prices
is likely to be zero. Angelucci and De Giorgi (2009) shows that there are indeed no statistically signiﬁcant
diﬀerences in food prices between Progresa treatment and control villages.8 The absence of a food price
eﬀect, yet the presence of a positive income eﬀect from higher wages, may partly explain the in table 1
(columns four to six) observed increase in food consumption of ineligible households living in treatment vil-
lages. Both the treatment dummy and the interaction eﬀects are now positive, bringing empirical evidence
for proposition 2.2 that the food consumption externality is positive for all households.9

Note that the increase in demand for non-food items is not the only possible explanation for higher village
wages. Cash transfers were conditional on regular school attendance. The decrease in market labor supply
of children is another factor which could aﬀect village wages.

5 Numerical Example

5.1 Simulation vs. Experimental Benchmark

A numerical exercise with an empirical version of the model of section 2 shall further illustrate how a gen-
eral equilibrium analysis of experimental data can provide a richer policy analysis. Values for some of the
model’s parameters can be observed directly from the Progresa randomized control trial (control group)
data. Parameters which cannot be observed from the data are calibrated to the Progresa RCT control
group.10 Table 6 shows all the parameter values of the model.

I then add the cash transfer to the income of the Progresa-eligible household, and solve the model again.
This yields a vector of simulated outcomes of the treatment group. The predictions of the model are shown
in table 3. Columns (2) and (5) show model predictions for the average program eligible household and inel-
igible household, respectively. The corresponding from the Progresa RCT observed experimental treatment
eﬀects are shown in column (1) and (4).

Both model and experimental benchmark show that Progresa raises eligibles’ non-food consumption. While
the model forecasts an increase of 14.1 percent, the experimental point estimate is 18.2 percent. Because
importation of non-food items requires labor, the village’s labor demand increases. Higher labor demand
leads to an increase in the village’s wage rate: The model predicts an increase from 7.39 to 8.27 peso/day.
The positive income eﬀect resulting from higher wages aﬀects consumption of ineligible households. The
model predicts an increase in ineligibles’ monthly food consumption of roughly four percent, compared to a
from the experimental data observed increase of about two percent. While the model predicts an increase
in ineligibles’ monthly non-food consumption expenditure of 3.9 percent, it predicts a decrease in quantity
consumed of seven percent. This compares to a from the experimental data observed increase in non-food
expenditure of 4.7 percent (non-food quantities, however, are not observed in the experimental data).

The model is able reproduce the experimental moments quite well, which increases my conﬁdence in the
partial equilibrium simulations that will follow.11

In partial
Columns (3) and (6) in table 3 show the partial equilibrium model predictions for Progresa.
equilibrium the wage rate is exogenous. Ineligible households, therefore, are not aﬀected by the program.
For eligible households we observe higher program eﬀects on non-food consumption (quantities) in partial
equilibrium vis-a-vis general equilibrium (7.7% vs. 2% increase). On the other hand, program eﬀects on food

8Furthermore, Cunha et al. (2011) ﬁnd no food price eﬀects for another more recent cash transfer program in rural

Mexico.

9Because we don’t observe neither prices nor quantities for non-food items, I am not able to test for diﬀerences in
non-food prices between treatment and control villages. However, because the village price of a non-food item consists
of the (exogenous) factory price plus labor costs pertaining to importation, the increase in wages suggested by table
2 does provide some evidence that such price eﬀects may exist.

10A detailed description of the empirical version of the model and its calibration is provided in the appendix.
11Note that I have not used any data of the Progresa RCT treatment group in the calibration of the model. The
fact that the model is nevertheless able to reproduce the moments of the Progresa RCT treatment group sample may
be seen as source of model validation (Todd and Wolpin, 2006).

9

consumption are lower in partial equilibrium compared to general equilibrium (7.7% vs. 14.1% vs. increase).

5.2 Short vs. Long-run Eﬀects

In reality, village wages may not adjust immediately. Suggestive evidence for slow wage adjustment is re-
ported in table 2. Above I described how, in the absence of within-village wage data, one may infer changes
in the village wage rate by looking at daily proﬁts made from within-village economic activities, such as
buying and reselling, tailoring, washing, ironing, etc. Table 2 reveals that the average treatment eﬀect on
Progresa-ineligible households’ daily proﬁts from such activities is twice as high in the March 1999 follow-up
survey (about 12 months after the launch of Progresa) vis-a-vis the October 1998 follow-up survey (6 months
after launch).

A slowly adjusting village wage has implications for the magnitude of treatment eﬀects in each period fol-
lowing the introduction of cash transfers. In the model of section 2, for example, food consumption is a
positive function of the village wage (because the positive income eﬀect resulting from higher wages, ceteris
paribus, increases demand for food). If the village wage moves slowly to its new equilibrium, this implies
that the food consumption treatment eﬀects increase in each period, until the wage has reached its new
equilibrium. Because in each period between old and new equilibrium, the cash transfer recipient household
experiences an additional positive income eﬀect from a higher village wage (vis-a-vis the previous period).

Table 3 illustrates how the food consumption treatment eﬀects of Progresa may evolve in time. The partial
equilibrium model predictions in column (3), where the village wage is ﬁxed, reﬂect the initial (instanta-
neous) eﬀect of Progresa on food consumption of cash recipients. The latter is about 7.7 percent. From
the Progresa experimental data observed eﬀects in column (1), where the wage is likely to be somewhere in
between old and new equilibrium, reﬂect the medium-term eﬀect. The latter is estimated at 9.7 percent.
And the general equilibrium predictions of the model in column (2), where the wage has fully adjusted,
reﬂect the long-run eﬀect. The latter is about 14.1 percent.12

The above numerical simulation illustrates how treatment eﬀects may evolve along the transition path from
pre-program to post-program steady state. The model, therefore, may provide some structural interpreta-
tion for the increase in the magnitude of food consumption treatment eﬀects that other empirical studies
document, but not explain.13

6 Local General Equilibrium Eﬀects: Further Evidence

In section 3 I described that Progresa eligibility depended on the poverty status of a household. The lat-
ter was calculated as a discriminant analysis score, using variables such as household size, household head
gender, access to medical services, number of children, education of household head, age of the head of the
household, and dwelling characteristics.14 The lower the score, the higher the level of poverty. A household
was considered eligible for Progresa if its poverty score did not exceed a threshold that was set by the
Mexican administration. The poverty score was calculated in September 1997, or about 7 months prior to

12The reader may then ﬁnd it puzzling why, for non-food consumption, the long term eﬀect is lower than the
medium-term eﬀect. This because I assumed unit elasticity demand functions for non-food and food items. If, more
realistically perhaps, I were to assume that the richer the household the higher the share of income spent on non-food
items vis-a-vis food items (Engel’s law), then the simulated long-term eﬀect would most likely be larger than the
medium-term eﬀect.

13For example, Angelucci and De Giorgi (2009) report an average treatment eﬀect of 15.84 peso (per month per
adult equivalent) in the ﬁrst Progresa follow-up survey in October 1999, 25.74 Peso in the second follow-up (March
1999), and 30.61 Peso in the third follow-up survey. Note, however, that not all the diﬀerence in treatment eﬀects
between the three follow-up surveys stems from sluggish wage adjustment. For example, between ﬁrst and third round
of follow-up surveys, the Mexican administration increased the cash transfer size per beneﬁciary. Furthermore, the
eligibility criteria were relaxed, which resulted in more cash transfer recipients per village and, thus, most likely higher
wages. I’ll address these factors in more detail in the next section.

14see Skouﬁas et al. (2001) and Coady and Parker (2009) for more details.

10

the disbursement of the ﬁrst cash transfers. Initially, only 54 percent of households residing in the 506 treat-
ment and control villages were classiﬁed as eligible by the Mexican adminstration. Thus, treatment eﬀects
obtained in the ﬁrst follow-up survey (October 1998) reﬂect a situation where about half of the households
in treatment villages received the Progresa cash transfer.

Between the ﬁrst (October 1998) and second (March 1999) follow-up, however, the Mexican administration
adjusted the eligibility threshold. This resulted in half of the households initially classiﬁed as ineligible sud-
denly becoming eligible. I’ll henceforth refer to the latter as ‘newcomers’. In other words, between October
1998 and March 1999, treatment villages experienced a signiﬁcant increase in the share of cash transfer
recipients. From initially 54 percent, the share of cash transfer recipients in treatment villages increased to
roughly 80 percent.15

My model provides some guidance how this within-village scale-up aﬀected the local general equilibrium of
the village economy. The model suggests that the within-village scaling-up raises demand for non-food con-
sumption of newcomers. Because importation of non-food items requires labor, the village’s labor demand
increases. Higher labor demand leads to an increase in the village’s wage rate. Above I described how, in
the absence of within-village wage data, one may infer changes in the village wage rate by looking at daily
proﬁts made from within-village economic activities (e.g. buying and reselling, tailoring, washing, ironing,
etc.). Table 2 reveals that the average treatment eﬀect on Progresa-ineligible households’ daily proﬁts from
such activities is about double as high in the March 1999 follow-up survey (i.e. after within-village scale-up)
compared to the October 1998 follow-up survey (i.e. before within-village scale-up).16

The model then suggests that the positive income eﬀect resulting from higher wages, in turn, increases
non-newcomers (i.e. those that were eligible right from the beginning) food consumption demand. This
implies that one should observe higher food consumption for non-newcomer households in the March 1999
(i.e. after within-village scale-up) vis-a-vis the October 1998 follow-up survey (i.e. before within-village
scale-up). Equivalently, the treatment eﬀect on non-newcomers food consumption should be higher in the
March 1999 follow-up survey compared to the October 1998 follow-up. Table 4 shows that this is indeed
the case. The average treatment eﬀect on non-newcomer households’ monthly food consumption is about 26
Peso in the October 1998 follow-up survey, compared to 68 Peso in the March 1999 follow-up. For non-food
consumption, the picture looks similar. The average treatment eﬀect on the monthly value of non-newcomer
households’ non-food consumption is about 40 Peso in the October 1998 follow-up, compared to 94 Peso in
the March 1999 follow-up.

Panel III in table 2 and 4 show that treatment eﬀects for both my village wage proxy as well as consumption
are similar in the March 1999 vis-a-vis the last follow-up survey conducted in November 1999. This suggests
that the sharp increase of treatment eﬀects between the October 1998 follow-up survey (before within-village
scale-up) and March 1999 follow-up (after within-village scale-up) is not due to seasonal ﬂuctuations in de-
mand.

However, not the entire increase in the magnitude of treatment eﬀects between the October 1998 follow-up
(before within-village scale-up) and March 1999 follow-up (after within-village scale-up) should be attributed
to the within-village scale-up. First, in the previous section I described how slow wage adjustment may gen-
erate increasing treatment eﬀects along the transition path from pre-program to post-program steady state.
Second, the program administration increased the cash transfer size per beneﬁciary between October 1998
and March 1999, which in turn is likely to explain part of the increase in treatment eﬀects. Between the
March 1999 and November 1999 follow-up, the adminstration again increased the cash transfer size per
beneﬁciary. The latter increase was larger than the ﬁrst increase that took place between October 1998 and
March 1999. In the previous paragraph, however, I described that the treatment eﬀects did not increase
substantially between March 1999 and November 1999. Because of seasonality, however, one may not di-

15In the previous section I included only those program-ineligible households whose eligibility status did not change

between baseline and last follow-up survey.

16The increase is even higher when considering the Tobit instead of the OLS estimates. The Tobit treatment eﬀect
estimate is 0.12 in the October 1998 follow-up survey (i.e. before within-village scale-up) vis-a-vis 2.87 in the March
1999 survey (i.e. after within-village scale-up)

11

rectly conclude from this that the increase in the cash transfer size per beneﬁciary to play a minor role in
explaining the sharp increase of treatment eﬀects between October 1998 and March 1999.

I can use the numerical model of the previous section to gain more insights of how much of the increase
in the magnitude of treatment eﬀects between the October 1998 follow-up and March 1999 follow-up may
potentially be attributed to the within-village scale-up. In the previous section, I have simulated the the
impacts of cash transfers for the March 1999 data wave (i.e. after within-village scale-up). The model
parameters describing the number eligible and ineligible households in the model village, nP and nR, were
set to the sample averages observed from the March 1999 data wave (nP = 35.31 eligible households
and nR = 8.82 ineligible households in the average control village). In the previous section we saw that
the resulting simulated treatment eﬀects were a 14.1 percent increase in the value of food and non-food
consumption, respectively. In order to shed some light on how much of the increase in the magnitude of
treatment eﬀects between the October 1998 follow-up and March 1999 follow-up may be attributed to the
within-village scale-up, I replace nP and nR with the sample averages observed in the October 1998 follow-up
survey (nP = 25.94 and nR = 23.61), while keeping the cash transfer amount constant at the March 1999
level. The resulting simulated treatment eﬀect is a 10.8 percent increase in the value of food and non-food
consumption, respectively. Therefore, increasing the number of eligible households from nP = 25.94 to
nP = 35.31 increases the treatment eﬀects by 14.1-10.8=3.1 percentage points.

7 Conclusion

In this paper I attempted to explore if analyzing experimental data within a general equilibrium framework
can provide a richer policy analysis. I ﬁnd that such a framework helps to provide a structural interpretation
for the magnitudes of the reduced-form experimental treatment eﬀects. By allowing to explore how sensitive
the signs and magnitudes of treatment eﬀects are to the local context, how treatment eﬀects would evolve
if a pilot program is scaled-up, and how long-run diﬀer from short-run eﬀects, the structural analysis may
help addressing concerns of critics regarding the RCT’s external validity (generalizability of the signs and
magnitudes of treatment eﬀects).

The partial equilibrium outcome can have desirable features vis-a-vis the general equilibrium outcome. From
a technical point of view, partial equilibrium (i.e. ﬁx wages and prices) improves the identiﬁcation of treat-
ment eﬀects by reducing the risk of contamination of the control group through changes in prices and wages.
From a social planner’s perspective, partial equilibrium avoids negative externalities on households not tar-
geted by the intervention. For example, the simulations I conducted in section 5 suggest that decreasing
non-food and leisure consumption leads to a fall in utility of -1.7% for Progresa-ineligible households residing
in the same villages as cash transfer recipients.

It is possible to design the experiment in such a way that the partial equilibrium outcome is achieved.
The general equilibrium eﬀect stems from transaction costs linked to consumption of non-food items. Non-
food items are not produced by the village and thus are subject to transaction costs (labor) pertaining to
importation. Cash transfers generate higher demand for non-food items hence labor for importing these
items. Higher labor demand raises the village wage. Because the village price consists of the (exogenous)
factory price plus (labor) transaction costs for importation, higher wages imply higher village prices. Under
these assumptions, the social planner may avoid the wage hence price eﬀect by limiting the increase in labor
demand. The social planner can achieve this by supplying non-food items to the village (in addition to
giving cash transfers). The labor market equilibrium becomes

x{i,g}

(17)

where xG denotes the quantity of non-food items that the government supplies to the village. The quantity
which induces ∂pL/∂T{i,P} = 0 hence the partial equilibrium outcome is

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

L{i,g} ≡(cid:88)

(cid:88)

g

i

g

i

−xG +

(cid:18) ∂x{i,P}

(cid:88)

i∈P

∂T{i,P}

xG =

(cid:19)

d T{i,P} − ∂L{i,P}
∂T{i,P}

d T{i,P}

(18)

12

By avoiding general equilibrium eﬀects, a program design where cash transfers are delivered jointly with (18)
could improve the identiﬁcation of treatment eﬀects (by reducing the risk of contamination of the control
group through changes in prices and wages) and help to avoid negative externalities on ineligible households.

References

Angelucci, M. and G. De Giorgi (2009). Indirect Eﬀects of an Aid Program: How Do Cash Transfers Aﬀect

Ineligibles’ Consumption? American Economic Review 99 (1), 486–508.

Attanasio, O., C. Meghir, and A. Santiago (2012). Education Choices in Mexico: Using a Structural Model

and a Randomized Experiment to Evaluate Progresa. The Review of Economic Studies 79 (1), 37–66.

Attanasio, O. and A. Mesnard (2006). The impact of a conditional cash transfer programme on consumption

in colombia. Fiscal studies 27 (4), 421–442.

Bandiera, O., R. Burgess, S. Gulesci, and I. Rasul (2009). Community Networks and Poverty Reduction

Programmes: Evidence from Bangladesh. Working Paper . London School of Economics.

Banerjee, A. and E. Duﬂo (2009). The Experimental Approach to Development Economics. Annual Review

of Economics 1, 151–78.

Bobonis, G. and F. Finan (2009). Neighborhood Peer Eﬀects in Secondary School Enrollment Decisions.

The Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (4), 695–716.

Buera, F., J. Kaboski, and Y. Shin (2012). The Macroeconomics of Microﬁnance. Working Paper . National

Bureau of Economic Research.

Bush, V. (1993). Niveles y Tendencias de la Migraci´on Interna en M´exico a partir de las Cifras Censales,

1970-1990. Revista Mexicana de Sociolog´ıa, 155–176.

Coady, D. and R. Harris (2004). Evaluating transfer programmes within a general equilibrium framework.

The Economic Journal 114 (498), 778–799.

Coady, D. and S. Parker (2009). Targeting social transfers to the poor in mexico. Working Paper .

Cunha, J., G. De Giorgi, and S. Jayachandran (2011). The price eﬀects of cash versus in-kind transfers.

Working Paper . National Bureau of Economic Research.

Deaton, A. (2010). Instruments, Randomization, and Learning about Development. Journal of Economic

Literature 48 (2), 424–455.

Duﬂo, E. (2004). The Medium Run Eﬀects of Educational Expansion: Evidence from a Large School

Construction Program in Indonesia. Journal of Development Economics 74 (1), 163–197.

Duﬂo, E., R. Glennerster, and M. Kremer (2007). Using Randomization in Development Economics Re-

search: A Toolkit. Handbook of development economics 4, 3895–3962.

Fafchamps, M. and R. Hill (2005). Selling at the farmgate or traveling to market. American Journal of

Agricultural Economics 87 (3), 717–734.

Fafchamps, M. and S. Lund (2003). Risk-sharing Networks in Rural Philippines. Journal of Development

Economics 71 (2), 261–287.

Finan, F., E. Sadoulet, and A. de Janvry (2005). Measuring the Poverty Reduction Potential of Land in

Rural Mexico. Journal of Development Economics 77 (1), 27–51.

Fizbein, A. and N. Schady (2009). Conditional Cash Transfers: Reducing Present and Future Poverty.

World Bank, Washington DC.

13

Heckman, J. and E. Vytlacil (2005). Structural Equations, Treatment Eﬀects, and Econometric Policy

Evaluation. Econometrica 73 (3), 669–738.

Heckman, J. J., L. Lochner, and C. Taber (1998, May). General Equilibrium Treatment Eﬀects: A Study

of Tuition Policy. American Economic Review 88 (2), 381–86.

Hoddinott, J. and E. Skouﬁas (2004). The Impact of PROGRESA on Food Consumption. Economic

Development and Cultural Change 53 (1), 37–61.

Imbens, G. and J. Wooldridge (2009). Recent Developments in the Econometrics of Program Evaluation.

Journal of Economic Literature, 5–86.

Kaboski, J. and R. Townsend (2011). A Structural Evaluation of a Large-Scale Quasi-Experimental Micro-

ﬁnance Initiative. Econometrica 79 (5), 1357–1406.

Kaboski, J. and R. Townsend (2012). The Impact of Credit on Village Economies. American Economic

Journal: Applied Economics 4 (2), 98–133.

King, E. and J. Behrman (2009). Timing and Duration of Exposure in Evaluations of Social Programs.

World Bank Research Observer 24 (1), 55–82.

Lalive, R. and M. Cattaneo (2009). Social Interactions and Schooling Decisions. The Review of Economics

and Statistics 91 (3), 457–477.

Lise, J., S. Seitz, and J. Smith (2004). Equilibrium Policy Experiments and the Evaluation of Social

programs. Working Paper . National Bureau of Economic Research.

Maluccio, J. and R. Flores (2005). Impact evaluation of a conditional cash transfer program: The Nicaraguan

Red de Protecci´on Social. Working Paper . International Food Policy Research Institute.

Miguel, E. and M. Kremer (2004). Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and Health in the Presence

of Treatment Externalities. Econometrica 72 (1), 159–217.

Parker, S. and E. Skouﬁas (2000). The Impact of PROGRESA on Work, Leisure and Time Allocation.

Working Pager . International Food Policy Research Institute.

Rodrik, D. The New Development Economics: We Shall Experiment, But How Shall We Learn? Working

Paper . Kennedy School of Government.

Rosenzweig, M. and K. Wolpin (2000). Natural “Natural Experiments” in Economics. Journal of Economic

Literature 38 (4), 827–874.

Schultz, P. (2004, June). School subsidies for the poor: evaluating the mexican progresa poverty program.

Journal of Development Economics 74 (1), 199–250.

Skouﬁas, E., B. Davis, and S. De La Vega (2001). Targeting the poor in mexico: an evaluation of the

selection of households into progresa. World Development 29 (10), 1769–1784.

Soares, F., R. Ribas, and R. Os´orio (2010). Evaluating the impact of brazil’s bolsa fam´ılia: Cash transfer

programs in comparative perspective. Latin American Research Review 45 (2), 173–190.

Taylor, J. and G. Dyer (2009). Migration and the Sending Economy: A Disaggregated Rural Economy-wide

Analysis. The Journal of Development Studies 45 (6), 966–989.

Taylor, J., G. Dyer, and A. Yunez-Naude (2005). Disaggregated rural economywide models for policy

analysis. World Development 33 (10), 1671–1688.

Todd, P. and K. Wolpin (2006). Assessing the Impact of a School Subsidy Program in Mexico: Using a
Social Experiment to Validate a Dynamic Behavioral Model of Child Schooling and Fertility. American
Economic Review 96 (5), 1384–1417.

Townsend, R. (2010). Financial Structure and Economic Welfare: Applied General Equilibrium Development

Economics. Annual Review of Economics 2, 507.

14

8 Appendix

8.1 Appendix for Numerical Example

A. Full Mathematical Model Statement

Household full income:

Labor supply:

Demand non-food item:

Demand food-item:

IP = ¯LP × pL + ¯QP ¯pq + TP
IR = ¯LR × pL + ¯QR ¯pq

L{P} = ¯LP − αl × IP /pL
L{R} = ¯LR − αl × IR/pL

xP = αx × IP /(¯pχ + m × pL)
xR = αx × IR/(¯pχ + m × pL)

qP = αq × IP /¯pq
qR = αq × IR/¯pq

Village labor market equilibrium:

(nP × xP + nR × xR)m = nP × LP + nR × LR

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

B. Calibration

I calibrate the model exploiting data available on the control group of the Progresa randomized control trial
(March 1999 data wave).

The vector of parameters for which we need values writes:

Ω = {¯pχ, ¯pq, ¯Li, ¯Qi, ¯α{q}, ¯α{x}, ¯m, ni} i ∈ {P, R}

(29)

where ¯pχ is the factory price of the imported non-food commodity, ¯pq is the world market price of the staple,
and ¯Li denotes the household’s endowment with eﬃcient units of labor. ¯Qi is the household’s staple endow-
ment. The parameters ¯α{x} and ¯α{q} are the Cobb Douglas preferences for non-food and food commodity,
respectively.17 The parameter ¯m describes how many units of labor are needed to consume one unit of the
non-food commodity such that px = ¯pχ + ¯m × pL. The parameter nP denotes how many Progresa eligible
households exist in the village. The parameter nR denotes how many Progresa-ineligible households exist
in the village.

In Mexico, the staple is corn. 78 percent of households in the control group cite corn as their main cultivated
crop. Corn is also the dominant ingredient in the food consumption basket of Mexicans. A value for the
market price of corn (¯pq) can be observed directly from administrative records (Ministry of Agriculture). I
take monthly corn production (in kilogram) of the average Progresa-eligible household in the control group
(which amounts to roughly 300kg) as a value for ¯QP . In an analog manner, I take monthly corn production

17The preference for leisure is then given by ¯α{l} = 1 − ¯α{x} − ¯α{q}.

15

(in kilogram) of the average Progresa-ineligible household in the control group (which amounts to roughly
450kg) as a value for ¯QR. The number of eligible households in the average control village is 35.3, which
serves as value for nP . In an analog manner, the number of ineligible households in the average control
village is 8.8, which serves as value for nR.

I am left with the following parameters for which values can neither be obtained from administrative records
nor from the Progresa RCT data.

Λ = {¯pχ, ¯Li, ¯α{q}, ¯α{x}, ¯m} i ∈ {P, R}

(30)

In order to obtain values for these parameters I exploit the fact that I do observe from the control group data
a couple of in the model endogenous variables: (1) monthly quantity of consumed food (qRCT
) of
the average eligible and ineligible household, respectively; (2) monthly inside-village labor supply18 (LRCT
and LRCT
) of the average eligible and ineligible household, respectively; (3) monthly non-food expenditure
(px × xP )RCT and (px × xR)RCT of the average eligible and ineligible household, respectively. Denote this
vector

and qRCT

R

R

P

P

YRCTC

= {qRCT

i

, (px × xi)RCT , LRCT

i

}

(31)

The superscript RCT is used to indicate that these values are obtained directly from the experimental data.
Denote Ysim(Λ) the vector of from the model simulated values of these variables. I then calibrate Λ by
minimizing the standardized squared distance between YRCTC

and Ysim(Λ)

s.t. X = g(Λ)

(32)

(cid:18) YRCTC − Ysim(Λ, X(Λ))

(cid:19)2

E =

min

Λ

The full calibration writes

YRCTC

E =

min

Λ

+

+

(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

i=P,R

i=P,R

i

− ¯αq × Ii/¯pq
qRCT
i

(cid:19)2
(cid:18) qRCT
(cid:18) (px × xi)RCT − ¯px × xi
(cid:18) LRCT

(px × xi)RCT
− [ ¯Li − ¯αl × Ii/¯pL]

(cid:19)2
(cid:19)2

i

i=P,R

LRCT

i

P × xRCT

(nRCT

P + nRCT

R × xRCT

R

s.t.

px = ¯pχ + ¯m × pL
Ii = ¯L × pL + ¯Qi × ¯pq + Ti
xi = ¯αx × Ii/px
) ¯m = nRCT

P × LRCT
1 = αx + αq + αl

P + nRCT

R × LRCT

R

where i ∈ {P, R}.

C. Model Prediction as Out-of-Sample Forecast

I derive the predictions of the model by conducting out-of-sample forecasts. I add the average Progresa
cash transfer to the income of P, then solve the model. This yields a vector of simulated outcomes of the
treatment group. Formally, I compute the simulated treatment eﬀect for some outcome Yj of household i,
θsim{i,j}, as the diﬀerence between simulated control group, Y sim{i,j}|{Ω,TP =0}, and simulated treatment group,
Y sim{i,j}|{Ω,TP >0}.

θsim{i,j} = Y sim{i,j}|{Ω,TP >0} − Y sim{i,j}|{Ω,TP =0}

18e.g. buying and reselling, tailoring, washing, ironing, etc.

16

(33)

8.2 Tables and Figures

Table 1: Heterogenous Consumption Eﬀects of Progresa

Non-Food

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

17.999
(24.142)

17.426
(38.993)

Food
(5)

31.482
(48.010)
-38.387
(45.929)

Panel I: October 1998
treatment village
treat×hhsize-small
treat×land-large

Controls
Number of Obs
R-squared
Panel II: March 1999
treatment village
treat×hhsize-small
treat×land-large

Controls
Number of Obs
R-squared
Panel III: November 1999
treatment village
treat×hhsize-small
treat×land-large

12.458
(24.491)

23.259
(33.486)
-24.409
(28.115)

YES
11050
0.057

YES
11050
0.055

31.942
(40.698)

79.285
(56.298)
-93.840*
(52.705)

YES
4722
0.053

YES
4722
0.056

-11.725
(34.623)

13.776
(45.743)
-61.349
(46.381)

Controls
Number of Obs
R-squared

YES
4722
0.053

YES
4722
0.056

-22.160
(60.369)

YES
11050
0.073

56.919
(40.416)

-225.159*
(117.107)

YES
4722
0.067

YES
4586
0.040

YES
4586
0.041

-14.557
(33.855)

27.069
(22.336)

10.324
(26.326)
38.290
(27.875)

60.858
(83.044)

YES
4722
0.067

YES
4586
0.040

YES
4586
0.041

(6)

2.547

(41.413)

77.041
(87.874)

YES
10989
0.013

70.187
(45.160)

YES
4586
0.051

28.116
(23.846)

-4.907
(33.495)

YES
4586
0.051

YES
10989
0.011

YES
10989
0.010

14.011
(27.074)

7.743

2.273

(35.101)

(29.834)

9.899

(39.311)

* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Displayed are results of regression (16). Standard errors are clustered
at the village level. For (1)-(3) the dependent variable is monthly household non-food expenditure of ineligible
households (in peso). For (4)-(6) the dependent variable is the household monthly food consumption (i.e. food
expenditure plus peso value of consumption of own agricultural production) of ineligible households. Standard
errors clustered at the village level. Regressions include program-ineligible households only. The 99th percentile of
dependent variable is excluded. Treatment village (treat) is a dummy indicating if ineligible household i lives in a
treatment village. hhsize − small is a dummy indicating if household has below median (working-age) household
size. Land − high is a dummy indicating if household has above median cultivated land. Regression (2) and (5)
controls for cultivated land, and regression (3) and (6) control for household size.

17

Table 2: Treatment Eﬀect on Progresa-ineligible Households’ Daily Service Proﬁts (in Peso)

Panel I: October 1998
(before within-village scale-up)
treatment village

constant

Controls
Number of Obs
R-squared
Panel II: March 1999
(after within-village scale-up)
treatment village

constant

Controls
Number of Obs
R-squared
Panel III: November 1999
(after within-village scale-up)
treatment village

constant

Controls
Number of Obs
R-squared

OLS

OLS

Tobit

Tobit

-0.001
(0.173)
1.052***
(0.128)
(0.092)

No
4476
0.000

0.081
(0.168)
0.811***
(0.120)
(0.084)

Yes
4457
0.009

0.286
(1.130)

0.864
(1.133)

-28.330***

-29.628***

(1.553)
(1.094)

No
4476

(1.626)
(1.124)

Yes
4457

0.113
(0.069)
0.254***
(0.047)

No
4662
0.001

0.116*
(0.070)
0.134*
(0.080)

Yes
4588
0.009

2.877***
(0.862)

2.810***
(0.869)

-23.226***

-23.278***

(1.488)

(1.514)

No
4662

Yes
4588

0.044*
(0.025)
0.063***
(0.014)

0.046*
(0.026)
0.072***
(0.019)

2.416*
(1.286)

2.601**
(1.315)

-30.225***

-29.651***

(3.299)

(3.432)

No
4662
0.001

Yes
4588
0.009

No
4662

Yes
4588

* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Standard errors clustered at village level. 99th percentile of dependent
variable excluded. Standard errors clustered at village level. Displayed coeﬃcients are obtained from the regression
2Xi+ ∀i ∈ ineligible, where Vi is a dummy if ineligible household i resides in treatment village.
xi = α0+β1Vi+β(cid:48)
The dependent variable is household monthly proﬁts (in peso) from buying and reselling, tailoring, cooking,
washing, ironing, carpenter services.

18

Table 3: Consumption Eﬀects of Progresa: Partial vs. General Equilibrium

Progresa-eligible Households

Progresa-ineligible Households

Progresa

Progresa

Progresa

Progresa

Progresa

Progresa

observed

predicted(GE) predicted(PE)

observed

predicted(GE) predicted(PE)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

698.00

811.04

67.95
(10.01)

0.097

660.06

752.97

92.91

660.06

711.21

51.15

0.141

0.077

756.85

757.34

14.01
(11.16)

0.019

731.08

759.44

28.35

731.08

731.08

0.00

0.039

0.00

I. Food consumption

control group mean (C)

treatment group mean (T )
T − C
(s.e)
(T − C)/C

II. Non-food expenditure [quantity]

control group mean (C)

516.07[n/a]

534.95 [26.33]

534.95[26.33]

679.00[n/a]

592.51[29.17]

592.51[29.17]

treatment group mean (T )
T − C
(s.e)
(T − C)/C

664.12[n/a]

610.25[26.85]

576.41[28.38]

700.44[n/a]

615.49[27.09]

592.51[29.17]

94.15[n/a]

75.30[0.52]

41.45[2.04]

31.94[n/a]

22.98[-2.08]

0.00

(19.18)

(24.68)

0.182 [n/a]

0.141 [0.020]

0.077[0.077]

0.047[n/a]

0.039[-0.071]

0.00

First and second row of columns (1) and (4) in panel I and II show ENCEL survey (March 1999) sample means
of monthly HH food consumption (Peso value) and non-food expenditure (Peso value) of program eligible and
ineligible households, respectively. The third row of column (1) in panel I and II shows the treatment eﬀect
obtained from the treatment eﬀect regression xi = α0+β1Vi+ ∀ i ∈ eligible, where Vi is a dummy if i resides in
a treatment village. The third row of column (4) in panel I and II shows the treatment eﬀect obtained from the
treatment eﬀect regression xi = α0+β1Vi+ ∀ i ∈ ineligible. The fourth row of columns (1) and (4) in panel I and
II shows displayes the ratio of treatment eﬀect (third row) over the control group mean (ﬁrst row). Columns (2)
and (5) in panel I and II show the by the general equilibrium model simulated values (i.e. ﬂexible wage). Columns
(3) and (6) in panel I and II show the by the partial equilibrium model simulated values (i.e. ﬁxed wage). Values
reported in parenthesis are consumed quantities (quantities are not observed from the Progresa ENCEL surveys).

Table 4: Treatment Eﬀect on Progresa-eligible Households’ Monthly Expenditure in Peso

Panel I: October 1998
(before within-village scale-up)
treatment village

Controls
Number of Obs
R-squared
Panel II: March 1999
(after within-village scale-up)
treatment village

Controls
Number of Obs
R-squared
Panel III: November 1999
(after within-village scale-up)
treatment village

Controls
Number of Obs
R-squared

(1)

(2)

hygiene

hh utensils

(3)
toys

(4)

clothing

(5)

shoes

(6)
total

Non-Food

3.119***
(0.965)

1.825***
(0.465)

Yes
10988
0.061

Yes
10959
0.015

0.000

(.)
Yes
11078

.

19.747***

13.174***

(3.634)

(2.803)

40.135***
(12.102)

Yes
10874
0.065

Yes
10951
0.087

Yes
11020
0.113

Food
(7)
total

26.092**
(11.143)

Yes
10893
0.139

2.745**
(1.391)

Yes
10211
0.048

Yes
10149
0.012

4.012***
(1.195)

4.329***
(1.171)

Yes
10242
0.092

Yes
10105
0.024

3.153***
(0.714)

0.178***
(0.056)

41.314***

30.876***

(6.470)

(5.944)

94.152***
(19.178)

67.945***
(10.056)

Yes
10120
0.008

0.000

(.)
Yes
10300

.

Yes
10154
0.080

Yes
10264
0.108

Yes
10220
0.123

Yes
10053
0.126

42.280***

32.347***

102.210***

(5.741)

(4.884)

(16.862)

71.007***
(13.123)

Yes
10157
0.100

Yes
10110
0.143

Yes
10133
0.192

Yes
9638
0.160

* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Standard errors clustered at village level. For columns (1)-(7) the
dependent variable is monthly household expenditure (in peso) for item. Displayed coeﬃcients are obtained from
the regression xi = α0+β1Vi+γX(cid:48)+ ∀ i ∈ eligible, where Vi is a dummy if eligible household i resides in treatment
village, and X(cid:48) is a vector of controls. 99th percentile of the dependent variable is excluded.

19

Table 5: Treatment Eﬀect on Progresa-ineligible Households’ Monthly Expenditure in Peso

(1)

(2)

hygien;e hh utensils

Non-Food
(3)
toys

(4)

clothing

(5)

shoes

(6)
total

Panel I: October 1998
(before within-village scale-up)
treatment village

Controls
Number of Obs
R-squared
Panel II: March 1999
(after within-village scale-up)
treatment village

Controls
Number of Obs
R-squared
Panel III: November 1999
(after within-village scale-up)
treatment village

Controls
Number of Obs
R-squared

1.951
(1.354)

Yes
4168
0.049

-2.196
(1.661)

Yes
4316
0.054

-0.086
(1.464)

Yes
4430
0.105

-0.192
(0.627)

Yes
4235
0.014

0.588
(0.864)

Yes
4416
0.008

3.034**
(1.258)

Yes
4464
0.016

0.000

(.)
Yes
4379

.

0.670
(4.255)

-3.895
(3.542)

-14.854
(15.910)

Yes
4190
0.054

Yes
4175
0.077

Yes
4116
0.104

0.026
(0.051)

-7.151
(8.366)

4.727
(8.296)

2.056

(24.676)

Yes
4439
0.004

0.000

(.)
Yes
4651

.

Yes
4350
0.033

Yes
4347
0.055

Yes
4280
0.078

5.202
(6.297)

1.805
(5.785)

4.771

(19.427)

Yes
4488
0.082

Yes
4406
0.082

Yes
4377
0.147

Food
(7)
total

-16.647
(12.221)

Yes
4162
0.137

7.633

(11.168)

Yes
4351
0.120

13.886
(13.217)

Yes
4342
0.165

* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Standard errors clustered at village level. For columns (1)-(7) the
dependent variable is monthly household expenditure (in peso) for item. Displayed coeﬃcients are obtained from
the regression xi = α0+β1Vi+γX(cid:48)+ ∀ i ∈ ineligible, where Vi is a dummy if ineligible household i resides in
treatment village, and X(cid:48) is a vector of controls. 99th percentile of the dependent variable is excluded.

Table 6: Parameter Values

average eligible HH

average ineligible HH

Village level parameters

price of food commodity (¯pq)

price of non-food commodity (¯pχ)

labor requirement per unit of x ( ¯m)

Household level parameters
food item endowment ( ¯Qi)
HH eﬃcient units of labor ( ¯Li)
preference food item (¯α{q})
preference non-food item (¯α{x})
preference leisure (¯α{l})

1.8

0.1

2.7

481.2

63.1

0.512

0.415

0.074

301.1

93.0

0.512

0.415

0.074

20

