SURVIVAL ANALYSIS OF YOUNG PEOPLE IN THEIR FIRST EMPLOYMENT IN BRAZIL 

Área 13 – Economia do Trabalho 

Maria Odalice dos Santos Sampaio1 
Francisca Zilania Mariano2 
Celina Santos de Oliveira3 

ABSTRACT 

This study seeks to investigate the duration of time that the young Brazilian population spend in their first 
formal Brazilian employment, highlighting the factors that influence their permanence or exit, either to a 
situation  of  unemployment  or  to  another  job.  In  addition,  it  seeks  to  relate  overeducation  to  their  first 
labor activity, in order to ascertain its impact to their permanence in the job. To that end, data from the 
Relação Anual de Informações Sociais (RAIS) were used from the years between 2003 and 2013, which 
made it possible to follow the trajectory of young people in the labor market when they joined their first 
job in 2003. Survival analysis models using the Kaplan-Meier non-parametric estimator and with the aid 
of Cox regressions allowed us to verify that male individuals, those employed by non-private companies, 
those  with  disabilities,  and  youngsters  who  obtain  their  first  labor  activity  in  large  companies  and  who 
have a higher level of schooling are more likely to remain in the first job for a longer period. On the other 
hand,  young  people  in  situations  of  overeducation  were  more  likely  to  leave  their  initial  activity  than 
those  who  are  in  compliance,  but  the  risk  of  leaving  for  another  job  is  significantly  higher  than  for  an 
unemployment  situation,  indicating  that  the  qualified  young  person  is  more  likely  to  be  included  in  the 
labor market. 

Keywords: First Job, Survival Analysis, Overeducation, Formal Labor Market. 

JEL Codes: J64, C41, I21. 

 

RESUMO 
Este  estudo  busca  investigar  a  duração  de  tempo  do  jovem  no  primeiro  emprego  formal  brasileiro, 
destacando os fatores que influenciam sua permanência ou saída, seja para uma situação de desemprego 
ou para outro emprego. Além disso, busca-se relacionar overeducation à primeira atividade laborativa dos 
jovens,  de  modo  a  averiguar  o  impacto  da  mesma  na  permanência  no  trabalho.  Para  tal  fim,  foram 
utilizados dados da Relação Anual de Informações Sociais (RAIS) para o período compreendido entre os 
anos  de  2003  e  2013,  o  qual  permitiu  acompanhar  a  trajetória  do  jovem  no  mercado  de  trabalho  ao 
ingressar no primeiro emprego em 2003. Modelos de análise de sobrevivência, através do estimador não 
paramétrico de Kaplan-Meier e com o auxílio regressões de Cox, permitiram verificar que indivíduos do 
sexo masculino, os contratados por empresas não privadas, os portadores de deficiência, e os jovens que 
conseguem  sua  primeira  atividade  laborativa  em  grandes  empresas  e  que  possuem  maior  nível  de 
escolaridade  têm  mais  chances  de  permanecer  no  primeiro  emprego  por  um  período  maior..  Por  outro 
lado, jovens em situação de overeducation apresentaram maiores chances de deixar sua atividade inicial 
que aqueles que se encontram em situação de conformidade, porém, o risco de saída para outro emprego é 
significativamente  maior  do  que  para  a  situação  de  desemprego,  indicando,  dessa  forma,  que  o  jovem 
qualificado tem maiores chances de estar inserido no mercado de trabalho. 
 
 
Palavras-chave:  Primeiro  Emprego,  Análise  de  Sobrevivência,  Overeducation,  Mercado  de  Trabalho 
Formal. 

Classificação JEL: J64, C41, I21 
                                                           
1 Mestranda em Economia –CAEN/UFC 
2 Doutora em Econommia pela UFPB e Professora da UFC/Sobral 
3 Doutora em Economia pelo CAEN/UFC e Professora da UFC/Sobral 

1.   INTRODUCTION 

 According  to  information  from  the  International  Labor  Organization  (ILO),  in  2017 
approximately 70.9 million young people were unemployed, equivalent to a global youth unemployment 
rate of 13.1%. According to the Organization, young people are three times more likely to be unemployed 
than adults. According to the Brazilian data, still according to the institution, it is observed that 52.5% of 
the  youngsters  are  employed,  and  that  about  22%  are  not  studying  or  working,  the  most  affected  being 
women and blacks or browns. In addition, among the young Brazilians who work, one in three receives 
up to one minimum wage.                   

 The high rates of  youth unemployment have been a focus on the agendas of the rulers, and 
this can be clearly observed in the results for the Brazilian labor market. According to the Ministério do 
Trabalho  e  Emprego  (MTE),  the  analysis  of  the  Relação  Anual  de  Informações  Sociais  (RAIS),  for  the 
year 2016 registered a decrease in the employment stock for all age groups, with the exception of those 
over  65  years  of  age.  However,  the  reduction  was  proportionally  higher  for  the  younger  bands.  For 
employees up to the age of 17, there was a 21.5% drop in the number of links, and among those aged 18-
24,  the  links  decreased  by  9.6%  compared  to  the  2015  data.  Among  young  people  who  are  out  of  the 
labor market, a large number of individuals are seeking the first access to it, and their insertion has proved 
to be a great challenge for different societies. In addition, the young person entering the labor market for 
the first time tends to find more precarious occupations, a situation that is aggravated in many countries 
due to low educational level and the fragility of educational training (GUIMARÃES, ALMEIDA, 2013). 
According to the ILO, three out of every four young people in the world work in informal jobs. 

The need to enter the market may lead young people to accept jobs that do not correspond to 
their  educational  level,  providing  a  mismatch  between  work  and  qualification,  which  characterizes  the 
overeducation  situation.  This  can  be  defined  as  the  irregularity  between  the  occupation  and  the 
educational level of the individual, where the same performs a function that requires a schooling below 
that which it possesses. And this can have a negative impact on the individual's satisfaction with work, as 
Verhofstadt  and  Omey  (2003)  indicate  when  analyzing  research  data  for  Flemish  workers  -  a  Belgian 
ethnic  group,  which  corresponds  to  the  majority  of  its  population.  There  are  few  studies  that  relate 
overeducation  and first  job. However, there are indications that when associated, they can be  a trap for 
the  young,  causing  the  mismatch  to  be  repeated  in  future  settings  (BALLESTEROS;  ROSAL,  2017). 
According to Marioni (2018), a quarter of the Brazilian formal market is overeducated. 

Recent studies have argued that the first job  can influence the future of  young people in the 
labor market. According to Carrijo (2017), a bad start for young people in the job market can affect their 
professional  future,  making  it  difficult  for  them  to  access  better  jobs.  CNBC  (Consumer  News  and 
Business Channel) information, submitted in June 2018 based on research by the Strada Institute for the 
Future of Work and Burning Glass Technologies - a company analyzing the career market - point out that 
the  first  job  may  have  serious  impact  on  the  rest  of  young  people's  lives.  The  study  shows  that  recent 
graduates who accept to work in jobs where they do not need a degree are five times more likely to be in 
the same position after five years than those who have already used their degree immediately; three out of 
four graduates who took early employment (who did not require a degree) will be in the same position ten 
years later. 

The institution's report also states that the situation of underemployment of young graduates 
cannot be considered only as a stage and, once underemployed, it is increasingly difficult to escape from 
this circumstance. 

Although the academic literature on young people in the Brazilian labor market is still scarce, 
there is empirical evidence of their difficulty in accessing the first job (REIS, 2015; MONTE; ARAÚJO; 
LIMA,  2007;  CARRIJO,  2017).  These  authors  point  to  the  educational  level  as  the  main  factor  that 
affects  entry  into  the  first  job.  Others,  however,  are  aware  of  the  high  turnover  of  young  people  in  the 
market  (FLORI,  2005;  ALBUQUERQUE,  PERO,  2008;  MONSUETO;  BICHARA;  CUNHA,  2010), 
which can be driven by better job opportunities and salary, or by remain in the same position. 

Studies  on  the  subject  have  presented  similar  results  regarding  the  influence  of  level  of 
schooling, gender and social class differentiation. Garcia et al. (2010) states that obtaining the first job is 
sensitive  to  macroeconomic  variations.  However,  there  was  no  work  in  the  Brazilian  literature  that 

proposed to analyze the survival time of young people in the first job, because the difficulty of the young 
person is not only to enter the labor market, but also to remain in it. Thus, this work aims to fill this gap. 

It is in this context that the present research seeks to contribute to the literature by analyzing 
the  duration  of  time  of  the  youngster  in  the  first  job  in  the  Brazilian  formal  market,  as  well  as  the 
variables that influence his stay or exit from it, and by relating first job and overeducation data. It is also 
intended to investigate the factors that drive them to another job or to the unemployment situation. In this 
way,  it  will  be  possible  to  produce  an  overview  of  how  and  why  the  young  person  entering  the  formal 
Brazilian  labor  market  for  the  first  time  can  leave  it,  according  to  their  individual  characteristics,  their 
work,  and  the  firm  in  which  they  work.  To  that  end,  the  data  from  the  Relação  Anual  de  Informações 
Sociais (RAIS), from the period 2003 to 2013 will be used and the survival analysis models will be used, 
according to the Kaplan-Meier non-parametric estimator and Cox regressions. 

The  sections  that  follow  will  present,  respectively,  a  brief  review  of  the  literature  on  young 
people in the labor market, especially in relation to the first job; sources of data used and methodological 
approach; results and final considerations. 
2. THEORETICAL REFERENCE 
2.1. Theoretical Aspects 

Some  studies  seek  to  analyze  the  theoretical  aspects  of  the  youth  labor  market,  highlighting 
the greatest difficulties encountered and the need for policies that promote greater access to young people 
(Guimarães and Almeida, 2013). This can also be observed in studies not only for Brazil, but also for all 
of Latin America (ABDALA, 2002) and in more developed continents such as Europe and Central Asia 
(HIGGINS, 2010). 

Guimarães and  Almeida (2013)  analyzed the difficulties of insertion of  young people in the 
labor market, seeking a reflection on the employment policy in Brazil, and especially how it behaves in 
relation to them. To this end, the authors also study the international scenario, specifically the European 
one, evaluating policies and programs adopted by other nations, such as England and Denmark, that have 
implemented  programs  focused  on  strengthening  schooling,  qualification  and  employability,  following 
rigorous demands. Regarding the Brazilian scenario, the authors highlight the low level of education that 
exacerbates the situation of young people in the country and the early entry of young people into the labor 
market  imposed  by  necessity,  which  leads  to  more  precarious  occupations.  Also  noteworthy  are  some 
policies  and  programs  created  in  Brazil  and  their  importance  for  the  integration  of  young  people  in  the 
labor  market.  Finally,  they  point  out  directions  that  are  based  on  the  advance  in  the  direction  of  work 
among the three spheres of government (federal, state and municipal) and in actions that contribute to the 
creation of greater opportunities, with employment policy being an integrated process. 

Abdala (2002) analyzes the problems of young people in the labor market for Latin America 
and  the  Caribbean,  and  how  educational  and  socioeconomic  factors  can  affect  their  entry  into  the 
employment  world.  The  author  points  out  that  in  Africa  the  lack  of  technological  innovation  and  the 
scarcity of resources, coupled with the productivity requirements of certain sectors, has created a difficult 
market for all, especially for young people. These, in turn, tend to enter the market with lower wages and 
social  protection, and  greater precariousness  and instability, in  most cases without contract  and without 
social security. It highlights the early entry of the young Latin American into the labor market, promoted 
by  necessity,  and  attentive  to  the  fact  that  the  larger  social  classes  are  more  prone  to  better  job 
opportunities.  In  addition,  it  also  emphasizes  gender  inequality,  where  women  have  few  opportunities; 
and the low level  of schooling that still affects  the continent.  In this way, it points to  policies based on 
education,  training  and  capacitation,  in  order  to  avoid  the  increase  of  poverty,  the  early  introduction  of 
labor, and to contribute to the reduction of social inequalities. 

This reality is also observed in some European countries and Central Asia in Higgins's (2010) 
study  of  the  labor  market  for  young  people  on  these  continents,  although  they  are  characterized  by  a 
relatively high level of education. The author analyzes the transition from education to the labor market, 
in  order to  help  in understanding this scenario and  to  suggest  areas where action  is necessary and  more 
effective.  Notes  that,  in  general,  education  and  training  systems  have  been  slow  to  adapt  to  rapidly 
changing market demands resulting from fundamental changes in the industrial structure. Thus, it points 
to the need to focus resources on disadvantaged young people, to reform education and training systems, 

and to invest adequately in education systems, especially in the short term, as they play a crucial role in 
supporting the integration into the labor market. 

Layard,  Nickell  and  Jackman  (1991)  argue  that  the  highest  unemployment  rates  for  young 
people  in  ODCE  -  Organização  para  a  Cooperação  e  Desenvolvimento Econômico  -  are  due  to  the  fact 
that  this  group  is  more  likely  to  be  unemployed.  According  to  these  authors,  issues  such  as  generous 
benefits  of  unemployment,  more  explicitly  dependent  on  job  search  and  acceptance,  and  some 
employment protection, perhaps in the form of evaluation of experiences, can help policymakers to make 
better market decisions regarding the labor market. 

When  researching  the  reasons  for  the  youth  unemployment  rate  is  much  higher  than  for 
adults,  Flori  (2005)  found,  based  on  data  from  the  PME  for  the  period  1983  to  2002,  that  the  average 
duration of unemployment is practically the same for young people, adults and the elderly. However, the 
entry  to  the  unemployment  situation  is  greater  for  young  people,  being  a  determining  factor  for  higher 
unemployment rates among them. Thus, the author concludes that the high rate of unemployment among 
young  people  is  not  caused  by  the  difficulty  of  getting  the  first  job,  but  rather,  it  is  due  to  their  high 
turnover in the labor market. 
2.2. Empirical Works 

Empirical studies of young people in the Brazilian labor market, especially the first job, show 
the positive influence of the level  of schooling on the way out  of unemployment, the  greatest difficulty 
encountered  by  the  female  gender,  and  that  the  probability  of  obtaining  a  job  is  greater  than  for  an 
individual who already has experience in relation to the one who is looking for a first opportunity (REY, 
2015; MONTE; ARAÚJO; LIMA, 2007; CARRIJO, 2017). Some studies highlight the turnover of young 
people,  and  associate  high  unemployment  rates  with  the  difficulty  of  remaining  in  the  same  job 
(ALBUQUERQUE,  PERO,  2010;  MONSUETO,  BICHARA;  CUNHA,  2010).  In  addition,  distinctions 
are  observed  between  social  classes  (CARRIJO,  2017;  MONSUETO;  BICHARA;  CUNHA,  2010),  the 
informal sector as the main responsible for absorbing youth labor (REIS, ÁGUAS, 2014; GUIMARÃES, 
ALMEIDA, 2013). and how macroeconomic variations may affect the first job (GARCIA et al., 2010). 

Aiming to analyze how the probabilities of the transition from unemployment to employment, 
whether  formal  or  informal,  and  to  inactivity,  are  related  to  the  duration  of  unemployment  and  the 
characteristics of the worker, Kings and Water (2014) estimated, based on data longitudinal surveys of the 
PME (Pesquisa Mensal e Emprego) for the period between 2006 and 2013, duration models that consider 
these  transitions.  Their  results  show  that  the  longer  the  unemployment  condition  the  greater  the 
probability  that  the  worker  will  move  to  the  employment  condition,  but  also  to  the  exit  from  the  job 
market.  As  for  schooling,  the  probability  of  moving  from  unemployment  to  formality  is  higher  among 
those who are more educated. For women, the probability of transition to formal or informal employment 
is lower than for men, while the chances of leaving the labor market are 28% higher for them. It was also 
observed that individuals who had never worked previously had a lower probability of transition to any of 
the  mentioned  conditions,  having  a  greater  difficulty  to  obtain  employment  (formal  or  informal)  than 
those  who  had  already  had  experience,  which  evidences  the  difficulty  of  first  job.  Thus,  the  authors 
conclude that both the individual characteristics and the fact of having or not experience influence the exit 
of the individual from the unemployment condition, either for the labor market or for inactivity; and that 
there  is  a  disincentive  to  workers  seeking  employment  for  a  long  time,  which  leads  them  to  leave  the 
market. 

Using  the  same  data  source  (PME),  for  the  years  2006  to  2012,  Reis  (2015)  analyzed  the 
transition of young Brazilians from the unemployment situation to the first job, as well as the duration of 
the  first  and  the  factors  which  influence  the  probability  of  exit  from  it.  It  also  sought  to  identify  the 
variables that could reduce it. In order to estimate the duration models with PME data, the author selected 
a sample of 15 to 24 year olds who had never worked (at the time of the first interview). The results show 
that the probability of exit from unemployment for young people who have never worked is much lower 
than for those who already have experience, especially in relation to better quality jobs. This probability 
is  even  lower  when  the  inexperienced  individual  is  female.  For  young  people  seeking  their  first  job, 
schooling  is  a  positive  variable  for  the  exit  of  unemployment,  and  the  informal  sector  appears  to  offer 
better opportunities for them. 

Similar  results  are  found  by  Monte,  Araújo  and  Lima  (2007),  who  applied  a  bivariate  logit 
model for PME data for the  years 2000 and 2001 to study the characteristics that affect the individual's 
occupational  insertion  and  a  non-  Kaplan-Meier  parametric  study  to  analyze  the  expected  duration  of 
unemployment,  aiming  to  ascertain  these  factors  for  those  seeking  the  first  job  and  those  seeking  re-
employment.  It was observed that the probability of insertion in the market is 116.3% higher for males; 
that the more educated are more likely to enter the formal sector, but the greater the chance of remaining 
in the state of unemployment; and that there are greater placement opportunities for those who have had 
some  experience,  76.8%  higher  than  those  who  seek  their  first  job.  In  addition,  regional  analysis  found 
that less developed regions have lower periods of unemployment, confirming the presence of the informal 
segment and its importance in reducing the average duration of inactivity. 

Garcia et al. (2010), investigated, through the analysis of time series, how the Brazilian labor 
market  in  the  period  between  1999  and  2009  was  influenced  by  the  macroeconomic  context,  and 
compared the results for both employment and the first job. In addition, the authors discuss the insertion 
of  young  people  in  this  market,  especially  those  seeking  a  first  job  in  the  formal  sector.  Before  the 
analysis, the authors concluded that both the employment and the first job are influenced positively by the 
growth  of  production  and  negatively  by  the  inflation  and  the  interest  rate,  for  the  studied  period.  They 
also found that the first job is more affected by economic growth, being the main variable to explain it, 
indicating  that  it  is  more  affected  by  shocks  in  economic  activity.  They  also  highlighted  the  lack  of 
incentives and the need for public policies that facilitate access to the labor market. 

Using Rais-Migra / MTE panel data for the years 1996 to 2005, Albuquerque and Pero (2008) 
estimated a fixed-effects model to analyze the relationship between turnover and salary, based on the first 
10  years  of  the  career  of  young  people  in  the  Brazilian  labor  market.  The  authors  highlight  the  high 
turnover of young people in the market, especially at the beginning of their professional life. During the 
analyzed period, only 5% of the individuals continued in the same occupation, not suffering any type of 
disconnection.  The  results  show  that  turnover  and  yields  are  positively  associated.  Although  positive, 
turnover returns are decreasing as the amount of shutdown increases. In addition, it can be observed that 
from 3 to 5 years from the first job the salary gains resulting from changes in employment are higher. 

Monsulto, Bichara and Cunha (2010), sought, through a multinomial Logit model, to analyze 
the  determinants  of  mobility  between  occupational  segments,  and  through  quantum  and  interquartile 
regressions to  estimate the effects  of this mobility  on income distribution, based on data  from  PME for 
the period between 2002 and 2010. They found that in the Brazilian market, in most cases, mobility has a 
positive effect on wages, however, it may be used as a method of higher earnings among higher income 
workers,  while  among  the  poorest  it  is  a  social  survival  strategy.  Thus,  they  observed  that  although  it 
contributes to wage increases, the mobility of Brazilian workers promotes a greater difference of wages 
among workers at the extremes of income distribution. 

Based  on  PME  data  from  2002  to  2016,  Carrijo  (2017)  estimated  probability  models  (Logit 
multinomial) to investigate the factors that determine the youth's insertion in the first job, the differences 
in  the  first  hiring  according  to  gender,  and  for  evaluate  the  impact  of  the  first  job  on  the  individual's 
occupational  trajectory.  The  author  concludes  that  young  people  obtain  their  first  employment 
opportunity in categories of lower quality and remuneration, and greater precariousness and informality, 
with domestic service being the main access for women and the construction sector for men. In addition, 
it verifies that men and women tend to start their employment at similar moments, and find evidence of 
segregation at the time of first employment, where  young people with similar productive characteristics 
are distributed in different occupations in terms of socioeconomic condition and quality. It also notes that 
females have greater difficulties in occupying higher occupational categories; that at the beginning of the 
activities, young people tend to have higher degrees of occupational turnover and flexibility; and finally, 
that  the  first  job  has  an  impact  on  the  young  person's  future  employment,  reducing  access  to  better  job 
opportunities. 
2.3. Overeducation 

The literature on overeducation has related it to different factors, such as the impact that this 
can bring to the future employment, causing the situation to remain for long periods or to repeat itself in 
the future moments ((MERONI, E. C.; TOSCANO, E. V., 2017; ANNEGUES et al., 2017), the influence 

that  it  can  exert  on  the  wage  income  (DIAZ,  M.  D.  M  .;  MACHADO,  L.,  2008;  REIS,  M.,  2015; 
MARIONI,  L.  S.,  2018)  and  more  specifically  with  respect  to  the  first  job  (VERHOFSTADT,  E  .; 
OMEY, E., 2003; BALLESTEROS, J. A.; ROSAL, M. P.O., 2017), although it is still somewhat limited. 
In analyzing the impact of education on first job satisfaction, Verhofstadt and Omey (2003), 
based  on  research  data  for  twenty-three-year-old  Flemish  workers  and  using  ordinal  regression  models, 
observed that people with higher levels of education appear to be more satisfied because they can get  a 
better  job.  However,  when  the  characteristics  of  the  work  are  controlled,  there  is  a  negative  relation  - 
people with higher levels of schooling being unhappy at the first job. They point out that the relationship 
between  educational  incompatibility  and  satisfaction  is  ambiguous,  since  overeducation  has  a  clear 
negative impact on job satisfaction. However, for low level of education different results are obtained for 
men and women. 

MCGuiness  (2006)  examines  the  consistency  of  overeducation  in  the  context  of  various 
theoretical  frameworks,  presenting  a  literature  review  on  this  phenomenon.  The  author  discusses  the 
various mediation controversies associated with the study of the topic, in order to provide an assessment 
of  the  extent  to  which  the  impacts  of  this  condition  represent  an  economic  reality  as  opposed  to  a 
statistical apparatus. Their conclusions point out that the repercussions are probably not simple, and that it 
can potentially be expensive for individuals and companies, as well as for the economy as a whole. 

In examining the literature on this topic in Europe, Caroleo and Pastore (2015) note that the 
interpretation of some recent contributions is that insufficient skill demand is a factor that prevails in most 
countries, especially after an expansion in the supply of skills. The authors contend that educational and 
skills mismatch would be a temporary phenomenon that will be absorbed when the economy grows back. 
In addition, their conclusions point to the importance of advancing the school transition system to work, 
and  particularly  the  links  of  the  education  and  training  system  to  the  labor  market.  Alternatively,  they 
indicate  that  more  employment  opportunities  and  integration  contracts  should  be  offered  to  the  newly 
graduates, so that their work skills will be developed earlier. 

Meroni  and  Toscano  (2017)  verify  whether  the  overeducation  at  the  start  of  a  graduate's 
career  is  a  pitfall  to  continue  in  such  situation  later,  or  whether  it  corresponds  to  a  push  for  a  job  that 
matches their qualifications. The authors distinguish the concept in apparent and genuine, where the first 
concerns only the educational level and the second includes the inadequacy of skills. Their results exhibit 
evidence that this early career condition leads to a greater chance of being overeducated also in the future 
with no real differences between the apparent and the genuine. However, they highlight the emergence of 
heterogeneities when observing countries or regions individually. 

Ballesteros  and  Rosal  (2017),  through  the  application  of  an  extension  of  the  recursive 
bivariate probit model, analyze the impact that the overeducation in the first job can trigger in the future 
employment  of  young  people,  using  the  2009  ad  hoc  module  of  the Spanish  Workforce  research.  Their 
results point to this condition as a trap, since young people who did not correspond between their level of 
schooling  and  the  first  job  are  40.2%  more  likely  to  be  subject  to  mismatch  in  a  second  job  than  those 
who  were  reciprocated  from  the  beginning.  The  authors  also  conclude  that  the  pure  effect  of  the  initial 
mismatch  has  more  impact  than  the  workers'  own  characteristics,  and  depends  on  the  educational 
achievement. 

Through the use of a logit model with Propensity Score Matching for multiple treatments and 
models of survival analysis, Annegues et al. (2017) sought to investigate the impact of the training area of 
former  students  graduated  at  the  Federal  University  of  Paraíba  (UFPB)  on  the  probability  of  being 
overeducation  and  the  influence  of  their  areas  of  performance  in  the  time  individuals  remain  in  such 
situation. They observed that the areas of applied humanities, arts and social were more likely to be under 
this  condition,  as  well  as  a  lower  probability  of  leaving  the  circumstance  for  some  years  after  the 
completion of the course.  

Reis  (2015)  estimates  the  effects  of  overeducation  and  undereducation  on  labor  income  in 
Brazil,  through  the  use  of  longitudinal  data  and  information  provided  by  analysts  on  the  schooling 
required  for  each  occupation.  The  author  points  out  that  the  results  for  the  Brazilian  data  do  not  differ 
from those reported for developed countries. The analysis indicates that one year of schooling in excess 

increases the income of work, however, to a lesser extent than an additional  year of schooling required, 
even when taking into account the fixed effects of individuals. 

Based on data from the 2000 Census and in order to add evidence to the  overeducation and 
undereducation literature, Diaz and Machado (2008) investigated for the Brazilian case the incidence and 
effects  on  income  of  the  inequality  between  schooling  required  to  perform  a  given  occupation  and  the 
schooling that the individual possesses, in particular, with regional disaggregation, by large group and by 
gender.  The  results  pointed  to  the  Southeast  region  with  the  highest  rate  of  adequacy,  and  the  South 
region with the highest rate of overeducated individuals. The Northeast presented a greater percentage of 
people in the condition of undereducation, about 60%. The return of these was more favorable to females, 
but the regions of greater dynamism - Southeast and South - showed lower returns than the others for the 
women of this category. 

Marioni (2018) examines the impact of educational inadequacy on the Brazilian labor market. 
Based  on  information  from  the  RAIS,  it  examines  the  incidence  of  nonconformity  between  educational 
level  and  work  performed,  and  estimates  the  wage  effects  of  super  and  low  educational  level  in  the 
heterogeneity of workers. His main conclusions show that a quarter of the Brazilian formal labor market 
is overeducated and a quarter is undereducated. He also notes that these workers earn significantly lower 
wages than co-workers who have a job in accordance with their level of education after the individual's 
unobserved heterogeneities are controlled. It also notes that the penalty for overeducation corresponds to 
about  half  of  the  premium  to  go  to  university,  and  therefore  such  a  situation  may  be  arising  due  to 
individual decision. 

In  the  light  of  the  above,  it  is  observed  that  most  of  the  research  seeks  to  investigate  the 
duration of youth unemployment, between their entry into the Economically Active Population (PEA) and 
obtaining their first job. The present study, however, seeks to contribute to the literature by analyzing the 
permanence of young people in the first job in the Brazilian formal market. It is also noted that, as far as 
overeducation is concerned, there are still no studies that relate it to the first job for Brazilian data, which 
is also the purpose of this study. 
3. METHODOLOGY 
3.1. Data base 

In  order  to  estimate  the  duration  of  young  people  in  their  first  job  in  the  Brazilian  formal 
market,  information  about  personal  characteristics  of  the  individuals,  their  work  and  the  company  in 
which  they  are  working  was  used.  This  information  was  extracted  from  the  RAIS  -  Relação  Anual  de 
Informações Sociais - and covers the period from 2003 to 2013. We selected young people between the 
ages  of  16  and  24  who  entered  the  labor  market  in  2003  and  followed  their  longitudinal  trajectory 
considering a period of 10 years. 

RAIS  is  generated  from  the  individual  statements  of  employers,  and  is  one  of  the  main 
sources of information on the formal labor market in Brazil. The information collected by it can have its 
data disaggregated at  the municipality level,  class of economic activity  and occupation.  It  also  contains 
the  number  of  employees  in  divisions  by  gender,  age  group,  education  level,  income  range,  average 
income,  wage  mass,  race  /  color  and  type  of  disability  (if  any).  In  addition,  it  has  annual  periodicity, 
covers the entire national territory and covers about 99% of the Brazilian formal market. 
3.2. Econometric Methodology 
3.2.1. Survival Analysis 

Used  in  the  study  of  data,  survival  analysis  is  a  set  of  statistical  processes  in  which  the 
variable of interest is the time that elapses until a certain event occurs. That is, the statistical techniques of 
survival analysis are used when trying to investigate a phenomenon in relation to a period of time, that is, 
the time elapsed between an initial event, in which a subject or an object enters a specific state, and a final 
event, which modifies this state. 

According  to  Monte,  Araújo  and  Lima  (2007),  the  definition  of  three  elements  is  of 
paramount importance in the duration models: event of interest (failure), scale of measurement and initial 
time. Adapting to the objectives of this work, the event of interest will be the young person leaving the 
first  job;  the  measurement  scale  will  be  the  time  elapsed  until  the  occurrence  of  the  failure,  given  in 

months; and the start time will be the month in which the individual was able to begin his work activities 
for the first time. 

It would not be reasonable to assume a normal distribution for these types of data, since they 
are  generally  not  distributed  symmetrically,  distorting  and  with  few  observations  surviving  for  a  very 
long time when compared with most. Thus, the presence of censorship is an important feature of duration 
models, as there may be cases where the exact survival time will not be known, which can occur when the 
individual's follow-up was interrupted, for example, not reaching the end point of interest. 

To  perform  the  analysis  of  survival  data  it  is  necessary  to  define  two  functions  used  to 

describe their distribution. These are called survival function and risk function. 

Everitt  and  Hothron  (2009)  define  the  survival  function,  S(t),  as  the  probability  that  the 
survival time, T, is greater than or equal to a time t, that is,                . When data are censored, the 
non-parametric survival function is typically estimated using the Kaplan-Meier estimator. 

The  Kaplan-Meier  method  consists  of  sorting  the  survival  times  in  ascending  order,  so  that 
                ,  where  the  last  element      is  the  longest  survival  time.  Thus,  we  have  the  following 
function: 

         

      

    

  
  

 
                                                            (1) 

Where    is the number of individuals who experienced the event of interest at time   and    
is  the  number  of  individuals  at  risk  before    ,  including  those  censored.  For  each  time  the  number  of 
observations   , the number of outputs in       and the conditional probability of survival are calculated. 
In this study, the survival function will determine the probability of a given individual staying at the first 
job for a period of time greater than a specified time, t. 

The  risk  function  indicates  a  threshold,  and  is  defined  as  the  probability  of  an  individual 
experiencing the event in a small interval (s), ie when the time interval tends to zero, since the individual 
survived until the beginning of the interval. This function can be written as follows: 

where T indicates the survival time of the subject. 
In the present study, the risk function offers the instant probability that the individual will 

                                                                              (2) 

leave the first job at a given time t, since he remained there until t. 

Given the survival and risk functions, the Cox Regression method, presented by Cox (1972), 

is used to investigate the effect of variables in the time the event takes place. Since h (t) is positive, the 
equation is written as follows: 

                                                                        (3) 
This  equation  cannot  be  considered  effectively  non-parametric,  since  it  assumes  that  the 
effects of variables on individual survival are constant over time and are additive on a scale. However, its 
own  formulator,  Cox  (1972)  proposed  a  new  equation,  so  that  the  dependence  of  h  (t)  on  t  continues 
unspecified. This method is known as proportional hazard model. Such equation will be: 

                                                                          (4) 
where        nown  as  the  baseline  risk  function,  where  the  function  of  individuals  has  all 

explanatory variables equal to zero. The function can be rewritten as: 

                                                                              (5) 
In (5) the "baseline function" represents the common form of survival time distribution for all 

individuals, and the relative risk function                        provides the individual risk level. 

In  a  Cox  model,  the  parameters  can  be  estimated  by  maximizing  what  is  called  partial 
likelihood  (KALBFLEISCH;  PRENTICE,  1980).  Continuous  survival  times  are  assumed  to  be  derived 
from partial probability. 

Finally, you can arrive in the following format for the duration model: 

                                                                             (6) 

where X corresponds to the set of explanatory variables. 
 

The  coefficients  in  a  Cox  regression  are  associated  with  the  individual's  risk  of  leaving  a 
particular situation. Thus, a positive coefficient indicates greater risk and a negative coefficient indicates 
a protective effect of the variable with which it is associated. 

It  is  worth  mentioning  that  three  analyzes  will  be  carried  out:  the  first  one  for  the  complete 
sample, considering all the young people who left the first job and went to unemployment or who entered 
another job (sample  I); the second one will be considered a new sample, in order to identify the factors 
that influenced the survival time of young people who left the first job directly to another (sample II); and 
the third to verify the factors that influenced the survival time of young people who left the first job and 
went to the unemployment situation (sample III). 
3.3. Variables used 
The description of the explanatory variables that will be used in the econometric model is shown in Table 
1. 
Table 1: Description of the variables 
Variables 
Sex           
Race          
Nationality 
Age  
dummieNorth  
dummieNortheast      
dummieSouth           
dummieSoutheast      
dummieMidwest      
Average income 
Disabled person 

Description 
Dummie:1=Man; 0=Woman 
Dummie: 1=White; 0=Other races 
Dummie :1= Brazilian born or naturalized; 0= Foreign 
age at which the individual entered the first job in 2003 
Dummie: 1= North; 0= other regions 
Dummie: 1= Northeast; 0= Other regions 
Dummie: 1= South; 0= Other regions 
Dummie: 1= Southeaste; 0= Other regions 
Dummie: 1=Midwest; 0= Other regions 
Income of the individual when entered the first job in 2003 
Dummie: 1= handicapped; 0=not handicapped. 

CBO1                

CBO2                
CBO3                
CBO4                
CBO5                
CBO6                
CBO7                
CBO8                
CBO9 
Legal nature 
Agriculture-Fishing  
Industtry 
Construction 
Trade 
Service 
Schooling-exit      

Schooling-change 

Dummie: 1=Top members of State , managers of public interest organizations and business , managers; 
0=Other categories 
Dummie: 1= Professionals of science and the arts; 0=Other categories 
Dummie: 1= Workers with high school degree; 0=Other categories 
Dummie: 1= Administrative service workers; 0=Other categories      
Dummie: 1= Service workers, sellers who work in stores and markets; 0=Other categories      
Dummie: 1= Agricultural, forestry and fishing workers; 0= Other categories  
Dummie: 1= Workers in the production of industrial goods and services; 0= Other categories      
Dummie: 1= Workers in the production of industrial goods and services; 0= Other categories    
Dummie: 1= Maintenance and repair workers; 0= Other categories 
Dummie: 1=Private; 0=Public, ( In 2003) 
Dummie: 1= Agricultural and fishing sectors; 0= Other sectors 
Dummie: 1= Industrial sector; 0=Other sectors 
Dummie: 1= Construction industry; 0=Other sectors 
Dummie: 1= Trade sector; 0=Other sectors 
Dummie: 1= Service sector; 0=Other sectors 
Level  of  schooling  that  the  young  person  had  when  leaving  the  first  job.  It  ranges  from  1  to  11,  and 
each number represents the following levels, respectively: illiterate; until the 5th full year; 5th full year 
to  fundamental;  6th  to  9th  grade;  complete  middle  school;  incomplete  high  school;  complete  high 
school; incomplete college degree; Graduated; masters; and PhD. 
 
Dummie: 1= If the individual has changed schooling during the first job; 
0= Opposite case.  

Micro-company            Dummie: 1= Micro-company ; 0=Other companies 
Dummie: 1=Small company; 0= Other companies 
Small company       
Dummie: 1= Medium company; 0=Other companies 
Medium company 
Dummie: 1=Big company; 0=Other companies 
Big Company          
Dummie: 1= If the individual entered the first job overeducated; 0= Opposite case 
Overeducation 
Source: Own Elaboration  

It should be noted that the occupations performed by the individuals were divided according 
to the Classificação Brasileira de Ocupações - CBO (2002), through the establishment of large groups, as 
shown in  Table 2. Each group is  divided according to  the similarity of the functions performed and the 

level  of  competence.  This,  in  turn,  is  defined  by  the  Ministério  do  Trabalho  e  Emprego  (2010)  as  a 
function of the complexity, breadth and responsibility of the activities developed in employment or other 
type of employment relationship. 

 

Table 2 - Division of large groups according to CBO 
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Large Groups in CBO 2002 
0 – Armed Forces, police and military firefighters 
1  –  Members  of  public  authorities,  managers  of  public 
organizations and companies and managers 
2 - Professionals of science and the arts 
3 - Technical workers( high school degree) 
4 - Administrative service workers 
5 - Service workers, sellers (commerce and markets) 
6 - Agricultural, forestry, hunting and fishing workers 
7 - Workers in the production of industrial goods and services1 
8 - Workers in the production of industrial goods and services2 
9 - Maintenance and repair workers 

                      

Level of competence 
Undefined 
Undefined 

interest 

4 
3 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
1 

Source: Own elaboration according to data from the Ministério do Trabalho e Emprego.               

              Note:¹ Production system workers who tend to be discrete and who deal more with the shape of the product than with  
its physico-chemical content. 
            Note: 2Workers of production systems that are or tend to be continuous (chemical, steel, among others). 

Competence  level  1,  for  example,  includes  those  who  are  not  qualified.  And  as  the  level 
increases, the greater the complexity and the schooling required for the job. Thus, for the analysis of the 
variables related to occupation categories, those that require lower level of competence - groups 1 and 2 - 
will be considered as the base.  It  is  also  worth  mentioning that category 0, which involve professionals 
from the Armed Forces, police and military firefighters, was not added to the variables used to estimate 
the model, considering that there were no observations that contemplated it. 

In order to define the size of the company, the definition of size of establishments according 
to the number of employees was considered, according to the division of SEBRAE - Serviço Brasileiro de 
Apoio  às  Micro  e  Pequenas  Empresas  –  2013  -  2013.  And  with  regard  to  the  CNAE  -  Classificação 
Nacional  de  Atividades  Econômicas  -  the  activities  were  subdivided  into  five  sectors  of  fundamental 
importance to the Brazilian economy: agriculture and fishing, industrial, construction, trade and services. 

 

Table 3: Classification of the size of the company according to the number of employees 

Size 

Micro-company 
Small company 
Medium company 
Big company 

Trade and Services 

Industry 

Up to 9 employees 
From 10 to 49 employees 
From 50 to 99 employees 
100 or more employees 

Up to 19 employees 
From 20 to 99 employees 
From 100 to 499 employees 
500 or more employees 

Source: Own elaboration based on data from the Serviço Brasileiro de Apoio às Micro e Pequenas Empresas (SEBRAE). 
4. ANALYSIS OF RESULTS 
4.1. Descriptive Statistics 

Table 1 presents  the descriptive statistics of the  variables of individual characteristics, work 
and company in which the young person who entered the formal Brazilian labor market for the first time 
in 2003, considering all sample (Sample I) and disaggregating by young people who left of the first job 
and entered another (Sample II) and those who left for the unemployment situation (Sample III). 

From  Sample  I,  it  can  be  seen  that  the  average  income  of  young  people  who  entered  the 
Brazilian formal labor market for the first time in 2003 was R$ 391.73, approximately 63% higher than 
the minimum wage in that year (R $ 240.00). The average income of the individual who left the first job 
directly to another was higher than for the other samples, R$ 406.24 (69.27% higher than the minimum 
wage for that  year). On the other hand, the average salary of the individual who left the unemployment 
situation was lower than in the other cases, R$ 388.70, however, very similar to the complete sample. 

The average duration of young workers in the Brazilian formal labor market is approximately 
17 months. The individual who leaves their initial job and goes to another job has a significantly longer 

average expectancy, around 31 months. As for the workers who leave for unemployment situation, they 
have a lower average, around 13 months. 

    Table 1: Descriptive Statistics 

  
Continuous Variables 
Income 
Duration of first job 
Age 
Categorical Variables 

  

 
 
 

Sex 

 
Race 

Nationality 

 

Regions 
 

 
  
Disabilities 
 
  
CBO 

 
 
 
Legal Nature 
  
CNAE 

 
 
 
  
Schooling  (when  entering  first 
job) 

 

 
 

 
 
 

 

 
 
Company size 

 
 
  
Overeducation 
  
Observations 

Sample 

Sample 

Sample  

 I 

II 

III 

391,73 
16,68 
20,03 

Average 
406,24 
31,25 
20,34 

388,70 
13,39 
19,98 

Percentage (%) 

41,27 
58,73 
61,84 
38,16 

 

39,92 
60,08 
58,24 
41,76 

 

41,47 
58,53 
62,31 
37,69 

 

99,97 

99,99 

99,97 

0,03 
6,45 
17,61 
16,04 
50,53 
9,38 

0,01 
8,47 
22,08 
27,89 
29,33 
12,23 

0,03 
6,22 
16,97 
14,3 
53,44 
9,08 

Women 
Men 
 
White 
Non-White 
Brazilian born or 
naturalized 
Foreign 
North 
Northeast 
South 
Southeast 
Midwest 

Desabled 

0,41 

0,51 

0,39 

Non-disabled 
CBO1 
CBO2 
CBO3 
CBO (4 a 9) 
Private 
Non-Private 
Industry 
Trade 
Services 
Construction 
Agropecuaria and Fishing 

Illiterate 

Up to the 5th full year 
5th full year to Elementary 
school 

 
6th grade to 9th grade 
 Completo  Elementary 
School 
 Incomplete High School  
 Complete High School 
 Incomplete Higher 
Education 
 Complete Higher 
Education 

Micro-company 

Small Company 
Medium Company 
Big Company 
Yes 
No 

99,59 
1,91 
2,43 
6,53 
89,13 
5,12 
94,88 
23,86 
38,25 
32,63 
2,78 
2,48 

0,58 

3,06 

99,49 
1,41 
2,79 
6,97 
88,83 
5,69 
94,31 
25,24 
36,92 
33,23 
2,42 
2,16 

0,54 

2,91 

99,61 
1,98 
2,38 
6,43 
89,21 
4,78 
95,22 
23,59 
38,62 
32,69 
2,84 
2,54 

0,59 

3,09 

4,22 

3,39 

4,34 

10,64 

16,8 

21,57 
37,05 

3,66 

9,57 

19,9 

12,2 
42,97 

3,66 

10,83 

17,12 

21,96 
36,11 

3,63 

2,41 

2,87 

2,33 

50,24 

22,97 
10,8 
15,99 
1,06 
98,94 

774.409 

42,66 

24,49 
13,56 
20,3 
1,04 
98,96 
94.580 

51,03 

22,86 
10,48 
15,64 
1,06 
98,94 

688.814 

                 Source: Own elaboration based on RAIS data. 

 

Regarding gender, for the complete sample, it is observed that the majority are men, 58.73%. 
As  for  the  race,  the  majority  of  individuals  are  white,  61.84%.  It  thus  represents  conformity  with  the 
literature, which affirms  that women and blacks or “pardos”  (brown-skinned) face greater difficulties in 
accessing  the  labor  market.  In  the  other  samples,  men  also  appear  in  a  greater  number,  60.08%  for  the 
situation of another job and 58.53% for unemployment, and in both situations, the white race continues as 
most of the total of individuals. 

Foreigners  accounted  for  only  0.03%  of  the  hiring,  the  disabled  people  about  0.41%,  and 
concerning the legal nature, it is verified that the great mass of contracts of first employment occurs in the 
private sector, approximately 95%. 

The  Southeast  region,  which  represents  the  country's  largest  economy,  was  the  largest 
recipient of individuals entering the formal Brazilian labor market for the first time, with more than half 
the  admissions,  50.53%,  followed  by  the  Northeast  region  with  17.61%.  The  region  with  the  lowest 
number of new entrants was the North, with 6.45% of the total number of contracts. The Southeast also 
had  a  higher  percentage  than  the  others  for  those  who  go  directly  to  another  job  (29.33%),  but  also 
showed a high percentage of young people who leave the first job for unemployment, 53.44%. 

Occupations  requiring  a  lower  level  of  competence  (CBO  4  to  9)  constitute  the  majority  of 
occupations  carried  out  by  young  people  when  entering  the  market  for  the  first  time,  around  89.12%, 
according  to  sample  I.  As  some  studies  have  noticed,  young  people  tend  to  exercise  more  precarious 
activities  when  they  enter  the  market.  These  categories  also  constitute  a  large  majority  in  the  other 
samples (II and III), and were shown with similar percentages. 

As  for  the  sectors,  the  activities  developed  by  the  young  entrants  in  the  formal  Brazilian 
market  are  more  strongly  in  the  trade  and  services  sectors,  38.25%  and  32.63%,  respectively.  And  the 
agriculture and fishing sector showed the lowest number of entrants, 2.48%. This pattern is also observed 
for young people who have gone to another job or to unemployment. 

Only  2.41%  of  the  total  number  of  young  people  had  completed  higher  education  when 
entering the labor market  in  2003, and about  37.05%  of them had completed high school. The majority 
had lower schooling than full high school, which justifies the low quality of jobs and the required level of 
competence. 

Micro and Small Enterprises represent the main gateway for young people seeking the formal 
job  market.  Approximately  73.21%  of  the  total  number  of  new  entrants  went  to  companies  with  such 
sizes. 

Only 1.06% of the individuals were in the overeducation situation when entering 2003 for the 
first  time  in  the  Brazilian  formal  market.  This  small  share  can  be  quite  significant  when  observing  the 
small number of young people who had higher education. In addition, this analysis considers only young 
people who were between 16 and 24 years old, relatively low age to have already concluded a graduation, 
post-graduation,  etc.  It  should  also  be  noted  that  a  few  years  ago  it  was  even  more  difficult  for  young 
people  to  access  university.  This  also  clarifies  the  low  level  of  schooling  observed  in  the  samples.  The 
percentage of young people in situations of overeducation was similar for the other cases. 
 
4.2. Analysis of the graphs of survival functions 

The  survival  function  graph  shows  the  probability  of  survival  of  the  individual  for  a  given 
situation in a given time period. In this study, the probability of permanence of the young person in the 
first  job  is  calculated  for  each  month.  Graphs  1  to  11  present  these  results  for  the  main  categorical 
variables used to estimate the duration models, considering the whole sample, regardless of whether the 
young person left the first job and went to unemployment or joined another job. 

It  is  observed  in  Graph  1  that  the  probability  of  survival  of  the  individuals  of  the  Northeast 
region is lower than in the others for the whole studied period, and a drastic drop can be already noticed 
in  the  first  ten  months.  North  and  Center-West  appear  with  similar  probabilities,  and  with  probabilities 
superior to the one of the Northeast, although they are the ones that have smaller number of hiring. South 
and Southeast regions are shown to have higher probabilities than all others and with similar functions for 
all months studied. 

Graph 2 shows that the occupational categories that require a lower level of competence (4 to 
9) are the ones which are less likely to survive in the initial employment, for the whole period. Categories 
2  and  3,  although  representing  only  about  9%  of  the  total  placements,  showed  a  greater  probability  of 
permanence than the others and their functions are quite similar. 
 
Graph 1 - Probability of Survival by Region                                Graph 2 - Probability of Survival by 
Occupational Category 

                  

 

            Source: Own elaboration.                                                             Source: Own elaboration. 
 

With  regard  to  economic  activities,  the  civil  construction  sector  exhibited  the  smallest,  and 
the  Industry  sector  the  highest  probability  of  survival,  when  compared  with  the  others.  Trade  and 
services, which  represent  the main destination for  young people when  entering their  first  job,  presented 
similar functions, as can be seen in Graph 3. 

Micro and small enterprises, in addition to representing more than 70% of the total number of 
young  firms  that  offer  access  to  the  first  job,  are  also  the  ones  that  show  the  highest  probability  of 
survival,  according  to  Figure  4.  Medium-  large  probabilities  have  very  similar  probabilities  of 
permanence for all months studied. 
 

Graph 3 - Probability of Survival by 
Sector of Activity 

Graph 4 - Probability of Survival by Size 
of Company 

Source: Own elaboration. 

 

 

Source: Own elaboration. 

 

Men  and  women  showed  similar  probability  of  survival  for  the  whole  period  analyzed, 
according  to  Graph  5.  It  can  be  observed  that,  regardless  of  sex,  in  the  first  10  months  there  is  a 
significant drop in the chance of the individual remaining in their initial employment. 

When analyzed individually, nationality shows a higher probability of survival for foreigners, 
as  can  be  observed  in  Graph  6.  From  the  twentieth  month  in  their  initial  work,  the  young  Brazilian 
presents  chances  of  approximately  10%  of  permanence,  while  that  same  probability  is  only  reached  by 
foreigners in the fortieth month. 

 

 

 

Graph 5 - Probability of Survival by 
Gender 

Graph 6 - Probability of Survival by 
Nationality 

 
. Source: Own elaboration. 
 

 

 
Source: Own elaboration. 
 

 

According to Figure 7, the overeducated young person has a chance of remaining in the initial 
employment similar to those who are in compliance with employment and educational level. This may be 
very relevant when considering the small number of overeducation observed in the sample, indicating that 
even in a smaller amount, the young person in such situation may present the same probability of survival 
as the great majority, and in some periods the chance may be even greater. 

White  youths, who  represent  the majority of the  hiring, present  a  greater  chance of survival 
than individuals of other races, and this can be observed from the tenth month of their admission, as can 
be seen in figure 8. 

Graph 7 - Probability of Survival for the 
Situation of Overeducation 

Graph 8 – Probability of Survival by Race 

Source: Own elaboration. 
 

 

 
Source: Own elaboration. 
 

 

According  to  Graph  9,  young  people  with  some  type  of  disability  have  a  probability  of 
remaining in their first activity practically equal to those who do not have any disability, throughout the 
studied period. Thus, one can observe a survival pattern of these individuals in the first job, which is not 
affected by this factor. 

Figure 10 indicates that young people hired for the first job through a private legal nature are 
more likely to survive than those hired for public service. In the fortieth month, for example, the chances 
of permanence of individuals working through private contracts are greater than 20%, while for the others 
the perspective is close to 10%. 

 
 

 
 

Graph 9 - Probability of Survival for 
Disability 

Graph 10 - Probability of Survival by 
Legal Nature 

Source: Own elaboration. 
. 

 

Source: Own elaboration. 
 

 

When analyzed separately, the level of schooling showed greater chances of survival for the 
individuals  who  remained  with  the  same  level  of  schooling  when  entering  and  leaving  their  initial 
employment, with great difference for those who increased their educational level, as shown in graph 11. 
This  may  indicate  that  the  individuals  who  got  qualified  tried  to  seek  better  employment  opportunities 
and may be justified by the fact that the vast majority of young people have remained with the same level 
of education with which they entered the market, as only 3.01% of young people progressed in the school 
level during first employment 

Graph 11 - Probability of Survival by comparison of Level of Schooling between the entry and exit of the 
first job. 

 

4.2. Analysis of Econometric Estimates 

Source: own elaboration 

 

Aiming  to  estimate  the  duration  of  young  workers  at  the  first  job  in  the  Brazilian  formal 
market  and  to  analyze  the  impact  of  the  variables  on  the  time,  a  Kaplan-Meier  survival  analysis  model 
and Cox regressions were used in the RAIS data for the period between 2003 and 2013. The results of the 
estimates are explained in Table 2. 

According to the results obtained, it can be observed that males tend to stay longer in the first 
job, as well as those who start in the market with a greater age, those with Brazilian nationality and those 
with disabilities. Thus, it is observed that women, in addition to entering the market in a smaller number, 
are more likely to leave than men. The same happens with foreigners, who present a small percentage of 
the  total  number  of  individuals  who  started  their  activities  for  the  first  time  in  the  Brazilian  formal 
market, and even then, they have lower chances of remaining in it. As for young people who have some 
kind of disability, their greater chance of permanence can be justified by the existence of quotas for their 

category. According to Law No. 8213 of 1991, companies with more than 100 employees are required to 
allocate between 2% and 5% of vacancies to employees who have some special needs. 

 

          Table 2: Results of Econometric Estimates 

 
Variables 

Man 

Race 

Braziliam 

Age 

Northeast 

South 

Southeast 

Midwest 

lncome 

Disability 

CBO1 

CBO2 

CBO3 

Legal Nature 
Industry 

Construction 

Trade 

Services 

Sample I 

Sample II 

Sample III 

coef 

exp(coef)  coef 

exp(coef)  coef 

exp(coef) 

-0.0524*** 

0.9489 

-0.0806*** 

0.9225 

-0.0430*** 

0.9579 

0.0818*** 

1.0852 

0.0133* 

1.0134 

0.0772*** 

1.0803 

-0.2400*** 

0.7866 

-1.3771*** 

0.2523 

-0.1468** 

0.8634 

-0.0612*** 

0.9406 

-0.0491*** 

0.9521 

-0.0611*** 

0.9407 

-0.1335*** 

0.8750 

-0.3656*** 

0.6938 

-0.1116*** 

0.8944 

-0.3027*** 

0.7388 

-0.2127*** 

0.8084 

-0.3286*** 

0.7199 

0.2346*** 

1.2644 

-0.2304*** 

0.7942 

0.2365*** 

1.2669 

-0.0639*** 

0.9381 

-0.0729*** 

0.9297 

-0.05001***  0.9511 

0.1494*** 

1.1612 

-0.0500*** 

0.9512 

0.1732*** 

1.1891 

-0.1737*** 

0.8405 

-0.3435*** 

0.7093 

-0.1448*** 

0.8651 

0.0088 

1.0089 

-0.0275 

0.9728 

-0.0081 

0.0230*** 

1.0233 

0.2704*** 

1.3104 

-0.0090 

0.9919 

0.9910 

-0.0585*** 

0.9432 

-0.0509*** 

0.9503 

-0.0553*** 

0.9462 

0.3492*** 

1.4180 

0.8377*** 

2.3111 

0.3479*** 

1.4161 

-0.2829*** 

0.7536 

-0.3244*** 

0.7229 

-0.2687*** 

0.7644 

0.1221*** 

1.1298 

0.2522*** 

1.2869 

0.1200*** 

1.1275 

-0.2074*** 

0.8127 

-0.1172*** 

0.8894 

-0.2004*** 

0.8184 

-0.1551*** 

0.8563 

-0.0404 

0.9604 

-0.1511*** 

0.8597 

Schooling_(exit) 

-0.0680*** 
Schooling_(change)  -1.0378*** 
Microcompany 

0.1172*** 

0.9342 

-0.0815*** 

0.9217 

-0.0633*** 

0.9386 

0.3542 

-0.9045*** 

0.4047 

-1.1057*** 

0.3310 

1.1244 

0.1265*** 

1.1348 

0.1048*** 

1.1105 

Smallcompany 

Bigcompany 

0.0895*** 

1.0937 

0.1045*** 

1.1101 

0.0892*** 

1.0933 

-0.0547*** 

0.9468 

-0.0285*** 

0.9719 

-0.0501*** 

0.9511 

0.2395*** 

1.2706 

0.2952*** 

1.3434 

0.2254*** 

1.2528 

0.164 
            Source: Own elaboration based on econometric estimations. 
            Note: Levels of significance of the coefficients: (*) 10%; (**) 5%; (***) 1%. 

0.137 

 

 

0.134 

 

The  coefficients  of  the  gender  variable  were  also  negative  for  both  those  who  leave  for 
another job and those who go to unemployment, indicating that males are less likely to leave the first job 
for  any  of  the  cases  analyzed,  compared  to  women.  For  another  job,  the  risk  of  men  leaving  the  initial 
activity  is  about  8%  lower  than  the  risk  for  women,  and  for  the  unemployment  situation  the  risk  is 
approaching,  with  the  chance  of  leaving  for  young  male  being  about  4%  lower  than  the  risk  for  the 
opposite sex. 

For  the  variables  representative  of  the  regions,  based  on  the  North  region,  it  is  noticed  that 
only the Southeast region presented positive coefficient, that is, in this region young people are less likely 
to remain in the first job for a longer period of time. In the other regions, they remain in their initial labor 
activity  for  a  longer  period  of  time,  the  South  region  being  the  most  likely  to  remain,  followed  by  the 
Northeast region. When compared to the North, young people of the Southeast have 26.4% more risk of 
leaving their first job. However, it is the region with the highest number of hiring and the greater risk can 
occur due to this. 

If the individual exits from the first direct job to another, it is observed that for all the regions 
the coefficients presented negative sign, pointing that independently of the region, the individual is more 

Overeducation 
 R2 

likely  to  remain  in  the  initial  job  than  to  go  directly  to  another  job.  For  the  individual  who  leaves  his 
initial  activity  for  an  unemployment  situation,  similar  results  are  observed,  with  the  exception  of  the 
Southeast  region,  which  presented a positive coefficient, that is,  in this region  the risk of  the individual 
leaving his or her initial activity for unemployment is higher than in the others, based on the North region. 
The Brazilian Classification of Occupations (CBO) shows that the coefficient  is positive for 
category  2,  and  negative  for  category  3.  In  view  of  this,  it  can  be  said  that,  when  compared  to  the 
categories that require a lower level of competence, mid-level technicians (competence level 3) are more 
likely to remain in the first job, while science and the arts professionals are at greater risk of leaving. 

It can be observed that white individuals are more likely to leave the first job, as well as those 
who  started  with  a  higher  income  and  those  who  were  hired  through  a  private  legal  nature,  which  was 
already expected, since they have less stability than those contracted for the public service and represent 
the majority of contracts. 

An  increase  of  one  unit  in  the  natural  logarithm  of  the  individual's  income,  all  the  more 
constant,  roughly  increases  the  exit  risk  of  his  or  her  initial  job  by  16%.  For  another  job,  the  same 
increase reduces the chance of leaving the first job to go directly to another job, that is, a young person 
who  is  receiving  a  higher  salary  on  his  first  job  is  less  likely  to  leave  it  to  join  other.  As  for  the 
unemployment  situation,  an  increase  of  one  unit  in  the  natural  logarithm  of  income  will  increase  its 
probability of exit by about 19%. 

The private legal nature contributes positively to the young person leaving the first job in all 
situations. However, it is worth noting that for the unemployed, the risk is 41.6% higher when compared 
to the public service, whereas for another job the risk is approximately 2.31 times higher. This shows that 
the  probability  of  young  people  who  work  through  a  private  legal  contract  leaving  their  initial  job  for 
another job is much higher than leaving for an unemployed situation, when compared to those admitted 
through law of non-private nature. 

 In  relation  to  the  National  Classification  of  Economic  Activities  (CNAE),  with  the 
agricultural  and  fishery  sector  as  the  base,  the  industrial,  trade  and  service  sectors  showed  negative 
coefficients  and  the  civil  construction  sector  was  a  positive  coefficient.  Thus,  it  is  inferred  that  young 
people  tend  to  spend  more  time  in  their  first  job  when  they  work  in  the  industry,  trade  and  services 
sectors, and are more likely to leave when working in the construction sector (approximately 13% higher 
risk), when compared to the agricultural and fishing sector. 

With regard to the size of the company in which the individual started in the labor market, it 
is noticed that when individual start working in a large company, they are more likely to remain in it, that 
is, in their original activity. On the other hand, for micro and small companies the opposite happens - the 
probability of leaving is greater. According to Verhofstadt and Omey (2003), the work in large companies 
has a positive impact on the satisfaction of the individual in the first job. 

The  coefficient  of  the  exit  educational  variable  was  negative,  indicating  that  the  higher  the 
education  level  individuals  have  in  their  exit  time  the  greater  their  probability  of  remaining  in  the  first 
job,  which may be due to the fact  that the companies keep the employees who higher qualifications, or 
even  because  they  have  already  started  their  work  in  jobs  that  demand  a  higher  school  level,  offering 
them  greater  stability.  In  addition,  the  chances  of  an  individual  who  has  changed  schooling  during  the 
first  job  leaving  the  same  job  is  about  65%  lower  than  those  who  remained  with  the  initial  level  of 
schooling, the risk of leaving for another job is 60.5% lower and for the unemployment situation the exit 
probability is approximately 67% lower. 

Although the percentage of young people in overeducation situation was small, the coefficient 
of the variable was positively related to the young person's exit from the first job. Thus, it is observed that 
the  individual  who  is  in  such  circumstance  has  greater  risks  of  leaving  the  first  job,  about  27%  higher 
than those who are in a situation of conformity between level of schooling and work. This also reinforces 
the literature of Verhofstadt and Omey (2003), according to which  overeducation has a visible negative 
impact 
satisfaction. 
                  In addition, overeducation was shown with positive coefficient for all the samples. However, 
significantly  higher  for  another  job,  indicating,  that  the  qualified  individual  has  a  greater  chance  of 
leaving  the  first  job  and  going  to  another  than  to  leaving  for  unemployment.  The  risk  of  a  young 

job 

on 

overeducated leaving their initial job to go to another job is 34.3% higher when compared to individuals 
who  are  in  situation  of  matching  between  school  level  and  work,  and  is  25.2%  higher  for  the 
unemployment  situation.  Some  variables,  such  as  race,  nationality,  industry  indicative,  company  size, 
occupational  categories,  and  disability  presented  similar  results  for  both  new  job  and  unemployment 
situation. In addition, they indicated coefficients with signals similar to those of the general regression. 
 
5. FINAL CONSIDERATIONS 

This study analyzes the duration of young people in their first job in the Brazilian formal job 
market, according to their individual characteristics, their role and the company in which they operate, as 
well  as  the  variables  that  influence  their  permanence  or  exit  from  it.  It  is  also  sought  to  relate 
overeducation and first employment in Brazil, so far not observed by Brazilian literature. 

The  literature  indicates  that  there  is  difficulty  in  the  insertion  of  young  people  who  are 
looking for a job in the Brazilian labor market for the first time, and when they manage to enter, they tend 
to work in more precarious occupations, and the low educational level is the main factor affecting it. In 
addition, it observes that some particular characteristics, such as sex and race, have an impact on the first 
work  activity  of  the  individual.  Some  authors  also  highlight  the  high  turnover  of  young  people  in  the 
labor market as being a determining factor for their high unemployment rates. And more recently, it has 
observed the first job as a factor that influences the future employment, and overdeducation as a trap that 
when observed in the initial activity can be repeated in future actions. Thus, this work contributes to the 
literature  by  investigating  the  duration  of  the  youngster  in  the  first  job  using  Brazilian  data,  and  by 
inserting overeducation in this analysis. 

The results of the duration models showed that males are more likely to remain in the first job 
for  a  longer  period,  as  well  as  those  employed  by  non-private  companies,  those  with  disabilities,  those 
with a higher level of schooling when entering in the initial job, and young people who get their first job 
in  big  companies.  The  southeastern  region  showed  a  greater  risk  of  exit,  and  the  construction  sector 
proved to be the riskiest. Overeducated individuals were more likely to leave their initial job than those 
who were in a situation of conformity between level of schooling and work. 

When comparing the estimates made for the individuals who left the first job directly to the 
other and those who left for the unemployment situation, results similar to the general regression for most 
of  the  coefficients  were  observed.  However,  it  is  worth  mentioning  the  overeducation,  although  being 
negative for both cases, the risk of leaving for another job is significantly higher, thus indicating that the 
qualified young worker is more likely to be included in the job market. 

Given the results, it can be inferred that the difficulty of the young person is not only to enter 
the labor market, but also to stay in it, given that the average survival time was only 1 year and 4 months, 
approximately. This is even more evident for females and for those with lower levels of schooling, since, 
in  addition  to  exercising  more  precarious  functions,  they  are  more  at  risk  of  leaving  their  initial  work 
activity. 

Given this, there is a need for policies that promote not only the access of young to the formal 
labor  market,  but  also  their  permanence  in  it.  Such  policies  should  also  encourage  the  preparation  and 
qualification  of  these  individuals,  giving  priority  to  the  quality  of  education  and  to  the  needs  and 
requirements  of  the  market.  In  addition,  it  should  be  noted  to  what  extent  individual  characteristics  are 
influencing hiring, in order to minimize the inequalities encountered. 
 
REFERENCES 

ABDALA,  E.  Jóvenes,  educación  y  empleo  en  América  Latina.  Papeles  de  POBLACIÓN  No.  33, 
CIEAP/UAEM, julho/setembro, 2002. 
ALBUQUERQUE,  L.  S.  G;  PERO,  V.  Mobilidade  de  Emprego  Entre  os  Jovens  Brasileiros.  Rio  de 
Janeiro, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (2008). 
 ANNEGUES,  A.  C.,  et  al.  Overeducation  e  Área  de  Formação:  evidências  para  os  Egressos  da  UFPB, 
Área 13 - Economia do Trabalho, ANPEC. 2017.  
BALLESTEROS, J. A.; ROSAL, M. P.O. Overeducation of Young Workers in Spain: How Much Does the 
First  Job  Matter?  Social  Indicators  Research,  Springer  Science+Business  Media  Dordrecht,  Soc  Indic 

- 

24 

on 

Nº 

em 

DE 

DE 

DE 

LEI 

AND 

1991. 

8.213, 

NEWS 

CNBC. 

JULHO 

Available 

Disponível 

BUSINESS 

CHANNEL 

Res, DOI 10.1007/s11205-017-1643-z, 2017. 
BRASIL. 
<http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/LEIS/L8213cons.htm>. Accessed November 2018. 
CAROLEO,  F.  E.;  PASTORE,  F.  Overeducation:  A  Disease  of  the  school-to-Work  Transition  System, 
Institute of Labor Economics, IZA Discussion Paper Nº 9049, 2015.  
CARRIJO, B. C. P. S. Análise do Primeiro Emprego e Seu Efeito Sobre a Trajetória Ocupacional do 
Jovem – 2002 A 2016. Dissertação de mestrado. Universidade Federal de Goiás, 2017. 
CONSUMER 
<https://www.cnbc.com/amp/2018/06/25/why-your-first-job-out-of-college-really-really-matters.html>. 
Accessed October 2018. 
COX,  D.  R.  Regression  Models  and  Life-Tables.  Journal  of  the  Royal  Statistical  Society.  Series  B 
(Methodological), Royal Statistical Society, v. 34, n. 2, p. 187–220, 1972. 
DIAZ,  M.  D.  M.;  MACHADO,  L.  Overeducation  e  Undereducation  no  Brasil:  Incidência  e  Retornos, 
Estudos Econômicos, São Paulo, 38(3): 431-460, 2008.  
EVERITT, B. S.; HOTHORN, T. A Handbook of Statistical Analyses Using R, Second Edition. 2nd. ed. 
[S.l.]: Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2009. 
FLORI, P. M. Desemprego de Jovens no Brasil. Revista da Abet, V. V, N° 1, Jan/jun. 2005. 
GARCIA,F.F.; et al. A Condição do Jovem no Mercado de Trabalho Brasileiro: uma Análise Comparativa 
entre o Emprego e o Primeiro Emprego (1999-2009) ECONOMIA & TECNOLOGIA, 2010. 
GUIMARÃES,  A.  Q.;  ALMEIDA,  M.  E.  Os  jovens  e  o  mercado  de  trabalho:  evolução  e  desafios  da 
política de emprego no brasil. Temas de administração pública, v. 8, n. 2, 2013. 
HIGGINS,  N.  O.  Youth  Labour  Markets  in  Europe  and  Central  Asia.  Università  di  Salerno  and  IZA. 
Discussion Paper No. 5094, July 2010. 
KALBFLEISCH, J. D.; PRENTICE, R. L. The Statistical Analysis of Failure Time Data (Wiley Series 
in Probability and Statistics). 1st. ed. Wiley-Interscience, 1980. Hardcover. ISBN 0471055190. Available 
on :<http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=citeulike0720\&path=ASIN/0471055190>. 
LAYARD,  R.;  NICKELL,  S.;  JACKMAN,  R.  Unemployment:  Macroeconomic  Performance  and  the 
Labour Market. 1. ed. Oxford, 1991. 
MARIONI,  L.  S.  Overeducation  in  the  Labour  Market:  Evidence  from  Brazil,  Dept.  of  Economics, 
University of Southampton. 2018.  
MCGUINNESS,  S.  Overeducation  in  the  labour  market.  Journal  of  Economic  Surveys,  20(3):387-418, 
2006.  
MERONI,  E.  C.;  TOSCANO,  E.  V.  The  persistence  of  overeducation  among  recente  graduates,  Labour 
Economics 48 ,120-143, 2017. 
MINISTÉRIO DO TRABALHO E EMPREGO.  Classificação Brasileira de Ocupações, 3a ed. Brasília: 
MTE, SPPE, 2010. 
MINISTÉRIO DO TRABALHO E EMPREGO – MTE. RAIS. Available on: <http://trabalho.gov.br/rais>. 
Accessed July 2018. 
MONSUETO, S. E.; BICHARA, J. S.; CUNHA, A. M. Mobilidade ocupacional e diferencial de renda: a 
experiência do Brasil entre 2002 e 2010. Área ANPEC: 12 - Economia do Trabalho. 2010.  
MONTE,  P.  A.;  ARAÚJO,  T.  P.;  LIMA,  R.  A.  Primeiro  Emprego  e  Reemprego:  Análise  de  Inserção 
Ocupacional  e  Duração  do  Desemprego  no  Brasil  Metropolitano.  Economia  e  Desenvolvimento,  Recife 
(PE), v. 7, n. 1, p. 139-177, 2007. 
ORGANIZAÇÃO  INTERNACIONAL  DO  TRABALHO  –  OIT.  Emprego  Juvenil.  Disponível  em: 
<http://www.ilo.org/brasilia/temas/emprego/lang--pt/index.htm>. Acesso em junho de 2018. 
REIS, M. Uma Análise da Transição dos Jovens Para o Primeiro Emprego no Brasil. Revista Brasileira de 
Economia, v. 69 n. 1 / p. 125–143, Jan-Mar 2015. 
REIS,  M;  ÁGUAS,  M.  Duração  do  Desemprego  e  Transições  Para  o  Emprego  Formal,  a  Inatividade  e  a 
Informalidade. Economia Aplicada, v.18, n.1. 2014.  
REIS,  M.  Overeducation,  undereducation  and  labor  earnings  in  Brazil:  a  panel  data  analysis,  Rede  de 
Economia Aplicada, Instituto de Pesquisa Economica Aplicada, Working Paper 87, 2015. 
Serviço Brasileiro de Apoio às Micro e Pequenas Empresas - SEBRAE. Anuário do Trabalho na Micro e 

Empresa, 

Pequena 
<http://www.sebrae.com.br/Sebrae/Portal%20Sebrae/Anexos/Anuario%20do%20Trabalho%20Na%20Mic
ro%20e%20Pequena%20Empresa_2013.pdf>. Accessed November 2018. 
VERHOFSTADT,  E.;  OMEY,  E.  The  impact  of  education  on  job  satisfaction  in  the  first  job,  Faculteit 
Economie em Bedrijfskunde, Universiteit Gent, Working Paper, 2003. 

Dispoível 

2013. 

em: 

